McCRACKEN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-10, passed 6-23-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025 KRS Pamphlet
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2020-04
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE McCRACKEN COUNTY CODE OF ORDINANCES SUBMITTED BY
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION OF CINCINNATI, ALONG WITH THE 2020 S-
1 SUPPLEMENT
   WHEREAS, in 2018 the American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, at the request of the McCracken County Fiscal Court, completed the
codification of McCracken County Ordinances to and including the end of 2018;
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has now
completed the 2020 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of McCracken County
(2020 S-1 Supplement), which supplement contains all Ordinances of a general
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky; and
   WHEREAS, the McCracken County Fiscal Court realizes the importance of
incorporation and adoption of said codification.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE FISCAL COURT OF MCCRACKEN COUNTY,
COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1.   Adoption of Original Codification.
   That the original codification of McCracken County Ordinances to and
including the end of 2018, as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference
as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Adoption of Supplement to Code of Ordinances.
   That the 2020 S-1 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of McCracken County,
Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
Section 3.   Compliance with Open Meetings Laws.
   The McCracken County Fiscal Court hereby finds and determines that all
formal actions relative to the adoption of this Ordinance were taken in an open
meeting of said legislative body in full compliance with the Kentucky Open
Meetings Act as modified by Section 8(b) of 2020 Senate Bill 150 and clarified
in application by the published Advisory of the Kentucky Attorney General dated
March 31, 2020. All deliberations of the Fiscal Court, if any, which resulted
in formal action, were in meetings open to the public, in full compliance with
the aforesaid legal requirements and all others germane to conduct of public
meetings within the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
Section 4.   Conflicts.
   All ordinances, resolutions, orders or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby
repealed and the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail and be given
effect.
Section 5.   Effective Date.
   This Ordinance shall be read on two separate days, published pursuant to KRS
Chapter 242, and shall take effect and be in force from and after its date of
passage, approval, and publication as recorded by law; the 11th day of May,
2020.
MCCRACKEN COUNTY FISCAL COURT
BY:   Craig Z. Clymer /s/
Craig Z. Clymer
McCracken County Judge Executive
ATTEST:
Julie Griggs /s/
Julie Griggs
McCracken County Clerk
Introduced and publically read on 4-27-20.
Publically read and adopted on 5-11-20.
Recorded by County Clerk on             .
Published by The Paducah Sun on 5-1-20 and 5-15-20.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
McCracken County Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code”
may be substituted. Title heads, chapter heads and section and division heads
or titles, and explanatory notes and cross-references, do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to those
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and maintained by
the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information on
vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards.
(KRS 446.010(55))
   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(10)
   COUNTY. McCracken County, Kentucky.
   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted.
(KRS 446.010(12))
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by authority
of this state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 83A.010(6), KRS 91A.010(4))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by
authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(19))
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A member of the Fiscal Court.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes,
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine, or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(KRS 446.010(26))
   MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
   OATH. Includes affirmation in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH. (KRS 446.010(28))
   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited PARTNERSHIPS.
(KRS 446.010(30))
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables granted police powers,
coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional
officers, marshals, police officers and other persons with similar authority to
make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even-numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected, and the election in odd-numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(KRS 446.010(39))
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   SWORN. Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of
office without a lawful incumbent therein, when the person elected or appointed
to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has been no
election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies whether
the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the state,
county, city or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases, and
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to that meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in
which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public
office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just
mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall mean the
time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or
compliance with the notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include those acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of County Fiscal Court in
enacting any ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held
unconstitutional the remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the
ordinance provides otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially
and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part
that it is apparent that County Fiscal Court would not have enacted the
remaining parts without the unconstitutional part; or unless the remaining
parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the intent of County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of County Fiscal Court.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of County Fiscal Court as long as it takes effect prior to
the effective date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
County Fiscal Court which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of County Fiscal Court, as long
as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the
original amendment.
   (E)   No other action of County Fiscal Court repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment, as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to
any offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings.
   (B)   If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision
of the new ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the party affected,
be applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the County
Fiscal Court, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall
remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein.
   (B)   Any chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may
be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the
subsequent ordinances until County Fiscal Court shall adopt a new code of
ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(KRS 83A.090)
   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
      or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
Statutory references:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065
   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
      
33.   JOINT SEWER AGENCY
      
34.   SEWER USE AND RATES
      
35.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
      
36.   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Electioneering
   
30.02   Salary and pay classification table for the county jail
   
30.03   Districts for Fiscal Court, Justice of the Peace and Constable
   
30.04   Library Taxing District
   
30.05   Fire Protection District
   
30.06   DES Rescue Squad
   
30.07   Personnel policies and procedures
   
30.08   Compensation and classification system; Sheriff’s office
   
30.09   Interlocal cooperation agreement; 911 service
   
30.10   Judge/Executive authority to execute agreements
 
   
30.99   Penalty
§ 30.01 ELECTIONEERING.
   (A)   To fulfill the governments obligation to protect the voter and the
integrity of the election process from actual or attempted fraud, from
obstruction, from intimidation real or inferred, from attempted or actual vote
buying, from invasion of privacy, from harassment real, threatened or implied,
from hindrance or delay all done under the disguise of electioneering, an
electioneering-free zone is established within 100 feet of the entrance to any
building containing a polling place on any election day. No person shall, on
the day of any election as established in KRS 118.025, do any electioneering at
the polling place or within a distance of 100 feet of the main entrance of a
building used by voters in which a voting machine is located on election day.
No person shall, on the day of any election as established in KRS 118.025,
intentionally invade the right of privacy of any person on his or her way to
vote, or cause interference, harassment, or alarm to any person on his or her
way to vote. No person shall loiter or congregate in, or hinder or delay a
voter, or solicit, or attempt to influence any voter in casting his or her vote
within this 100-foot campaign-free zone. Electioneering shall include the
displaying of signs, the distribution of campaign literature, cards or
handbills, the soliciting of signatures to any petition, or the solicitation of
votes for or against any political party, candidate or question on the ballot
in any manner. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit electioneering
conducted within the interior of a private residence or business establishment
by person having a leased or ownership interest in such property, within the
campaign-free zone, provided that all electioneering activities are confined to
the interior of the buildings and cannot be heard or observed by any voters
going to the polling place. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
displaying of political bumper stickers on privately owned vehicles or
political signs on private property or private establishment by a person having
a leased or ownership interest in that private property or private
establishment within the campaign-free zone, regardless of the distance from
the polling place provided that the sign is not accompanied by a person and
does not emit any sound and is not audio-visual or mechanical and no larger
than four square feet in size.
   (B)   Any Precinct Election Officer, County Clerk, Deputy County Clerk or
any law enforcement official is authorized to enforce this section at the polls
within 100 feet of the main entrance to the building used by voters in which
the voting machine is located. Assistance may be requested of any law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   Any property used for a polling location on election day shall not be
considered a public place in any manner for public discourse. The grounds,
buildings, sidewalks and parking lots at all polling locations are designated
non-public forums for the election day.
(Ord. 2004-15, passed 9-15-2004) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.02 SALARY AND PAY CLASSIFICATION TABLE FOR THE COUNTY JAIL.
   The salary and pay classification table for the county jail, attached to
Ordinance No. 2022-05 as Exhibit A, is hereby incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 8-22-2022)
§ 30.03 DISTRICTS FOR FISCAL COURT, JUSTICE OF THE PEACE AND CONSTABLE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish district lines
for the offices of Fiscal Court Commissioner, Justice of the Peace and
Constables.
   (B)   Reapportionment Committee meeting and report. At 1:00 p.m., on July
13, 2023, the Reapportionment Committee convened a meeting and examined
population data from the 2023 census. The Reapportionment Committee, having
considered the census data, has filed a report with the County Clerk and Fiscal
Court recommending district boundaries. The districts are laid out in a manner
to comply with applicable law. A copy of the report, along with a map and
district descriptions, are attached to and made part of this section.
   (C)   Fiscal Court findings and creation of districts. The County Fiscal
County makes the following findings.
      (1)   There shall be three districts, labeled “District 1,” “District 2”
and “District 3.”
      (2)   The districts are compact and contiguous.
      (3)   The district populations, derived from 2023 census data, are nearly
equal as is reasonably possible:
         (a)   District 1: 22,227;
         (b)   District 2: 22,996; and
         (c)   District 3: 22,652.
      (4)   A copy of the reapportionment map along with the district
description is adopted by reference and made part of this section.
(Ord. 2001-5, passed 9-10-2001; Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-24-2023)
§ 30.04 LIBRARY TAXING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court does hereby establish an independent county
library which shall provide library services for all residents of the county.
   (B)   The management and control of this county library shall be vested in a
five-member Board of Trustees.
      (1)   The County Judge/Executive, with the approval of the County Fiscal
Court shall appoint the initial five-member Board, whose terms of office shall
conform to the provisions of KRS 173.490.
      (2)   Successor Board members shall be appointed by the County Fiscal
Court as provided in KRS 173.490.
      (3)   The County Fiscal Court grants to the Board of Trustees all of the
duties and powers to act that are provided in KRS Chapter 173, that are
consistent with the purposes of a county library service funded solely by a
special ad valorem taxing district.
   (C)   In order, to provide funding for the proper maintenance and operation
of the county library service, the County Fiscal Court does hereby establish
pursuant to KRS 173.470, KRS 65.182, KRS 67.715 and KRS 67.083, the County
Public Library Taxing District.
      (1)   The County Fiscal Court does hereby establish a special ad valorem
tax for the Library District, and fixes the tax rate at $0.05 on each $100 of
the assessed valuation of all property in the district.
      (2)   The tax rate established above shall be subject to the provisions
of KRS Chapter 132 as to subsequent modifications.
(Ord. 99-3, passed 4-12-1999; Ord. 99-3.1, passed 6-28-1999)
§ 30.05 FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT.
   A fire protection district to be known as the Melber - New Hope Fire
District is hereby established pursuant to KRS Chapter 75, which district shall
cover the following described territory, to-wit: beginning at the four-way stop
in Melber, KY (Highway 339 and Highway 1820); thence, with the McCracken-Graves
county boundary line, to the intersection of said boundary line with west
right-of- way line of U.S. Highway 45; thence, with the west right-of-way line
of U.S. Highway 45, northwesterly, to the intersection with the northwesterly
right-of-way line of Highway 1241; thence, northwesterly, along a straight line
to the intersection of Clinton Road and Wurth Road as described in the Lone Oak
Fire Protection District boundary description; thence, along a line, as
described in the Lone Oak Fire Protection District Boundary Description cross-
country to the Lovelaceville Florence Station Road 500 feet west of Mayfield-
Metropolis Road; thence, along a line, as described in the Lone Oak Fire
Protection District Boundary Description, continuing to/and crossing New Hope
Church Road 0.4 mile west of Mayfield-Metropolis Road, to a point 1,000 feet
north of New Hope Church Road; thence, southwesterly, along a straight line to
a point on the centerline of the New Hope Church Road at the 90-degree turn,
said turn being located approximately 2,200 feet northwest of the centerline
intersection of the New Hope Road and the New Hope Church Road; thence,
southwesterly, along a straight line, to a point in the intersection of the
centerline of the Illinois Central Railway and the centerline of the W.
Lovelaceville Florence Station Road; thence, along the centerline of the W.
Lovelaceville Florence Station Road, westwardly, to a point 500 feet west of
the W. Lovelaceville Florence Station Road-Coleman Cut Road intersection;
thence, along a line, said line being 500 feet west and parallel to the
centerline of the Coleman Cut Road to a point 3,000 feet north of the
centerline of the Mayfield Drainage Canal; thence, due east to the east right-
of-way of the Illinois Central Railway; thence, southwardly, along the east
right-of-way of the Illinois Central Railway to the intersection with the
centerline of the Mayfield Drainage Canal; thence, westwardly, along the
centerline of the Mayfield Drainage Canal to the intersection with the Carlisle
County boundary line; thence, southeastwardly, along the Carlisle County
boundary line, to the intersection of the Carlisle County boundary line with
the Graves County and the county boundary lines; thence, eastwardly, along the
McCracken-Graves county boundary line to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 2000-10, passed 7-24-2000)
§ 30.06 DES RESCUE SQUAD.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of KRS 39F.020(1) and KRS 39F.120(9), it is
hereby declared the Paducah-McCracken Co. DES Rescue Squad shall be affiliated
with the local disaster and emergency services organization in the county as
established pursuant to KRS 39B.050.
   (B)   With respect to the affiliation of the Paducah-McCracken Co. DES
Rescue Squad with the local emergency services organization in the county, it
is further declared:
      (1)   A written agreement between the County Judge/Executive, local
Emergency Management Director, and the Chief of the Paducah-McCracken Co. DES
Rescue Squad shall be executed annually as the local charter of authorization
for the Paducah-McCracken Co. DES Rescue Squad to operate in the county
pursuant to KRS 39F.120(9)(a) and (b);
      (2)   The local Search and Rescue (SAR) Coordinator, designated under the
provisions of KRS 39F.200, shall be responsible for annually updating or
maintaining the currency of the local charter and securing the signatures of
the local officials, as required by KRS 39F.120(9)(a)(b); and
      (3)   The affiliation agreement is hereby adopted by reference and
included herein as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
§ 30.07 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   The personnel policies and procedures are hereby adopted by reference and
included herein as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2016-06, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 30.08 COMPENSATION AND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM; SHERIFF’S OFFICE.
   (A)   The classification and compensation plan, pay differentials, criteria
for training, qualifications and promotion attached to the ordinance codified
herein and made part of, shall be the plan for all employees of the County
Sheriff’s office. The plan may not be altered, except by Fiscal Court action.
All status changes to an employee’s classification and grade shall be approved
by the Fiscal Court in accordance with the “Criteria for Training,
Qualifications and Promotion” attachment; or by agreement with the Sheriff for
those positions for which criteria do not exist.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall file and maintain with the Fiscal Court a
comprehensive list of job descriptions and specifications for all positions and
differentials listed prior to the enactment of the plan.
   (C)   No part of this pay and classification is intended to conflict with or
supersede any other requirement, regulation or standards as required by the
state statutes.
(Ord. 2006-12, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 30.09 INTERLOCAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT; 911 SERVICE.
   (A)   Requirements for interlocal agreement. This is an interlocal
cooperative agreement by and between the City of Paducah and McCracken County
entered into under the authority of the Interlocal Cooperation Act , KRS 65.210
et seq.
   (B)   Mission statement.
      (1)   The city and county hereby state their collective intent to
collaborate in the provision of public safety communication services to all
police and fire agencies and emergency management departments within Paducah
and McCracken County including, but not limited to, 911 emergency dispatching,
radio communications, access to criminal history/warrants information and
related records management, and similar information and services generally
associated with public safety/emergency communications systems.
      (2)   Through this joint venture, the city and county shall provide
efficient, reliable and quality public safety communication services to the
public safety agencies and citizens of Paducah and McCracken County. The
parties to this agreement further acknowledge a belief that the provision of
these services, via a model of integrated service delivery, will result in the
most efficient and effective utilization of resources to accomplish this
purpose.
      (3)   This joint venture shall operate under the name of Paducah-
McCracken 911 Service (hereinafter "911").
   (C)   Organization.
      (1)   Board. There shall be created the Paducah-McCracken 911 Board
(hereinafter "Board").
      (2)   Composition of Board. The Board shall consist of five citizen
members who shall not be elected officials nor employees of the city or county.
The Mayor of the City of Paducah shall appoint two members, the Judge Executive
of McCracken County shall appoint two members, and the Mayor and Judge-
Executive shall jointly appoint one member.
      (3)   Appointment of Board members. All appointees shall serve a two year
term of office or until the member is replaced, at the pleasure of the
appointing authority, being subject to removal with cause, as described herein.
      (4)   Removal of Board members. Each appointed Board member shall be
removable for cause due to inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance or
conflict of interest. Any member of the Board may be removed by their
appointing authority, for cause, after a hearing by the appointing authority,
and after at least ten days' notice in writing has been given to the member,
specifying the charges against the member. The finding of the appointing
authority shall be final. A member subjected to removal proceedings may be
represented by counsel.
      (5)   Board compensation. Each member of the Board shall receive
compensation in the amount of $200 per meeting attended for service on the
Board and shall be reimbursed for all reasonable mileage and out-of-pocket
expenses for Board business conducted outside of McCracken County. All such
payments shall be charged to the 911 operating budget.
      (6)   Ethics. All members shall be bound by ethics policies enacted by
the parties in the performance of their duties as Board members.
      (7)   Board officers. At the first meeting, the members shall elect a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson by a majority vote, who shall serve during the
first two years. Subsequent appointments of Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
shall be made by a majority vote of the Board every two years.
      (8)   Management control of 911. The Paducah Police Department
(hereinafter "PPD") shall serve as the management control of 911. In doing so,
PPD shall be responsible for the management of 911, excepting those
responsibilities specifically assigned herein to the Board and the city's
Finance Department. Responsibilities of PPD shall include, but not be limited
to, the management of the National Crime Information Center ("LINK/NCIC")
Database, the adoption of 911 policies and procedures relating to employment/
personnel, implementing policies adopted by the Board that are in compliance
with the Criminal Justice Information Services ("CJIS") Security Policies and/
or Agreement, and the management of 911 employees, including but not limited
to, hiring, firing, and discipline. The Chief of the Paducah Police Department
or his/her designee shall serve as the Criminal Justice Agency Director ("CJA
Director") of 911.
      (9)   Paducah-McCracken 911 Service User Committee. A 911 Service User
Committee (hereinafter "User Committee") shall be created which consists of
Paducah's Chief of Police or his/her designee, Paducah Fire Chief or his/her
designee, McCracken County Sheriff or his/her designee, the Paducah-McCracken
Office of Emergency Management Director or his/her designee, one member from
each of the five County Fire Protection Districts, and one member from any
other customer that shall hereinafter be served by 911. The User Committee
shall meet quarterly or more often, as necessary. The User Committee members
shall meet to discuss strategic issues and matters of mutual interest and
concern and shall report to the CJA Director, as defined herein, those
recommendations which the User Committee deems of significant import. The CJA
Director shall consider the recommendations but is not required to implement
said recommendations. However, if the CJA Director declines to implement said
recommendations, the matter shall be referred to the Board for decision
consistent with the provisions of division (D)(2)(G).
   (D)   Board powers, duties, and responsibilities.
      (1)   Authority of Board. The Board shall be responsible for adopting a
recommended annual operating budget for 911, which shall be presented to the
city and county by the Board Chairman no later than April 1 of each year.
      (2)   Discharge of duties. The Board shall discharge all duties and
responsibilities conferred upon it by this agreement in a manner serving the
interests of the political entities, public safety agencies and the general
public. The Board shall possess the authority, in fulfilling its duties and
obligations as stated herein, to perform the following functions:
         (a)   Meet no less than on a quarterly basis, at dates and times that
is within the discretion of the Board; the Board shall have authority to call
special-called meetings as necessary; a quorum shall be three or more members;
         (b)   Provide financial oversight, including adoption of an annual
operating budget to meet the continuing expenditures of the organization;
         (c)   Retain the services of consultants and other experts for
purposes of upgrading equipment to operate a fully-integrated 911 dispatching
facility, to the extent permitted by the operating budget;
         (d)   Ensure a User's Committee, as more accurately described herein,
is in place and that its recommendations and/or concerns are considered by the
CJA Director, as described in division (B)(2)(c) above;
         (e)   Ensure that the revenues and expenditures of 911, administered
by the city's Finance Department, are audited on an annual basis by a qualified
certified public accountant with the report being presented to each party to
this agreement within ten days of receipt by the Board;
         (f)   Enter into user agreements and set rates related thereto; and
         (g)   Make any necessary changes to 911 policies and procedures, with
guidance from the CJA Director, that do not violate LINK and/or CJIS policies,
agreements, or laws. However, the Board shall not have authority to make any
changes to 911 policies and procedures related to issues concerning employment
and/or personnel but shall have the authority to make recommendations to the
Paducah Board of Commissioners with respect thereto.
      (3)   Bi-annual report. The Board shall require the Board Chairman to
report on a bi-annual basis to the respective parties to this agreement
regarding matters relating to the provision of service, future plans, and
general Board operations.
   (E)   Funding.
      (1)   Funding. This joint venture shall be funded utilizing the following
sources of revenue: (1) fees on wireless services, to the extent allowed by
ordinances and Kentucky law; (2) parcel fees imposed by McCracken County and
City of Paducah ordinances on real property located in McCracken County, with
the parties’ fees to be the same, and with revenues to be shared equally; (3)
any grants received by 911, PPD, and/or the parties for provision of 911
services; (4) user fees imposed on agencies (other than the parties) utilizing
the services of 911; and/or (5) any other lawful source of revenue. All 911
expenses, obligations, capital costs, and liabilities shall be shared equally
by the parties. The parties agree that any 911 expenses, obligations, capital
costs, and liabilities not paid due to a shortfall of revenue sources shall be
shared equally between the parties. Any revenues, including interest, in excess
of expenses shall be retained by the city's Finance Department to be applied to
911's next fiscal year expenses.
      (2)   Collection/remittance/financial administration. Collection of
parcel fees shall be the responsibility of the county for all parcels located
outside the city's jurisdiction and the responsibility of the city for all
parcels located within the city's jurisdiction. Collection of user fees and
CMRS/wireless service fees shall be the responsibility of the city. All fees,
grants, and other sources of revenue collected by either party or any third
party for the provision of 911 services shall be remitted to the City Finance
Department, which shall serve as the Financial Administrator for 911 and shall
be responsible for ensuring 911 expenses, liabilities, and other obligations
are paid. All funds collected for the operation of 911 shall be deposited in a
separate account earmarked solely for expenses, obligations, capital costs, and
liabilities related to 911. The parties agree that all revenues received and/or
collected for the provision of 911 services, as described herein, shall be used
solely for expenses related to the provision of 911 services.
      (3)   Land line fees. The assessment of telephone land line fees shall
cease. The city and county shall abolish all landline fees after parcel fees
have been assessed and sufficient revenue has been collected.
      (4)   Budget. The Board shall prepare and adopt an annual operating
budget for each fiscal year, appropriating anticipated revenue adequate to fund
projected expenditures, consistent with the mission of the Board to be
submitted to the McCracken County Fiscal Court and the Paducah City Commission
by no later than April 1 of each year for approval by each respective
legislative body. If the city and county are unable to reach agreement as to
the operating budget prior to the applicable fiscal year, the operating budget
shall remain as last approved by the parties until such time the parties can
reach an agreement or until the parties terminate this agreement pursuant to
the termination/withdrawal provisions set forth herein.
      (5)   Board financial duties. The Board shall perform, or cause to be
performed, all financial activities and transactions consistent with generally
accepted accounting principles and state law, including but not limited to,
budgeting, procurement, fund accounting, and auditing services.
      (6)   Rates and fees. The Board shall, on no less than a yearly basis,
analyze all projected revenues and expenses and make recommendations to the
City of Paducah and McCracken County by no later than March 1 of each year, any
proposed amendments to existing legislative enactments relating to funding of
911.
   (F)   Administration.
      (1)   Employees. All current city 911 employees shall remain employed by
the City of Paducah at their current rate of pay and shall retain their current
benefits. This agreement does not affect the terms and conditions of their
employment, nor should it be construed as a waiver of their at-will employment
status. In no event shall this agreement be interpreted or construed to create
an employer-employee relationship between the county and personnel providing
911 service.
      (2)   CERS obligation. The city, as employer of 911 employees,
acknowledges and accepts responsibility for the participation of any such
eligible employees in the Hazardous Duty Retirement Program.
      (3)   Payroll and accounting. Payroll, employee benefits, and all
attendant accounting employee functions for 911 shall be performed by the City
of Paducah. Any and all costs associated with payroll, accounting, and human
resources concerning 911 shall be charged to the costs of operating 911 and
included in the budget.
   (G)   Expenditures.
      (1)   Expenditures. In addition to all ordinary expenses necessary for
the operation of 911, the Board and the parties shall be responsible for
ensuring the following are funded:
         (a)   CAD, Telephony, and Recorder upgrades; and
         (b)   Upgrades to the 911 system, including, but not limited to,
radios, paging systems, and new technology.
      (2)   Party expenditures. Each party shall be individually responsible
for upgrades to their handheld and vehicle radios which are necessary to comply
with the upgraded 911 system.
      (3)   Debt. The city and county shall be equally responsible for all debt
incurred by either party for the operation of 911. The budget proposed by the
Board and adopted by the parties shall contemplate the repayment of debt. No
party shall incur debt for the operation of 911 without the other party’s
written approval.
   (H)   Location of dispatching facility. The Paducah-McCracken 911 Service
Dispatching Facility is currently located at the Emergency Communications
Building at 510 Clark Street, Paducah, Kentucky, 42003. Any decision to
relocate the 911 Service Dispatching Facility to a location other than 510
Clark Street shall be made jointly by both parties.
   (I)   Property.
      (1)   Party assets. As of the date of execution of this agreement, all
assets relating to 911 owned by the parties to this agreement are listed,
incorporated, and attached to Ordinance No. 2024- 03 as Exhibit A. The parties
shall retain ownership of all such assets during the pendency of this
agreement.
      (2)   Additional assets. Each party may acquire and otherwise own
personal property and equipment necessary to provide the services as enumerated
herein.
      (3)   Joint assets. The parties intend to acquire joint assets with joint
funds during the pendency of this agreement. A list of those anticipated joint
assets is attached to Ordinance No. 2024-03 as Exhibit B. The parties agree to
update Exhibit B during the pendency of this agreement as additional joint
assets are acquired. In the event of termination of this agreement, each party
shall have the right to acquire one or more assets from the other party. In
doing so, the parties agree to negotiate in good faith as to the current fair
market value of said asset(s), taking into consideration the purchase price of
the asset(s) and/or fair market value at the time of acquisition and the
depreciation of said asset(s). The purchasing party shall only be required to
pay a percentage equivalent to the selling party's pro rata contribution toward
the purchase price and/or cost of the asset. For instance, if the selling party
contributed 40% of the funds used to purchase the joint asset, the purchasing
party is only required to pay the selling party 40% of the current fair market
value of the joint asset. In addition, any selling party shall have the
authority to lease any joint asset from the purchasing party if it so chooses.
The parties agree to negotiate in good faith as to a reasonable rental payment
and, in doing so, agree to set the rental payment so that such value is
reasonably related to the cost of operation. In the event the parties cannot
agree to a purchase price and/or lease payment price of any joint asset at the
time of termination, either party shall have the right and/or authority to file
a declaratory judgment action in McCracken Circuit Court.
      (4)   Assets upon termination. Upon termination of this agreement, each
party shall retain ownership in the assets listed on Exhibit A of Ordinance No.
2024-03 and any additional assets acquired by that party during the pendency of
this agreement.
   (J)   Insurance. The city and county shall each maintain insurance against
legal liability for 911 services, naming each other as additional insureds with
limits of liability no less than $3,000,000 per person and $3,000,000 per
incident. All insurance costs shall be charged to the cost of operating 911 and
included in the budget thereof.
   (K)   Shared liability. It is the intent of the parties to share equally in
the liabilities associated with the operation of 911. In the event either the
city or county or the officers, agents, employees and/or volunteers of the city
or county are held liable for acts or omissions relating to the provision of
911 services and such liability is not paid in whole or part by insurance, the
parties agree to share equally in those uncovered losses, expenses, costs,
attorney's fees, and other damages of every kind and nature for all claims,
demands, and causes of action, both in law and equity, including, without
limitation, third party actions and actions for contribution and/or
indemnification.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 3-26-2008; Ord. 2024-03, passed 6-24-2024)
§ 30.10 JUDGE/EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The Judge/Executive is authorized to execute an interlocal cooperation
agreement between the City of Paducah, Kentucky, and the county for animal
control services.
   (B)   The Judge/Executive is authorized to execute interlocal management
agreements among and/or between the county, the City of Paducah and the
Paducah-McCracken County Joint Sewer Agency for the shared positions of grants
administrator, network administrator and network technician. The county shall
compensate the city for its share of the annual salary and benefits for the
positions.
(Ord. 2004-14, passed 8-9-2004; Ord. 2006-7, passed 10-30-2006)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violators of any provision of §
30.01 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor under the laws of the
commonwealth and be fined up to $1,000 and/or up to one year in the county jail
per violation.
(Ord. 2004-15, passed 9-15-2004)
CHAPTER 31: COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
31.01   Auxiliary Police Force
   
31.02   Office of Emergency Management
   
31.03   Industrial Development Authority
   
31.04   Sports Tourism Commission
Code Enforcement Board
   
31.10   Definitions
   
31.11   Creation and membership
   
31.12   Enforcement powers
   
31.13   Appointment of members; terms of office; removal from office; oath; and
compensation
   
31.14   Organization of Board; meetings; quorum
   
31.15   Conflict of interest
   
31.16   Jurisdiction
   
31.17   Powers of the Code Enforcement Board
   
31.18   Enforcement proceeding
   
31.19   Hearing; notice; and final order
   
31.20   Presentation of cases
   
31.21   Appeals; final judgment
   
31.22   Liens, fines, charges, and fees
   
31.23   Lienholder notification system
   
31.24   Lienholder rights, lien precedence
   
31.25   Immediate action
§ 31.01 AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE.
   There is hereby established an Auxiliary Police Force by virtue of the
authority granted under KRS 67.083.
   (A)   The membership of the Auxiliary Police Force shall be in such number
as determined by the County Judge/Executive to be useful and desirable but not
to exceed 15 members.
   (B)   Each member of the Auxiliary Police Force shall be appointed by the
County Judge/Executive in writing and each officer thereof shall be approved by
said County Judge/Executive, and any member or officer of said Auxiliary Police
Force may be removed at any time and without cause by the County Judge/
Executive.
   (C)   Each member of the Auxiliary Police Force shall be a resident of the
county; in good physical condition; a high school graduate; a person of
sobriety and integrity, and have been an orderly, law-abiding citizen of at
least 21 years of age. The requirement of being a high school graduate may be
waived if the person being considered has seven or more years’ experience in
law enforcement, including auxiliary police work.
   (D)   Before entering upon the performance of his or her duties, each member
of the Auxiliary Police Force shall be sworn in by the County Judge/Executive
and shall execute a bond in the sum of $1,000 with corporate surety to be
approved by the County Judge/Executive, conditioned that he or she will
faithfully perform the duties of his or her office. The premium for such bond
shall be paid by the County Fiscal Court.
   (E)   No assignment shall be accepted and no duties shall be performed by a
member or officer of the Auxiliary Police Force except on direct order of the
County Judge/Executive, or in his or her absence, the order of the Chief of the
County Police Force.
   (F)   When on active duty under an assignment as provided herein, each
member of the Auxiliary Police Force shall have the powers of other peace
officers of the county.
   (G)   No salary or wages or other compensation shall be paid by the county
to any member or officer of the Auxiliary Police Force, and none of them shall
acquire any rights or benefits under the rules or laws governing the members of
the County Police Department.
(Ord. 320.1, passed - -1980)
§ 31.02 OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Paducah-McCracken County Office of
Emergency Management, in accordance with the provisions of KRS 39B.010, which
shall serve in the interest of public safety within the territorial boundaries
of the county.
      (1)   The Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management shall
develop, implement and maintain the local comprehensive emergency management
program for the county in accordance with the provisions KRS Chapters 39A to
39F, the comprehensive emergency management program requirements of the State
Division of Emergency Management, the provisions of the State Emergency
Operations Plan, administrative regulations promulgated by the State Division
of Emergency Management, and the resolutions, orders or ordinances of the
Fiscal Court of the county.
      (2)   The Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management shall
be an organization unit of county government attached to the Office of County
Judge/Executive and shall have primary jurisdiction, responsibility and
authority for all matters pertaining to the comprehensive emergency management
program of the county.
      (3)   The Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management shall
meet all requirements for a local emergency management agency as specified in
KRS Chapters 39A to 39F, and shall serve as the executive branch of the
Paducah-McCracken County Disaster and Emergency Services Organization
established pursuant to KRS 39B.050.
      (4)   The County Judge/Executive shall designate, prepare and include a
separate Office of Emergency Management budget unit classification within each
annual fiscal year county budget, and all financial matters of the Paducah-
McCracken County Office of Emergency Management shall be handled through the
county treasury and uniform budget system.
      (5)   The County Judge/Executive, within 30 days of assuming office,
shall appoint a County Emergency Management Director in accordance with the
provisions of KRS 39B.020, and shall immediately notify the State Division of
Emergency Management of the appointment.
      (6)   The County Emergency Management Director, appointed pursuant to
this section, shad be sworn by oath to the Office of Emergency Management
Director immediately upon appointment, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
County Judge/Executive, but shall serve no longer than four consecutive years
without reappointment and, as a minimum, shall meet all the qualification
requirements as specified in KRS 39B.020.
   (B)   The County Emergency Management Director shall have and exercise all
the powers, authorities, rights and duties as specified in, or referenced in,
KRS 39B.030, and in the orders or ordinances of the fiscal court of the county,
to include the following:
      (1)   To represent the County Judge/Executive on all matters pertaining
to the comprehensive emergency management program and the disaster and
emergency response of the county;
      (2)   To be the executive head of, and chief administrative officer of,
the Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management, and direct,
control, supervise and manage the development, preparation, organization,
administration, operation, implementation and maintenance of the comprehensive
emergency management program of the county;
      (3)   To develop, update and maintain the County Emergency Operations
Plan in compliance with the provisions of KRS 39B.030(3);
      (4)   To establish and maintain Paducah-McCracken County Disaster and
Emergency Services Organization in accordance with the provisions of the County
Emergency Operations Plan, the State Emergency Operations Plan, and the
provisions of KRS 39B.050;
      (5)   To notify the County Judge/Executive and the State Division of
Emergency Management immediately of the occurrence, or threatened or impending
occurrence, of any emergency, declared emergency, disaster or catastrophic
incident or situation, and provide in such notice an assessment of possible or
actual damages or threats to life, health, safety, property or the environment,
and recommend any emergency actions or orders which should be executed;
      (6)   To be the chief advisor to, and the primary on-scene representative
of, the County Judge/Executive in the event of any emergency, declared
emergency, disaster or catastrophe within the county in a coordinating
capacity;
      (7)   To respond and have full access to the scenes of an emergency,
declared emergency, disaster or catastrophe and immediately investigate,
analyze or assess the nature, scope or seriousness of all situations;
coordinate the establishment and operation of an incident command or management
system; execute the provisions of the County Emergency Operations Plan;
activate the Paducah-McCracken County Emergency Operations Center or on-scene
command post; convene meetings, gather information and conduct briefings;
notify the County Judge/Executive and the State Division of Emergency
Management immediately of the nature, scope or seriousness of an emergency
situation and provide information on all on-going response actions being taken
in association with the incident; provide any assistance requested, as deemed
necessary or appropriate; and taken any actions to fully expedite and
coordinate the local disaster and emergency response as specified in the
Paducah-McCracken County Emergency Operations Plan;
      (8)   To take or direct immediate actions to protect public safety at the
direction of the County Judge/Executive during any declared emergency or
disaster;
      (9)   To act as an official representative of the State Division of
Emergency Management when specifically requested by the State Director;
      (10)   To report directly to the County Judge/Executive and act in an
official policy-making capacity when carrying out all duties of Emergency
Management Director;
      (11)   To have full signatory authority, in accordance with the county
administrative code, for execution of all contracts, agreements or other
official documents pertaining to the administration, organization and operation
of the Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management and the local
comprehensive emergency management program;
      (12)   To direct all paid or volunteer employees, staff assistants or
other workers of the Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management,
and supervise any operating units and personnel associated with it which are
officially appointed and affiliated with the Paducah-McCracken County Disaster
and Emergency Services Organization pursuant to the provisions of KRS 39B.070;
      (13)   To prepare and submit regular or scheduled program activity
reports to the area manager of the State Division of Emergency Management and
the County Judge/Executive;
      (14)   To execute bond in the amount as determined by the County Judge/
Executive, when directed by the County Judge/Executive;
      (15)   To prepare and submit to the County Judge/Executive, on an annual
basis by March 1, a program and agency budget request for the Paducah-McCracken
County Office of Emergency Management;
      (16)   To prepare and submit to the State Division of Emergency
Management, on an annual basis by July 15, a fiscal year program paper and
budget request for the Paducah-McCracken County Office of Emergency Management;
      (17)   To enroll and be a registered member of the State Emergency
Management Association and the West Kentucky Emergency Managers Association;
      (18)   To perform the duties of, or appoint with the approval of the
fiscal court of the county, the local Search and Rescue Coordinator pursuant to
the provisions of KRS 39F.200; and
      (19)   To perform all executive, administrative, organizational or
operational duties and tasks required pursuant to KRS Chapters 39A to 39F,
state administrative regulations, the State Emergency Operations Plan, or
program guidance issued by the State Division of Emergency Management; and to
carry out all other emergency management-related duties as required by the
resolutions, orders or ordinances of the fiscal court of the county, the
executive orders of the County Judge/Executive, and the provisions of the
County Emergency Operations Plan.
   (C)   Pursuant to KRS 39B.070(3), the following entities shall constitute
the Emergency Management agency supervised operating units or personnel within
the Paducah-McCracken County DES Organization, pursuant to KRS 39B.050(1)(c):
      (1)   Rescue Squad;
      (2)   Urban Search and Rescue Team;
      (3)   Dive Rescue and Recovery Team;
      (4)   Search Dog Team;
      (5)   Weather Spotters;
      (6)   Auxiliary Police;
      (7)   Communications;
      (8)   Public Information;
      (9)   Alerting and Warning;
      (10)   Radiological Protection;
      (11)   Administrative;
      (12)   Emergency Operations Center Staff;
      (13)   Social Services; and
      (14)   WMD Hazardous Materials Response Team.
   (D)   The operating units listed above in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), (C)(3),
(C)(5), (C)(6), (C)(13) and (C)(14) shall:
      (1)   Develop written bylaws to specify, as a minimum:
         (a)   The mission of the operating unit;
         (b)   The appointment of officers;
         (c)   Financial accounting procedures;
         (d)   Property accountability;
         (e)   Membership requirements and record keeping; and
         (f)   Training requirements.
      (2)   Develop written standard operating procedures that specify, as a
minimum:
         (a)   Direction and control or incident command system procedures;
         (b)   Notification and call-out procedures; and
         (c)   Procedures for all operations and response activities of the
operating unit consistent with the mission statement.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or any
lawful orders, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to it, upon conviction
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. Violators of this section may be
issued a citation by the Sheriff of the county or by a duly authorized
official.
(Ord. 2000-9, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 2000-9.1, passed 8-12-2002)
Cross-reference:
   Government operations during an emergency, see §
32.03
§ 31.03 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created and established pursuant to the
provisions of KRS 154.50-310 et seq., the Paducah-McCracken County Industrial
Development Authority.
   (B)   Composition; appointment of members. 
      (1)   The Industrial Development Authority shall be composed of six
members, three of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Paducah,
and three of whom shall be appointed by the County Judge/Executive of the
county.
      (2)   Appointments made by the County Judge/Executive shall be with the
approval of the County Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Qualifications of members; county and city officials not eligible for
membership. All members appointed to the Industrial Development Authority shall
reside within the county and each shall have knowledge or experience in matters
relating to industry or economic development. No member of the Industrial
Development Authority shall hold any office with the county or city.
   (D)   Terms of members. 
      (1)   Of the initial appointments to the Industrial Development
Authority, the County Judge/Executive and Mayor shall each appoint one member
for two years, one member for three years and one member for four years.
      (2)   Thereafter, members of the Industrial Development Authority shall
serve for a term of four years each, and until their successors are appointed
and qualified.
   (E)   Powers, functions and duties. The Industrial Development Authority
established hereby shall have all the powers, functions and duties authorized
by the Local Industrial Development Authority Act, KRS 154.50-301 et seq.
(Ord. 97-2, passed 2-24-1997)
§ 31.04 SPORTS TOURISM COMMISSION.
   (A)   Withdrawal from Paducah-McCracken County Tourist and Convention
Commission. Pursuant to KRS 91A.350(2) and Ky. Op. Atty. Gen. 15-007, the
county shall withdraw from the Paducah- McCracken County Tourist and Convention
Commission, effective August 21, 2019.
   (B)   Establishment of County Tourist and Convention Commission. Pursuant to
KRS 91A.350(2) and KRS 91A.360, the County Fiscal Court hereby establishes a
McCracken County Tourist and Convention Commission for the purpose of promoting
and developing convention and tourist activities and facilities. The Commission
shall be known as the McCracken County Sports Tourism Commission. Pursuant to
KRS 91A.360, the County Sports Tourism Commission shall be composed of seven
members, to be appointed in accordance with the County Administrative Code, and
in a manner consistent with KRS 91A.360.
      (1)   Commissioners shall be appointed as follows:
         (a)   Consistent with KRS 91A.360(l)(a), three Commissioners shall be
appointed to represent the local hotel and motel industry;
         (b)   Consistent with KRS 91A.360(l)(b), one Commissioner shall be
appointed to represent the local restaurant business community;
         (c)   Consistent with KRS 91A.360(l)(c), one Commissioner shall be
appointed to represent the local general commerce businesses;
         (d)   Two additional Commissioners shall be appointed by the County
Judge Executive, with the approval of the County Fiscal Court, in a manner
consistent with the County Administrative Code.
      (2)   The seven-person Commission shall elect from its membership a
chairman and a treasurer, and may employ personnel and make contracts necessary
to carry out the purpose of KRS 91A.350 to 91A.390.
      (3)   Pursuant to KRS 91A.390(l)(a), the County Fiscal Court shall
annually approve a proposed budget and request for funds submitted by the
County Sports Tourism Commission. The County Sports Tourism Commission shall
submit a proposed annual budget and request for funding to the County Treasurer
on or before March 1 of each year, to be approved or rejected by the County
Fiscal Court during its budget preparation analysis for the subsequent fiscal
year.
   (C)   Activities of the County Sports Tourism Commission.
      (1)   The County Sports Tourism Commission is authorized to undertake any
activity permitted by statute; however, its primary focus shall be upon sports-
related tourism.
      (2)   The activities of the County Sports Tourism Commission, along with
its respective rights and duties in connection with tourism, convention and
recreation activities within the geographic jurisdictional boundaries of the
county, shall be memorialized by an interlocal cooperation agreement entered
into pursuant to KRS 65.210 through 65.314, and comprised of the following
parties: the City of Paducah; McCracken County, Kentucky; the Paducah Tourist
and Convention Commission; the Paducah-McCracken County Convention Center, and
the McCracken County Sports Tourism Commission.
(Ord. 2019-10, passed 8-21-2019)
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 31.10 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this subchapter and in
further chapters of this code shall have the meanings ascribed to them except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ABATEMENT COSTS. The county's necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing all
or a portion of a structure or premises, removing discarded items, or taking
any other action with regard to discarded items, a structure, or premises
necessary to remedy a violation and to maintain and preserve the public health,
safety and welfare in accordance with any county ordinance.
   CITATION.  A written notification that a violation occurred and fines, fees
, and/or remedy charges may apply. This notification is appealable to the Code
Enforcement Board with procedures set out below.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under the
authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, KRS 65.8801 to
65.8840.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  An officer appointed pursuant to the provisions
of the
Chapter 110 with the authority as set forth in the same.
   FINAL ORDER. Any order:
      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing in
accordance with the provisions herein below;
      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested the citation
within ten days as provided herein below; or
      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing the
violator requested to contest the citation as provided herein below.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life
threatening injury or death at any time or where the violation otherwise
presents a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, or if in
the absence of immediate action, the effects of the condition will be
irreparable or irreversible.
   OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
having a legal or equitable title in real property.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, agency, establishment, business, company,
association, partnership, business trust, joint stock company, body politic or
corporation.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon it.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.11 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created, pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8840, a Code
Enforcement Board which shall be composed of three members. Code Enforcement
Officers and the Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction over and shall
enforce the property maintenance code and all other ordinances that provide for
enforcement by Code Enforcement Officers or the Code Enforcement Board in the
manner set forth herein. All members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be
residents of the county for a period of at least one year prior to the date of
the member's appointment and shall reside in the county throughout the term in
office.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.12 ENFORCEMENT POWERS.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue remedial
orders and impose civil fines as a method of enforcing county ordinances when a
violation of the ordinance has been classified as a civil offense.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to enforce any
violation as a criminal offense.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.13 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERMS OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; OATH; AND
COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by the Judge
Executive, subject to the approval of the Fiscal Court. All appointments shall
be for a term of three years. A member may be reappointed by the Judge
Executive, subject to the approval of the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The Judge Executive may appoint, subject to the approval of the Fiscal
Court, one alternate member to serve in the absence of regular members.
Alternate members shall meet all the qualifications and shall be subject to all
the requirements that apply to regular members of the Board.
   (C)   Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Judge Executive,
subject to the approval of the Fiscal Court. All vacancies shall be filled for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (D)   A Board member may be removed from office by the Judge Executive, with
approval of the Fiscal Court, for misconduct, inefficiency, or willful neglect
of duty. The Judge Executive shall submit a written statement to the Board
member and to the Fiscal Court setting forth the reasons for removal.
   (E)   All members of the Board must, before entering office, take the oath
of office prescribed by § 228 of the Kentucky Constitution. Said oath shall be
administered by the County Judge Executive or his or her designee.
   (F)   Members of the Board shall be compensated at the rate of $200 per
meeting attended and shall be reimbursed for actual expenses.
   (G)   No member of the Board may hold any elected or non-elected office,
paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the county.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.14 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM.
   (A)   The Board shall annually elect a chair from among its members. The
Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting member of the
Board. If the Chairperson is not present at a meeting, the Board shall select
one of its members to preside in place of and exercise the powers of the
Chairperson.
   (B)   The Board may elect to hold regular monthly meetings. Meetings other
than established regular meetings shall be special meetings held in accordance
with the Kentucky Open Meetings Act.
   (C)   All meetings and hearings of the Board shall be public meetings held
in accordance with the applicable state statutes and the Kentucky Open Meetings
Act.
   (D)   The presence of a majority of the Board's membership shall constitute
a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Board shall be
necessary for any official action to be taken.
   (E)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board, and the vote
of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in the
minutes. A clerk from the County Clerk's office or the office of the Judge
Executive may serve as the Clerk of the Board.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.15 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Board who has any direct or indirect financial or personal
interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the nature of the interest
and shall disqualify him or herself from voting on the matter in which he or
she has an interest and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a
quorum. If a quorum cannot be established on a given appeal due to a conflict,
the Fiscal Court may serve as a special Code Enforcement Board subject to the
same rules and procedures of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.16 JURISDICTION.
   The Board shall have jurisdiction to enforce and shall enforce the property
maintenance code contained in
Chapter 110 of this code and any other county ordinances that specifically
provide for Code Enforcement Board enforcement.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.17 POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   The County Code Enforcement Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and the
conduct of its hearings;
   (B)   Once an appeal has been initiated by the respondent, to conduct
hearings to determine if there has been a violation of an ordinance over which
it has jurisdiction;
   (C)   To subpoena alleged violators, witnesses, and evidence to its
hearings. Subpoenas issued by the Board may be served by a Code Enforcement
Officer or a County Sheriff Deputy;
   (D)   To take testimony under oath. The Chairperson shall have the authority
to administer oaths for the purpose of taking testimony. To make findings of
fact and issue orders necessary to abate any violation of a county ordinance
which the Board is authorized to enforce; and
   (E)   To impose civil fines as authorized on any person found to have
violated an ordinance over which the Board has jurisdiction. The Board may
forgive or waive any civil fines imposed by the Board within 60 days from the
date of the final order. The Board shall have no authority to waive any civil
fine imposed by a final order not issued by the Board. Any forgiveness or
waiver by the Board of a civil fine within 60 days of the date of the Board's
final order shall not forgive or waive any abatement charges or filing fees
incurred by the county in recording or releasing liens.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.18 ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings before
the Board:
   (A)   Enforcement proceedings before the Board shall be initiated by the
issuance of a citation by a Code Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Except as provided below, if a Code Enforcement Officer believes,
based on his or her personal observation or investigation, that a person has
violated a county ordinance under this chapter or the property maintenance
code, he or she is authorized to issue a citation to the violator. In lieu of a
citation, the Code Enforcement Officer may give the violator notice that a
violation has occurred and allow the violator a specified period to remedy the
violation without fine. The time allowed by the Code Enforcement Officer shall
depend on the nature of the violation and the time necessary to remedy the
violation. If the violator fails or refuses to remedy the violation within the
time specified, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a citation.
   (C)   The notice of violation or citation shall be in writing and shall be
reasonably calculated to inform the violator of the nature of the violation.
The notice of violation shall be delivered to the violator by any method chosen
by the Code Enforcement Officer. The citation shall be delivered to the
violator:
      (1)   By personal delivery;
      (2)   By leaving a copy of the citation with any person who is 18 years
of age or older who is a resident of or has an ownership interest in the
premises, if the alleged violator is not on the premises at the time the
citation is issued;
      (3)   By mailing a copy of the citation by regular first-class mail to
the last known record mailing address of the alleged violator; or
      (4)   If in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the issuance of a
citation using the methods set out above is not possible, then the citation is
properly served by posting a copy of the citation in a conspicuous place on the
premises. When the violation involves a fire damaged structure, a copy of the
notice of violation or citation shall also be delivered to any mortgage
company, lien holder and any insurance company with verified interest in the
property. Reasonable attempts shall be made to determine all verified interest.
   (D)   The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
      (3)   The date and time of issuance of the citation and date and time the
offense was committed;
      (4)   The facts constituting the violation;
      (5)   The section of the ordinance or other code violated;   
      (6)   The name and office contact information of the Code Enforcement
Officer;
      (7)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil
fine or to contest the citation;
      (8)   The civil fine that may be imposed per day for the violation if the
person does not contest the citation;
      (9)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed per day for the
violation if the person elects to contest the citation; and
      (10)   A statement that if the person fails to pay the civil fine set
forth in the citation or to contest the citation within time allowed, the
person shall be deemed as having waived the right to a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board to contest the citation and that the determination that a
violation was committed shall be final and the alleged violator shall be deemed
to have waived the right to appeal the final order to county District Court.
   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board by delivering a copy of the
citation to the person designated by the Board.
   (F)   Final orders.
      (1)   The person to whom the citation is issued shall respond to the
citation within ten days of the date the citation is issued by either paying
the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting, in writing, a hearing
before the Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation. If the person
responds by paying the civil fine, the person to whom the citation is issued
shall still be required to remedy the violation. If the person does not contest
the citation within ten days by requesting a hearing, the person shall be
deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a
violation was committed shall be considered final. In this event, the citation
as issued shall be deemed a final order determining that the violation was
committed and imposing the civil fine as set forth in the citation, and the
person shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal the final order to
the Board and to the District Court.
      (2)   Notice of a final order shall be provided to the cited violator by
regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; personal
delivery; or by leaving the final order at the person's usual place of
residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older
and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.19 HEARING; NOTICE; AND FINAL ORDER.
   (A)   Hearing. When a hearing has been requested, the Board or its designee
shall schedule a hearing.
   (B)   Notice. Not less than ten days before the date of the hearing, the
Board shall notify the requester of the date, time and place of the hearing.
The notice may be given by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return
receipt requested, by personal delivery, or by leaving the notice at the
person's usual place of residence with any individual residing therein who is
18 years of age or older and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
   (C)   Failure to appear.
      (1)   Any person requesting a hearing before the Board who fails to
appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing to
contest the citation and the determination that a violation was committed shall
be final. In this event, the citation, as issued, shall be deemed a final order
determining that the violation was committed and imposing the civil fine set
forth in the citation and the alleged violator shall be deemed to have waived
the right to appeal the final order to District Court.
      (2)   Notice of the final order shall be provided to the cited violator
by regular first-class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; by
personal delivery; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of
residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older
and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
   (D)   Testimony. All testimony shall be taken under oath and audio or audio/
video recorded. Testimony shall be taken from the Code Enforcement Officer, the
alleged violator (should they choose to testify), and any witnesses to the
violation offered by the Code Enforcement Officer or alleged violator. Formal
rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be
observed and shall govern the proceedings.
   (E)   Board determination. The Board shall, based on the evidence, determine
whether a violation was committed. In reaching its decisions, the Board shall
weigh the evidence and reach a decision upon the preponderance of the evidence
presented. If the Board determines that no violation was committed, an order
dismissing the citation shall be entered. If it determines that a violation was
committed, an order shall be issued upholding the citation and either imposing
a fine up to the maximum authorized or requiring the violator to abate a
continuing violation, or both.
   (F)   Final order.
      (1)   Every final order of the Board shall be reduced to writing, which
shall include the date the order was issued and the findings and conclusions
reached, including the fine, charges and costs, including abatement costs (if
ascertainable at the time), imposed. The Board may also direct the violator to
abate the violation within a reasonable time and to assess daily fines for
noncompliance. A copy shall be furnished to the person named in the citation.
      (2)   If the person named in the citation is not present when the final
order is issued, the order shall be delivered to the person by regular first-
class mail; certified mail, return receipt requested; by personal delivery; or
by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of residence with any
individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed
of the contents of the notice.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.20 PRESENTATION OF CASES.
   Each case before the Board shall be presented by an attorney selected by the
county, a Code Enforcement Officer for the county, or by a member of the
county's administrative staff. The County Attorney may either be counsel to the
Board or may present cases before the Board, but in no case shall the County
Attorney serve in both capacities.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.21 APPEALS; FINAL JUDGMENT.
   (A)   An appeal from any final order of the Board following a hearing
pursuant to the above provisions may be made to the County District Court
within 30 days of the date the order is issued. The appeal shall be initiated
by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the Board's final order in the same
manner as any civil action under the Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   If no appeal of the final order of the Board is filed within the time
allowed, the Board's order shall be deemed final for all purposes.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.22 LIENS, FINES, CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The county shall possess a lien on property owned by the person found
by a final, non-appealable order as set out herein above, or by a final
judgment of the court to have committed a violation of a county ordinance for
all civil fines assessed for the violation and for all charges, fees and
abatement costs incurred by the county in connection with the enforcement of
the ordinance. An affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the
proceedings pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8840.
   (B)   The lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and shall
be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest
at 12% per annum thereafter until paid. The lien shall continue for ten years
following the date of the non-appealable final order or final court judgment.
   (C)   Subject to the provisions herein below, the lien shall take precedence
over all other liens on the property, except state, school board, and county
taxes and may be enforced by judicial proceedings, including a foreclosure
action.
   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed above, the person found to have
committed the violation shall be personally responsible for the amount of all
civil fines assessed for the violation and for all charges, fees, and abatement
costs incurred by the county in connection with the enforcement of the
applicable code. The county may bring a civil action for the collection of
delinquent liens and other costs incurred by the county in the enforcement of
the ordinance, and the county shall have the same remedies as provided for the
recovery of a debt.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.23 LIENHOLDER NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.
   The county shall obtain and maintain priority over previously filed liens,
as provided in §
31.22, in accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   Individuals and entities who are residents of, or have ownership
interest in a subject property, including but not limited to lienholders, may
register with the county to receive electronic notification of final orders
entered pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   In order to receive the notification, the registrant shall submit the
following information to the code enforcement staff:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Mailing address;
      (3)   Phone number; and
      (4)   Electronic mailing address.
   (C)   A registrant may use the electronic form provided on the county
website to submit the information required in this section. It shall be the
responsibility of the registrant to maintain and update the required contact
information with the county. The county shall inform a registrant of any
evidence received that the electronic mailing address is invalid or not
functional so that the registrant may provide an updated electronic mailing
address.
   (D)   No less than once a month but no more frequently than once per week,
the county shall send electronic mail notification of all final orders entered
pursuant to this section since the last date of notification to each party
registered pursuant to this section. The notification shall provide an
electronic link to the county code enforcement database located on the county
website. The database shall include the following information regarding each
final order:
      (1)   The name of the person charged with a violation;
      (2)   The physical address of the premises where the violation occurred;
      (3)   The last known mailing address for the owner of the premises where
the violation occurred if, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, it is
ascertainable;
      (4)   A copy of the full citation;
      (5)   A copy of the full final order; and
      (6)   The status of the final order regarding its ability to be appealed
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (E)   If an appeal is filed on a final order pursuant to this subchapter,
the county shall send electronic mail notification to all registrants.
   (F)   Within ten days of the issuance of a final order pursuant to this
subchapter, the county shall update its code enforcement database to reflect
the issued final order and shall post the notification required by this section
containing an updated link to the code enforcement database on the county
website.
   (G)   The county shall maintain the records created under this section for
ten years following their issuance.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.24 LIENHOLDER RIGHTS, LIEN PRECEDENCE.
   (A)   A lienholder of record who has registered pursuant to §
31.23 may, within 45 days from the date of issuance of notification under §
31.23:
      (1)   Correct the violation, if it has not already been abated; and/or
      (2)   Pay all civil fines assessed for the violation, and all charges and
fees incurred by the county in connection with enforcement of the ordinance,
including abatement costs.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the county from taking
immediate action, if necessary under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The lien provided herein above shall not take precedence over
previously recorded liens if:
      (1)   The county failed to comply with the requirements of §
31.23 for notification of the final order; or
      (2)   A prior lienholder complied with this section.
   (D)   A lien that does not take precedence over previously recorded liens
under division (C) of this section shall, if the final order remains partially
unsatisfied, take precedence over all other subsequent liens except liens for
state, county, and school board taxes.
   (E)   If the county records a lien before the 45 day period established in
this section expires and the lien is fully satisfied prior to the expiration of
the 45 day period , the county shall release the lien in the County Clerk's
office where the lien is recorded within 15 days of satisfaction.
   (F)   Failure of the county to comply with this and the previous sections,
or failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as provided
in this section, shall not limit or restrict any other remedies the county has
against the property of the violator.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 31.25 IMMEDIATE ACTION.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the county from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason
to believe that there is imminent danger. Costs incurred by the county in
taking immediate action, where necessary as qualified under this section, shall
be reimbursed to the county and the county may seek reimbursement in the same
manner that abatement costs are sought in this chapter.
   (B)   If such imminent danger is present, the county may abate the nuisance
immediately. Notice shall be served upon the property owner by certified mail,
but if the whereabouts of the person is unknown and cannot be ascertained by
the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Code
Enforcement Officer may make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of
notice may be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation for two
consecutive days. A copy of the notice may be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the notice, and it may be recorded in the office of
the County Clerk.
(Ord. 2024-11, passed 9-9-2024)
CHAPTER 32: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
   
32.01   Concealed weapons on government property
   
32.02   Cremation services
   
32.03   Government operations during an emergency
§ 32.01 CONCEALED WEAPONS ON GOVERNMENT PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared that the purpose of local government is to serve
the people of its jurisdiction to the best of its ability in a spirit of peace
and cooperation. It is to assure the safety of the citizens, officers and
employees of said government and to solve problems in the positive mood of
accord.
   (B)   The Fiscal Court of the county, after due consideration, has
determined that this purpose can best be met by the absence of concealed deadly
weapons in the places where such proceedings take place.
   (C)   Under the authorization of KRS Chapter 237, the county does hereby
prohibit the carrying of concealed weapons into the County Courthouse. The
provisions of this section, as enacted under KRS Chapter 237, shall not be
deemed to be a violation of KRS 65.870.
      (1)   A sign shall be posted at the entrance(s) of the County Courthouse,
which shall be a minimum of 18 inches square and shall read as follows: “The
possession of concealed deadly weapons, even with proper permit, is hereby
prohibited on this property.”
      (2)   DEADLY WEAPONS, as used in this section, shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Any weapon from which a shot, readily capable of producing death
or other serious physical injury, may be discharged;
         (b)   Any knife other than an ordinary pocket knife, i.e., a knife
with a blade of four and one-half inches or less;
         (c)   Billy, nightstick or club;
         (d)   Blackjack or slapjack;
         (e)   Nunchaku karate sticks;
         (f)   Shuriken or death star; or
         (g)   Artificial knuckles made from metal, plastic or other similar
hard material.
      (3)   Any person or persons violating this section may be denied entrance
to the building or ordered to leave the building. Any such violator, who
refuses to leave the premises after being ordered to do so, shall be subject to
being charged with criminal trespass in the second degree.
      (4)   Any employee of the county government or of any elected official of
the county, excluding peace officers, who violates this section shall be
subject to employee disciplinary measures.
   (D)   The adoption of this section shall be deemed to serve as public notice
that the carrying of concealed deadly weapons shall be prohibited into the
County Courthouse and shall also be posted accordingly.
(Ord. 97-1, passed 3-13-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.02 CREMATION SERVICES.
   (A)   Two levels of cremation services financed by the county. In light of
the important public purposes served by governmental assistance in ensuring the
proper disposition of the remains of those who would not otherwise be able to
financially procure the same, the county hereby establishes the following two
different levels of cremation services financed by the county:
      (1)   Unclaimed decedent cremation service; and
      (2)   Indigent decedent cremation assistance service.
   (B)   Unclaimed decedent cremation service.
      (1)   Qualifications for unclaimed decedent cremation service. It is an
express condition precedent that prior county financing the disposition of the
remains of an unclaimed decedent, each of the following elements be met:
         (a)   The decedent is a resident of the county;
         (b)   The decedent is in the possession of the County Coroner;
         (c)   The County Coroner, after conducting a good faith and diligent
search, is unable to locate a surviving spouse or any next-of-kin; and
         (d)   Note: notwithstanding the foregoing conditions precedent, under
extraordinary circumstances, the County Coroner’s office, with the approval of
the County Judge/Executive, may determine it is in the county’s best interest
to fund cremation services for a nonresident.
      (2)   Unclaimed decedent cremation services provided. Upon verification
of the above conditions precedent, and upon the completion of any and all
administrative policies, regulations or guidelines subsequently put in place to
facilitate the aforesaid verification, the county shall render the following
cremation service.
         (a)   The county shall cause the remains to be cremated by a licensed
funeral home in the county.
         (b)   The county shall take receipt of the cremains and cause them to
be spread upon the garden at the pauper cemetery at Wilmington.
         (c)   The county shall pay the licensed funeral home rendering the
cremation services in the amount of $750 for said services.
         (d)   It is expressly stated that the county shall not provide any
type of grave marker, nor finance the provision of any visitation or other
services at either a funeral home or at the cemetery.
      (3)   Future recoupment of county and funeral home expenditures.
         (a)   If, after the provision of the services stated in division (B)
(2) above, it is determined that an unclaimed decedent possessed any type of
assets, said assets shall be turned over to the county and subject to the
county’s initial right of recoupment and be used to defray the county’s
expenses in providing such services.
         (b)   If any additional assets exist after the full recoupment of the
county’s cremation service expenses, said assets shall escheat to the County
Fiscal Court General Fund after the one-year anniversary of the date on which
the unclaimed decedent’s assets were turned over to the county. Upon escheating
to the General Fund, the county shall pay over any remaining assets to the
licensed funeral home providing the cremation services to compensate for the
funeral home’s actual costs of services if they were in excess of what was
originally recouped from the county.
   (C)   Indigent decedent cremation assistance service.
      (1)   Qualifications for indigent decedent cremation assistance service.
It is an express condition precedent that prior county financing the
disposition of the remains of an indigent decedent, each of the following
elements be met:
         (a)   Decedent is a resident of the county;
         (b)   Decedent possesses no assets of any nature that can be used or
sold to finance cremation; and
         (c)   A family member or friend of the decedent, formally accept
financial responsibility for the disposition of the decedent’s remains.
      (2)   Indigent decedent cremation assistance services provided. Upon
verification of the above conditions precedent, and upon the completion of any
and all administrative policies, regulations or guidelines subsequently put in
place to facilitate the aforesaid verification, the county shall render the
following cremation assistance service.
         (a)   The county will contribute the amount of $750 toward the
cremation and internment of the indigent decedent’s cremains.
         (b)   Such payment shall be made directly to the licensed funeral home
after an invoice for services has been received by the county.
         (c)   At the election of the financially responsible party identified
in division (C)(1)(c) above, said party may request to receive the cremains or
may direct that the cremains be spread upon the garden at the pauper cemetery
at Wilmington.
         (d)   It is expressly stated that the county shall not provide any
type of grave marker, nor finance the provision of any visitation or other
services at either a funeral home or at the cemetery. Should the indigent
decedent cremation assistance services applicant purchase any additional
services from the funeral home in excess of basic cremation and internment,
said purchase shall invalidate the county’s aforesaid duty to contribute.
      (3)   Future recoupment of county expenditures. If after the provision of
the services stated in division (C)(2) above, it is determined that an indigent
decedent possessed any type of assets, said assets shall be turned over to the
county and subject to the county’s right of recoupment and be used to defray
the county’s expenses in providing such services.
(Ord. 2016-11, passed 7-11-2016; Ord. 2023-12, passed 7-24-2023)
§ 32.03 GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS DURING AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions shall be in effect in the
application of this section unless context indicates otherwise.
      EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR. A person designated by this section to
assume and exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an officer or
official upon the unavailability of that officer or official to do so in a
state of emergency. The tenure of the EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR shall
continue until a successor is legally appointed or elected, or until the lawful
incumbent is able to resume the exercise of the powers and discharge of the
duties of the office.
      OFFICE. Includes all local offices, including the duties and powers
thereof, as established by law.
      OFFICER. The individual that lawfully holds an office.
      STATE OF EMERGENCY. A condition resulting from any incident or situation,
whether natural or manmade, that poses a major threat to public safety so as to
cause, or threaten to cause, loss of life, serious injury, significant damage
to property, or major harm to public health or the environment.
      UNAVAILABLE. Means that during a state of emergency either:
         (a)   A vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy authorized to
exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of the office; or
         (b)   The lawful incumbent of the office and any duly authorized
deputy are absent or unable to exercise all of the powers and discharge all of
the duties of the office.
   (B)   Scope. This section describes and sets forth procedures for addressing
three types of disruptive situations:
      (1)   Loss of use of a governmental facility (i.e., damage to a building
or essential infrastructure, and the like);
      (2)   The absence or inability to function of an elected official;
      (3)   The loss of available services due to equipment or systems damage
or failure (i.e., information technology (IT) systems failure, and the like).
   (C)   Alternate facilities plan.
      (1)   In the event that a county governmental facility becomes damaged or
otherwise unable to house or adequately support the operation of any or all
government office functions normally in that facility, the office(s) affected,
or a portion thereof, may move to another suitable facility until the normal
facility is again usable or until other, longer-term plans are made.
         (a)   Tentative plans and suggestions for suitable facilities are
delineated herein.
         (b)   County officers are encouraged to further develop plans for how
their operations could be quickly moved into one of these facilities and
services resumed, including pre-planning of space utilization, moving
procedures, backup of equipment, and the like.
         (c)   Governmental offices and operations shall resume in their
original location as soon as it is practical for them to do so.
      (2)   The situation will dictate circumstances in which replacement
facilities should be sought; in general, when an administrative function would
be interrupted for more than two business days or in a public-safety function
for more than two hours, this plan shall be activated. If there is a county-
wide disaster or emergency, then immediate implementation of the plan shall
begin. For administrative functions, at least basic operations shall be re-
established in 12 hours or less, if at all possible.
      (3)   The facilities listed below assume that limited disruption has
occurred; i.e., that only one building or one office in a building needs to
find new quarters. If a larger-scale disruption occurs, then only partial
allocation of available space may be possible.
      (4)   Also, in general, the listings below are in order of preference for
each office and the order in which temporary facilities should be sought in the
event the need arises.
      (5)   The following delineates the suitable alternate facilities to be
utilized if needed in the course of a state of emergency:
         (a)   County Courthouse (Judge-Executive’s Office, Fiscal Court,
Treasurer’s Office, County Clerk's Office, County Attorney's Office, Coroner's
Office, County Sheriffs Office):
            1.   County Emergency Management Complex;
            2.   County Public Safety Annex;
            3.   County Rescue Headquarters;
            4.    County Emergency Operations Center;
            5.   Reidland/Farley Fire Department Station #2;
            6.   West McCracken Fire Department;
            7.   Kentucky State Police Post 1.
         (b)   County Jail (Jailer’s office). There is no backup, secure
facility suitable to house prisoners in county. The Jailer will contact
Kentucky Department of Corrections and transport all inmates to a correctional
facility that is able to house them. The Jailer’s administrative functions
could be temporarily moved to coincide with the movement of prisoners.
   (D)   Continuity of governmental leadership plans.
      (1)   State law provides for the interim appointment and the eventual
replacement election for an elected official who becomes permanently
unavailable, such as through death or permanent incapacity.
      (2)   However, there may be need for a rapid temporary replacement
process for an official who is unavailable during an emergency event.
      (3)   KRS 39D.030 and KRS 39D.040 direct local governing bodies to enact
ordinances or orders for the prompt filling of offices and employees during
times of disaster and emergency, if the filling of these vacancies is not
otherwise provided for by law.
         (a)   State law directs that not fewer than three, nor more than seven
interim successors for each position be designated.
         (b)   Emergency interim successors, in the order of their succession
as listed below, shall have the full power to exercise all powers and discharge
all duties of the office, and to commit its resources during a time of
emergency or disaster, if the person normally exercising the position is
unavailable, but shall immediately relinquish such power if the person normally
exercising the position again becomes available.
         (c)   If the preceding emergency successor becomes available, he or
she shall resume the duties being performed by the following successor, unless
he or she chooses to permit the following successor to remain in the position
until relieved.
      (4)   In other, non-emergency but urgent situations, when the officer may
be out of town but available for consultation or having left advance
directives, a duly authorized deputy may exercise the authority of the office
to an extent limited by the office holder.
      (5)   The county officials listed below may, of their own accord or at
the request of the Judge-Executive, provide to the office of the Judge-
Executive a list of planned successors as outlined above, which shall be kept
on file in that office in case the office holder becomes unavailable.
         (a)   A list so filed may be modified at any time by the county
official, in his or her sole discretion.
         (b)   Alternatively, if a county official has not provided such a
list, then the default listing set forth below shall control.
         (c)   In either event, it shall be the duty of the county official to
ensure that his or her potential successors have taken the appropriate oath for
the office to which they might succeed.
      (6)   The following gives the default listing of planned, emergency,
interim successors, in order, if the elected official becomes disabled or
absent during a declared emergency or disaster event.
         (a)   County Judge-Executive.
            1.   The Deputy Judge -Executive.
            2.   The Commissioner who has served the longest on the Fiscal
Court. If more than one Commissioner has served an identical longest length,
then the one who received the largest number of votes at the last election in
which both were candidates shall be the first successor, and the other the
second.
            3.   The Commissioner who has served the second longest on the
Fiscal Court.
            4.   The Commissioner who has served the third longest on the
Fiscal Court.
         (b)   Members of the Fiscal Court of County (Commissioners).
            1.   County Judge-Executive.
            2.   In the event the Judge-Executive is unavailable, then this
succession shall follow the same plan as set forth above.
         (c)   County Treasurer.
            1.   The Deputy Treasurer.
            2.   The County Judge-Executive or his or her designee.
            3.   In the event that both the Deputy Treasurer and the Judge-
Executive are unavailable, then this succession shall follow the same plan as
set forth above.
         (d)   County PVA.
            1.   The Chief Deputy PVA.
            2.   The Assistant Chief Deputy PVA.
            3.   The Deputy PVA having served the longest in that role.
         (e)   County Clerk.
            1.   The Chief Deputy County Clerk.
            2.   The Assistant Chief Deputy County Clerk.
            3.   The Deputy County Clerk having served the longest in that
role.
         (f)   County Sheriff:
            1.   The Chief Deputy Sheriff
            2.   The Assistant Chief Deputy Sheriff, or, if no Assistant Chief
Deputy Sheriff has been appointed by the Sheriff, the next highest-ranking
Deputy Sheriff. If there are two or more Deputies holding the next highest
rank, then the Deputy Sheriff having served the longest in that role.
            3.   The next highest-ranking Deputy Sheriff, or, if there are two
or more Deputies holding the next highest rank, then the Deputy Sheriff having
served the longest in that role.
         (g)   County Jailer.
            1.   The first Chief Deputy Jailer.
            2.   The second Chief Deputy Jailer.
            3.   The next highest-ranking Deputy Jailer, or, if there is no
further ranking delineation, then the Deputy Jailer having served longest in
that role.
         (h)   County Coroner.
            1.   The Chief Deputy Coroner.
            2.   The next highest-ranking Deputy Coroner, or, if there is no
Deputy Coroner available to act as emergency interim successor, the County
Sheriff or his or her designee shall so act.
            3.   In the event the Sheriff is unavailable, then this succession
shall follow the same plan as set forth above for the office of the Sheriff.
         (i)   County Road Supervisor.
            1.   The Assistant Road Supervisor.
            2.   The Road Department Head Mechanic.
            3.   The County Judge-Executive or his or her designee.
         (j)   County Attorney.
            1.   The first Assistant County Attorney.
            2.   The second Assistant County Attorney.
            3.   The third Assistant County Attorney, or, if there is no third
or subsequent Assistant County Attorney, the Commonwealth’s attorney for the
judicial circuit shall so act.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 11-5-2018)
Cross-reference:
   Office of emergency management, see §
31.02
CHAPTER 33: JOINT SEWER AGENCY
Section
   
33.01   Establishment
   
33.02   Board
   
33.03   Fiscal year
   
33.04   Meetings of Board; quorum
   
33.05   Officers and employees
   
33.06   Merger; agency to take over existing facilities
   
33.07   General powers of the agency
   
33.08   Privately constructed sewers to be approved
   
33.09   Rates and charges; use of funds of agency; cutting off sewer and water
service to delinquents
   
33.10   Power to acquire land
   
33.11   Agency revenue bonds
   
33.12   Enforcement of rights of bondholders
   
33.13   Apportionment of construction costs
   
33.14   Combined sewers
   
33.15   Coordination of operations with other agencies
   
33.16   Appeal process
   
33.17   Additional authority
   
33.18   Name of agency
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   In order to provide for the protection of public health, safety and welfare
of its citizens, there is hereby created and established, under and pursuant to
the provisions of KRS 76.231, a joint sewer agency (hereinafter “Agency”) to
own, manage, control and operate regional comprehensive wastewater facilities
within the county. The jurisdiction of the Agency shall include all of the
county, including the City of Paducah and the City of Lone Oak.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.02 BOARD.
   (A)   The Agency shall be managed by a Board of Directors (hereinafter
“Board”) consisting of seven persons, one of whom shall be a sitting member of
the Paducah City Commission and elected by the Commission, one of whom shall be
a sitting member of the County Fiscal Court and elected by the Fiscal Court,
two of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Paducah and subject
to approval of the City Commission, two of whom shall be appointed by the
County Judge/Executive and subject to approval of the Fiscal Court, and one of
whom shall be jointly appointed by both the Mayor and the County Judge/
Executive, subject to the approval of both legislative bodies.
   (B)   Members of the Board shall be persons of outstanding reputations for
ability and integrity, shall be at least 25 years of age, a resident of the
county for a period of no less than three years. No person shall be appointed a
member of the Board who is related within the third degree to the Mayor, the
Judge/Executive, or any member of the governing body of the city or county.
   (C)   Initial Board appointments shall be as follows: the jointly appointed
member shall serve a one- year term; the representatives of the County Fiscal
Court and the Paducah City Commission shall serve a two-year term; one
appointment by each governing body shall serve a two-year term; one appointment
by each governing body shall serve a three-year term. All private sector
appointments made at the conclusion of the initial term shall thereafter be for
a term of four years, except that the representatives of the County Fiscal
Court and the Paducah City Commission shall serve two-year terms. The initial
Board appointment terms shall expire on June 30 of each applicable year in
order to coordinate with the Agency’s fiscal year.
   (D)   In the event of a Board vacancy and also at least 30 days preceding
the expiration of the term of office of any appointed Board member, a successor
shall be appointed by the appropriate government body; however, the incumbent
member shall serve until such time as the vacancy has been filled. All
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
   (E)   Any Board member shall be eligible for reappointment upon expiration
of their term; however, no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
   (F)   Any person who shall have held an elective office within the county
shall not be eligible for appointment until at least one year after the
expiration of the term for which the appointee was elected. Except for the
representatives of the legislative bodies on the Board, no employees of the
City of Paducah or the county shall be eligible for appointment as a member of
the Board.
   (G)   Each appointed Board member shall be removable for “cause,” which
shall mean inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance or conflict of interest.
Any member of the Board appointed by the Mayor may be removed by the Paducah
City Commission, for cause, after hearing by the Paducah City Commission, and
after at least ten days’ notice in writing shall have been given to the member,
specifying the charges against the member. The finding of the Paducah City
Commission shall be final and removal results in vacancy in such office. Any
member of the Board appointed by the Judge/Executive may be removed by the
County Fiscal Court, for cause, after hearing by the County Fiscal Court, and
after at least ten days’ notice in writing shall have been given to the member,
specifying the charges against the member. The finding of the County Fiscal
Court shall be final and removal results in vacancy in such office. A member
subjected to removal proceedings may be represented by counsel.
   (H)   Any appointed Board member failing to attend three regularly scheduled
successive meetings, or a minimum of 75% of all meetings within a one-year
period, without cause acceptable and approved by the Board, shall automatically
be removed from office, and the vacancy shall be filled as provided for herein.
   (I)   Each Board member shall be insured by the Agency against liability for
acts and omissions as a member of the Board.
   (J)   Members of the Board shall be paid $200 per month and shall be
reimbursed for mileage and out-of-pocket expenses for Agency business conducted
outside of the county.
   (K)   All members of the Board shall be required to comply with any
applicable rules, regulations and reporting requirements established by the
appropriate city or county ethics commission.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 98-3.1, passed 12-13-1999)
§ 33.03 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the Agency shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on
June 30 next following.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.04 MEETINGS OF BOARD; QUORUM.
   (A)   The Board shall meet no less than once per month, and may adopt rules
and bylaws for the time and location of its meetings and conduct thereof.
   (B)   A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and
the affirmative majority vote or a minimum of three affirmative votes shall be
required for the adoption of any motion, measure or resolution.
   (C)   A permanent record of Board proceedings shall be maintained, and shall
be available for inspection as a public record, in accordance with the
procedures established in the Kentucky Open Records Act.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.05 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The jointly appointed member of the Board shall serve as its
Chairperson during the first year, and the members of the Board shall elect
from its members a Vice Chairperson. Beginning with the second year and
continuing annually thereafter, the members of the Board shall elect the
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings
when present, and shall call special meetings on the Chair’s own motion or when
requested to do so by three other Board members. The Vice Chairperson shall
preside at any meeting in which the Chairperson is absent.
   (B)   The Board shall have the power to employ, fix the compensation of, and
discharge at will an Executive Director and/or Chief Engineer, and a Secretary-
Treasurer. Excepting the foregoing, the Executive Director shall have the power
to direct, employ, fix the compensation of, and discharge at will any employees
of the agency subject to the general policies of the Board and its right to
review such actions. The Board shall have the power to establish rules and
regulations for all employees of the Agency.
   (C)   The Board shall require the Executive Director and/or Chief Engineer
to execute a bond and may exact from such of its other officers and employees
bonds as it deems expedient. All bonds shall be payable to the Agency in the
sums as the Board may fix with approved corporate surety, and premiums therefor
shall be paid by the Agency. The bonds shall obligate the makers thereof to
perform the duties of their respective offices and positions and to fully
account for and pay over all money, property or other thing of value of the
Agency, which may come into their possession, custody or control.
   (D)   The Board may also employ, and remove at pleasure, accountants,
engineers, legal counsel, professional and technical advisors or services,
experts and other persons, skilled or unskilled, as it deems requisite for the
performance of its duties.
   (E)   No person shall be hired as an employee of the Agency who is related
within the third degree to the Mayor, the Judge/Executive, any member of the
governing body of the city or the county, any member of the Board, the
Executive Director And/or Chief Engineer, or the Secretary-Treasurer.
   (F)   The Agency may contract with the City of Paducah or the county for
financial, engineering, personnel and other services it deems expedient.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 98-3.1, passed 12-13-1999; Ord. 98-03.2,
passed 12-2-2002)
§ 33.06 MERGER; AGENCY TO TAKE OVER EXISTING FACILITIES.
   (A)   After the Agency has organized, obtained approval of the State Public
Service Commission (if required), and made all necessary arrangements to assume
or refinance the debts and liabilities of the existing agencies, the sanitary
and combined sewer facilities of the existing agencies shall be merged into the
Agency, together with all contracts, books, maps, plans, papers and records, of
whatever description pertaining to or relating to the design, construction,
maintenance, operation and affairs of the existing agencies, and shall
thereafter be assigned, transferred and dedicated to the use of and be in
possession, and under the jurisdiction, control and supervision of the Agency.
The existing agencies shall also assign, transfer and convey to the Agency all
property (whether real, personal or mixed), easements, equipment, inventory,
accounts receivable, contracts and rights thereunder and causes of action owned
by the existing agencies. The Agency shall thereafter have complete
jurisdiction, control, possession and supervision, of all sanitary and combined
sewer systems and facilities in the City of Paducah and the county.
   (B)   Upon establishment of the Agency, the Agency shall immediately make a
determination of all existing assets, liabilities, easements, personnel,
control, management and authority of the existing agencies to be transferred
to, and become a part of, the Agency. All existing agencies are expected to
cooperate fully with the Agency and each existing agency shall promptly prepare
a comprehensive list of its assets, liabilities, easements and personnel.
   (C)   All personnel of the existing agencies shall be offered employment by
the Agency, and shall retain all existing and accrued benefits, including, but
not limited to, wages and/or salaries, vacations, sick leave, years of service
and pension investment. All employees of the Agency shall be employees at will.
   (D)   At such time as the transfer of assets, liabilities, easements,
personnel and authority of the existing agencies is complete, the existing
agencies shall no longer retain any power or authority and shall be dissolved.
   (E)   In the event that the legislative bodies of the City of Paducah and
the County Fiscal Court decide to dissolve the Agency, all existing assets,
liabilities, easements, personnel and authority shall be distributed as
stipulated in identical ordinances approved and adopted by both governing
bodies.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.07 GENERAL POWERS OF THE AGENCY.
   The Agency created under this chapter is empowered:
   (A)   To have full and complete jurisdiction, control, possession and
supervision of the sanitary and combined sewer systems in the county, including
the maintenance, operation, reconstruction and improvements to the same as a
regional comprehensive sanitary and combined sewer system; to make additions,
betterments and extensions thereto; and to have all the privileges, and
jurisdiction necessary or proper for carrying such powers into execution. No
enumeration of powers shall operate to restrict the meaning of this general
grant of power, or to exclude other powers comprehended within this general
grant;
   (B)   To prepare or cause to be prepared, and to be thereafter revised and
adopted, plans, designs and estimates of costs, of a system of trunk,
intercepting, connecting, lateral and outlet sewers, pumping and ventilating
stations, disposal and treatment plants and works, and all other appliances and
structures which in the judgment of the Board will provide an effective and
advantageous means for relieving the county from inadequate sanitary drainage
and from inadequate sanitary disposal and treatment of the sewage thereof, and
may take all steps the Board deems proper and necessary;
   (C)   To construct any additions, betterments and extensions to the
facilities of the Agency by contract or under, through or by means of its own
officers, agents and employees;
   (D)   To establish, construct, operate and maintain, as a part of the
sanitary sewer system of the Agency, sewage treatment and disposal plants and
systems and all the appurtenances and appliances there unto belonging. The
sewage treatment and disposal plants may be located anywhere the Board deems
expedient;
   (E)   To acquire and hold the personal property the Board deems necessary
and proper for carrying out the corporate purposes of the Agency, and to
dispose of personal property when the Agency has no further need therefor;
   (F)   To acquire by purchase, gift, lease or by condemnation, real property
or any interest, right, easement or privilege therein, as the Board determines
necessary, proper and convenient for the purposes of the Agency, and to use the
same so long as the Agency’s existence continues. Condemnation proceedings may
be instituted in the name of the Agency pursuant to a resolution of the Board
declaring the necessity for the taking, and the method of condemnation shall be
the same as provided in the Eminent Domain Act of the state. When the Board by
resolution declares that any real property which it has acquired, or any
interest therein, is no longer necessary or useful to the Agency, the real
property and interest therein may be disposed of. If any property to be
disposed of has been acquired by condemnation and has not been used by the
Agency for the purpose condemned, the Agency shall first offer to sell the
property back to the original owner for its then-existing fair market value;
   (G)   To make bylaws, regulations and agreements for the management and
regulation of its affairs and for the regulation of the use of property under
its control, including the power to establish pretreatment regulations;
   (H)   To make contracts and execute all instruments necessary or convenient
in the premises;
   (I)   To recommend and initiate all user charges adequate to meet the
projected revenue requirements necessary to maintain and operate the complete
sanitary and combined sewer collection system and treatment facilities in a
manner that complies with federal and state requirements;
   (J)   To borrow money and issue negotiable revenue bonds to provide for the
rights of the holders thereof, and to assume existing financial obligations of
any of the existing agencies;
   (K)   To enter any lands, waters and premises for the purpose of making
surveys, soundings and examinations;
   (L)   To require payment by customers for wastewater service provided and
tap-on fees;
   (M)   To discontinue service for non-payment and to make agreements with
water service providers for the discontinuance of water service to delinquent
customers;
   (N)   To approve or revise the plans and designs of all wastewater treatment
facilities proposed to be constructed, altered or reconstructed, including, but
not limited to, sewer lines and pump stations, by any other person or
corporation, public or private, within the county, in order to ensure that such
proposed construction, alteration or reconstruction shall conform to, and be a
part of, a comprehensive wastewater plan for the county. No construction or
extensions in the City of Paducah shall be started until, firstly, the City
Engineer, and secondly, the Agency have approved the plans. No construction or
extensions in the county outside the City of Paducah shall be started until,
firstly, the County Engineer, and secondly, the Agency have approved the plans.
These projects shall also be subject to inspection and supervision by the
Agency;
   (O)   To prepare a budget annually for wastewater activities, effective
beginning with fiscal year July 1, 1999; and
   (P)   To promote the public good by offering reasonable and prudent
incentives to promote commercial and economic development efforts within the
system where permitted by the laws of the commonwealth.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 98-03.2, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 33.08 PRIVATELY CONSTRUCTED SEWERS TO BE APPROVED.
   (A)   Any person or corporation, public or private, in the county shall
submit for approval plans and designs for sanitary sewers to be constructed by
written application to the Agency.
   (B)   An application for approval of plans or designs of sanitary sewers to
be constructed shall be referred by the Agency to the City Engineer or County
Engineer, as determined by the area of jurisdiction for which the project is
proposed, for approval. After approval by the appropriate engineer, the Agency
shall have the right to examine, inspect and investigate the sufficiency of the
proposed facilities to serve the purposes intended, and to establish and make
reasonable charges for such services as may be required to make such
investigation.
   (C)   The construction of any sanitary sewer facilities shall be subject to
inspection and supervision by the Agency to assure the protection of public
health and the proper completion of such facility for the purposes intended,
and the Agency shall charge for such inspection and supervision on the basis of
the actual cost of inspection plus a reasonable additional cost of supervision.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.09 RATES AND CHARGES; USE OF FUNDS OF AGENCY; CUTTING OFF SEWER AND WATER
SERVICE TO DELINQUENTS.
   (A)   The existing user rates and charges as established by the existing
agencies shall be adopted by the Agency. All user rates and charges to be
collected from all the real property within the county served by facilities of
the Agency shall remain in effect until such time as an adjustment thereof has
been approved by the Paducah City Commission and the County Fiscal Court.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all tap-on fees previously established by the
Existing Agencies on existing sewer lines at the time the Agency is created
shall not be changed. Any proposed adjustments of the schedule of rates and
charges shall be recommended by the Agency at a joint meeting of the Paducah
City Commission and the County Fiscal Court. The Paducah City Commission and
the County Fiscal Court shall approve or disapprove all rate changes
recommended by the Agency by majority vote of each body. Neither the Paducah
City Commission nor the County Fiscal Court shall have the authority to
initiate rate changes. If for any reason the Paducah City Commission and the
County Fiscal Court cannot agree to amendments to a rate schedule, the current
schedule shall remain in effect until such time as an agreement can be reached.
      (1)   The schedule of rates and charges may be based upon either:
         (a)   The consumption of water on premises connected with the
facilities, taking into consideration commercial and industrial use of water;
         (b)   The number and kind of plumbing fixtures connected with the
facilities;
         (c)   The number of persons served by the facilities;
         (d)   May be determined by the Agency on any other basis or
classification which the Agency determines to be fair and reasonable, whether
similar or dissimilar to those enumerated; except that the schedule shall be
equitable for all residential property; provided, however, pursuant to KB 739,
enacted by the 2002 Kentucky General assembly, if the Paducah City Commission,
County Fiscal Court and the Agency find that local needs warrant, uniformity of
rates for all residential property shall not be required for a period of no
more than ten years from the date the Agency was established on July 1, 1999;
or
         (e)   Any combination thereof.
      (2)   This schedule may include additional charges for treatment of
sewage, with a surcharge where the sewage contains industrial waste or other
waste in excess of limitations established by the regulations of the Agency.
   (B)   Prior to modification of the schedule of rates and charges, the Agency
shall adopt a proposed schedule and publish notice thereof pursuant to KRS
Chapter 424. The notice so published shall be dated as of the date of first
publication thereof and shall state that the proposed or revised schedule of
rates and charges will remain open for inspection in the office of the Agency
for 30 days from the date of the notice, and that objections thereto in writing
may be filed during that period with the Agency by any person aggrieved
thereby. The Board shall examine and hear any and all complaints, may modify
the proposed schedule and may recommend to the Paducah City Commission and
County Fiscal Court a final schedule within 60 days after the date of the
notice. The schedule so adopted and established shall thereafter be the rates
and charges for the use of the facilities of the Agency by users within the
county until changed in the manner provided herein.
      (1)   The schedule of rates and charges shall be established and revised
from time to time so as to produce aggregate revenues to the Agency sufficient:
         (a)   For the payment of interest on and principal of all revenue
bonds and other obligations of the Agency;
         (b)   For the payment of all costs and expenses of operating and
maintaining the sewer system of the Agency, including, but not limited to, that
portion of the salaries, wages and fees of all officers and employees of the
Agency; and
         (c)   For the payment of all costs of renewals and replacement of such
system within the county; provided, however, that all expenses, salaries, wages
and fees necessary or incident to improvements for the account of which bonds
are issued or other indebtedness incurred may be included as a part of the cost
of the improvements and paid from the proceeds of the bonds or other
indebtedness.
      (2)   The use of all monies of the Agency received from any and all
sources shall be limited exclusively and devoted solely to the payment of all
obligations of the Agency and no funds from any sources shall be diverted to
any other purposes than those described in this chapter.
   (C)   Whenever any sewer rates or charges for services rendered remain
unpaid for a period of 30 days after the same becomes due and payable, the
Agency shall declare the property, the owner thereof, and the user of the
service, delinquent until such time as all rates and charges are fully paid,
and may cut off the sewer connection and service. The Agency may enter into
agreements with any water company or water service, public or private,
providing for the discontinuance of water service to delinquents.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 98-03.2, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 33.10 POWER TO ACQUIRE LAND.
   (A)   The Agency shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift or
eminent domain proceedings, the fee or such right, title, interest or easement,
in such lands as may be deemed by the Agency necessary for any of the purposes
mentioned in this chapter, and any personal property necessary for the purpose
of the Agency. Such lands or interests therein, or personal property may be so
acquired whether or not the same are owned or held for public use by
corporations, associations, or other persons having the power of eminent
domain, or otherwise held or used for public purposes. Forthwith upon the
acquisition of any such fee, right, title, interest or easement, or personal
property, the same shall become dedicated to the uses and purposes of the
Agency.
   (B)   The method of condemnation of such property shall be pursuant to the
Eminent Domain Act of the state.
   (C)   When the Agency has filed a proceeding to condemn land or any interest
therein, or personal property, pursuant to the provisions of the Eminent Domain
Act of the state, and the Board shall determine that the necessity for
procuring possession of the property is urgent, it may pass a resolution, at
the time that said condemnation is authorized or at any time thereafter for a
declaration of taking, declaring that said lands are to be taken for the use of
the Agency. Said declaration of taking shall contain, or have annexed thereto,
the following:
      (1)   A statement of the authority under which and, the public use for
which, said lands are taken;
      (2)   A description of the lands taken sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (3)   A statement of the estate or interest in said lands taken for said
public use; and
      (4)   A plat showing the lands taken.
   (D)   At any time after the report of the Commissioners has been made, the
Agency may file said declaration of taking and make a deposit with the Clerk of
the Court of the sum of money stated in the award of the Commissioners
appointed. Title to said lands in fee simple or such lesser estate as is
specified in said declaration or to said personal property shall then vest in
the Agency, and the right to just compensation for said land or interest
therein or personal property shall vest in the persons entitled thereto. Said
compensation shall be ascertained and awarded in said proceeding as otherwise
provided in the Eminent Domain Act of the state.
   (E)   Any property owner whose property is proposed to be the subject of a
condemnation action by the Agency shall be provided by U.S. mail at his or her
last known address, at least five days prior to the meeting, a copy of the
official agenda of the Agency meeting wherein the initial resolution for
Condemnation is to be acted upon. In addition to the agenda, the property owner
shall be informed by an accompanying letter from the Agency of his or her
rights of appeal under §
33.16, in the event the aforesaid resolution is adopted. Each property owner so
adversely affected shall be invited to attend the meeting wherein the Agency
will act upon the resolution for condemnation.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 98-03.2, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 33.11 AGENCY REVENUE BONDS.
   (A)   The Agency may, from time to time, issue its negotiable interest-
bearing revenue bonds for any of its corporate purposes, and it may also, from
time to time, issue its negotiable interest-bearing revenue bonds to refund any
of its bonds at maturity or pursuant to redemption provisions, or at any time
before maturity with the consent of the holders. All the bonds, including
interest, are payable solely from and secured only by the revenues of the
Agency realized through the collection of rates or other charges, imposed for
use of the facilities of the Agency. The bonds shall be authorized by
resolution of the Board and shall bear the dates, mature at the times not
exceeding 40 years from their respective dates, bear interest at the rate or
rates, or method of determining rates, payable at least annually, be in the
denominations and form, either coupon or registered, carry the registration
privileges, be executed in the manner, be payable in the medium of payment at
the place, and be subject to the terms of redemption, with or without premium,
as the resolutions provide. The bonds shall be sold at public sale for the
price the Board determines.
   (B)   Any resolution authorizing any bonds may contain provisions which
shall be a part of the contract with the holders of the bonds as to:
      (1)   Pledging all or any part of the gross or net revenues of the Agency
to secure the payment of the bonds and interest on the bonds;
      (2)   The amounts to be raised in each year by rates and charges, and
their use and disposition, and of any other revenues of the Agency;
      (3)   The setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and their regulation
and disposition;
      (4)   Limitations on the right of the Agency to restrict and regulate the
use of its facilities;
      (5)   Limitations on the purposes to which the proceeds of sale of any
issue of bonds to be issued may be applied;
      (6)   Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds; and
      (7)   The procedure, if any, by which the term of any contract with
bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of
which must consent, and the manner in which the consent may be given.
   (C)   The bonds or other obligations of the Agency shall not constitute an
obligation or indebtedness of the City of Paducah or of the county and it shall
be plainly stated on the face of each bond of the Agency that it has been
issued under the provisions of this chapter, and that it does not constitute an
indebtedness of the City of Paducah or the county. All bonds authorized may be
issued without a vote of the voters and without any other proceedings or
happenings of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions
and things described herein. The bonds shall be signed in the name of the
Agency by the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Board, and attested by the
signature of the Secretary-Treasurer.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.12 ENFORCEMENT OF RIGHTS OF BONDHOLDERS.
   (A)   (1)   In the event the Agency shall default in the payment of
principal or interest on any of the revenue bonds issued pursuant to this
chapter after the said principal or interest shall become due, whether at
maturity or upon call for redemption, and such default shall continue for a
period of 30 days, or in the event that the Agency shall default in any
agreement made with the holders of the bonds, the holders of 20% in aggregate
principal amount of the bonds then outstanding, by instrument or instruments
filed in the office of the County Court Clerk and approved or acknowledged in
the same manner as a deed to be recorded, may apply to a judge of the County
Circuit Court to appoint a trustee to represent all of the bondholders for the
purposes herein provided.
      (2)   Upon such application, the judge shall appoint a trustee and such
trustee may, and upon written request of holders of 20% in principal amount of
the-bonds of the Agency then outstanding shall:
         (a)   By mandamus or other suit, action or proceeding at law or in
equity, enforce all rights of the bondholders, including, but not limited to,
the right to require the Agency to collect rates and other charges, adequate to
carry out any agreement as to, or pledge of, the revenues of the Agency and to
require the Agency and its officers to carry out any other agreement with the
bondholders and to perform its and their duties;
         (b)   Bring suit upon the bonds;
         (c)   By action or suit in equity, require the Agency to account as if
it were the trustee of an express trust for the bondholders;
         (d)   By action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may
be unlawful or in violation of the rights of bondholders; or
         (e)   Declare all bonds due and payable, and if all defaults shall be
made good then to annul such declaration and its consequences.
   (B)   Any such trustee shall be entitled as of right, upon application to
the judge, to the appointment of a receiver, who may enter upon and take
possession of the facilities of the Agency, or any part or parts thereof, and
operate and maintain the same, and collect and receive all rates and charges
and other revenues of the Agency, thereafter arising therefrom, in the same
manner as the Agency and its officers might do, and shall deposit all monies in
a separate account and apply the same in such manner as the court shall direct.
In any suit, action or proceeding, by the trustee, the fees, the counsel fees
and expenses of the trustee and of the receiver shall constitute disbursements
taxable as costs. All costs and disbursements allowed by the court shall be a
first charge on any revenue derived from the facilities of the Agency. Such
trustee shall, in addition to the foregoing, have and possess all of the powers
necessary or appropriate for the exercise of any function specifically set
forth herein or incident to the general representation of the bondholders and
the enforcement and protection of their rights.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.13 APPORTIONMENT OF CONSTRUCTION COSTS.
   (A)   A resolution of the Board providing for the construction of sewerage
facilities and appurtenances shall describe the nature and kind of facilities
to be furnished and shall describe the particular area to be benefitted by said
sewerage facilities.
   (B)   The costs of the sanitary sewers and appurtenances, excepting, at the
option of the Agency, core and trunk facilities, shall be assessed against the
land in the benefitted area. The square foot method, the front foot method, the
equivalent residential unit method, the ten-year net revenue method, or any
other equitable basis may be used for determining the assessment. No property
which has been assessed for collector lines shall be reassessed for the
installation or reinstallation of collector lines. The Agency may, at its
option, pay for core and trunk facilities through the Agency’s revenues, loans,
grants, assessments or any combination thereof.
   (C)   The costs of property service connections from the sewer to the
property line or easement line as required shall be assessed against the
individual lots or tracts to which such property service connections are
furnished. The costs to be assessed for the property service connections shall
be fixed by regulation of the Agency based on its experience of costs for such
work.
   (D)   All land included in the benefitted area shall be assessed, except
public roadways and property owned by the city or county.
   (E)   When the Board determines that construction of sanitary sewers and
appurtenances or property service connections at the cost of the property owner
shall be necessary, the Agency shall cause its engineers to prepare complete
drawings and specifications for the work and to keep same available for
inspection in its offices.
   (F)   The actual construction work of the sanitary sewers and appurtenances
shall be done by, or under the control of, the Agency. The cost of the sanitary
sewers and appurtenances or property service connections shall include not only
the actual construction cost and the cost of any easements required for the
sewers, but also cost of surveys, designs, plans, specifications, advertising,
inspection and administration; provided, however, these additional costs shall
not exceed 15% of the actual construction cost of the project.
   (G)   A lien superior to all liens except the liens for state, county, city,
school and road taxes and liens prior in time for other public improvements
shall exist against the respective lots or tracts of land for the cost of the
sanitary sewers, appurtenances or property service connections for
apportionment as provided herein, plus interest thereon at the rate of 6% per
annum.
   (H)   If sanitary sewers, appurtenances or property service connections are
constructed as provided in the resolution, the Agency shall not be liable for
the cost of the sanitary sewers, appurtenances or property service connections
and shall have the right to enforce such costs against the property receiving
the benefit.
   (I)   Upon completion and acceptance of the sewer facility constructed, the
Agency shall make out all apportionment warrants for which liens are given for
improvements of sewer facilities and shall immediately enter them in
alphabetical order upon a register kept for that purpose. When the holder of
the warrant has obtained payment, such holder shall notify the Agency and the
Agency shall mark upon the register the fact of payment.
   (J)   The lien shall exist from the date of the apportionment warrant, but a
lien shall not be valid against a purchaser for a valuable consideration
without notice, unless the apportionment warrant is entered and registered
within ten days of its issuance.
   (K)   After any sewer facilities have been constructed, the Agency shall
give notice by publication pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 of the costs
apportioned, and the amounts assessed and levied on the various tracts of land
liable for the payment.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 98-03.2, passed 12-2-2002)
§ 33.14 COMBINED SEWERS.
   (A)   All facilities in the City of Paducah that are a combination of
wastewater and storm water sewers shall be included in the assets transferred
to the Agency.
   (B)   The Agency shall have the responsibility to maintain all combined
sewer system facilities in the City of Paducah. The combined sewer system
facilities visible on the surface, (such as inlets, grates, inlet throats,
open-ended pipes, surface ditches, surface drainages and the like), and the
connector pipe to the combined sewer main shall be maintained by the City of
Paducah.
   (C)   The Agency shall be responsible for compliance with all environmental
regulations and requirements for combined sewer overflow established by the
commonwealth.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.15 COORDINATION OF OPERATIONS WITH OTHER AGENCIES.
   (A)   The Agency shall take all necessary efforts and make all necessary
agreements with the City of Paducah to establish procedures for coordinating
the use and operation of all flood control pump stations used when the Ohio
River reaches flood stage.
   (B)   The facilities that constitute the City of Paducah flood control
system shall not be part of the assets transferred to the Agency and shall
remain the property of the City of Paducah.
   (C)   The Agency shall coordinate with the City of Paducah the operation of
the compost facility operated by the City of Paducah and make such agreements
as may be necessary for the disposal of sludge generated by the operations of
the Agency.
   (D)   The Agency may enter into an agreement with the City of Paducah and
the county to provide necessary maintenance of storm sewers.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.16 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Any entity or person, other than employees of the Agency, aggrieved by
any final action of the Agency may appeal from said action to a grievance
committee which shall be composed of one member of the County Fiscal Court
selected by the County Fiscal Court and one member of the Paducah City
Commission selected by the Paducah City Commission, and the two members thus
appointed shall jointly select a third person to serve on the committee.
      (1)   The representatives of the legislative bodies shall not be the same
representatives who are then sitting on the Board of the Agency.
      (2)   The aggrieved person and the Agency shall be allowed to appear
before the grievance committee to state their position. The grievance committee
may modify, sustain or overrule the action taken by the Agency.
   (B)   Appeals by the aggrieved party shall be made in writing by filing the
appeal with the Secretary-Treasurer of the Agency 30 days after the decision of
the Agency. All decisions which have not been appealed within 30 days shall
become final.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.17 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   The County Fiscal Court and the City of Paducah, within their respective
jurisdictions, shall have the authority to establish with sufficient funding, a
separate and independent storm water utility by separate ordinance, under the
management and control of the Agency.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
§ 33.18 NAME OF AGENCY.
   The name of the Agency shall be the Paducah-McCracken County Sewer Agency,
in which name it may act in accordance with the powers set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 98-3, passed 9-14-1998)
CHAPTER 34: SEWER USE AND RATES
Section
Rates and Charges
   
34.01   Wastewater user charges
   
34.02   Industrial surcharge
   
34.03   Hauled waste
   
34.04   Other fees
   
34.05   Effective date
Standards for Sewer Use
   
34.20   Purpose and policy
   
34.21   Definitions and abbreviations
   
34.22   Use of public sewers
   
34.23   Private wastewater disposal
   
34.24   Building sewers and connections
   
34.25   Pollutant discharge limits
   
34.26   Pretreatment program administration
   
34.27   Individual private sewage disposal
   
34.28   Fees
   
34.29   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
34.30   Enforcement
   
34.31   Compliance
 
   
34.99   Penalty
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 34.01 WASTEWATER USER CHARGES.
   For customers of the former sewer districts, the rates and charges shall be:
   (A)   From July 1, 2005 through June 30, 2007, the following rates shall
apply:
 
City of Paducah $3.30 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
Lone Oak        $4.39 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
Reidland        $5.80 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
Woodlawn        $4.39 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
 
   (B)   From July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2009, the following rates shall
apply:
 
City of Paducah $3.70 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
Lone Oak        $4.39 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
Reidland        $5.20 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
Woodlawn        $4.39 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons
                minimum
 
   (C)   From and after July 1, 2009, the following rates shall apply:
 
City of Paducah $4 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons minimum
Lone Oak        $4 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons minimum
Reidland        $4 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons minimum
Woodlawn        $4 per 1,000 gallons of water usage with 3,000 gallons minimum
 
   (D)   After July 1, 2009, the JSA may adjust the listed rates in accordance
with the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (“CPI-U”).
(Ord. 2005-8, passed 5-23-2005)
§ 34.02 INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Permits are issued to certain industries that produce wastewater of an
unusual content or an abnormally high strength. Industries that qualify, as
determined by JSA, will pay a permit fee of $900 every three years.
   (B)   Additional surcharge rates shall apply to each user of the treatment
system that has received permission from JSA to contribute excessive strength
wastewater to the sewer system.
   (C)   For the treatment of biological oxygen demand (“BOD”) waste in a
concentration exceeding 300 mg/l, an additional surcharge will be imposed as
follows:
      (1)   From July 1, 2005, through June 30, 2007, a surcharge of $0.15 per
pound of BOD;   
      (2)   From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2009, a surcharge of $0.17 per
pound of BOD; and
      (3)   From and after July 1, 2009, a surcharge of $0.20 per pound of BOD.
   (D)   For the treatment of waste containing total-suspended solids (“TSS”)
in a concentration exceeding 350 mg/l, a surcharge will be imposed as follows:
      (1)   From July 1, 2005, through June 30, 2007, a surcharge of $0.16 per
pound of TSS;
      (2)   From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2009, a surcharge of $0.19 per
pound of TSS; and
      (3)   From and after July 1, 2009, a surcharge of $0.21 per pound of TSS.
   (E)   After July 1, 2009, the JSA may adjust these rates in accordance with
the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (“CPI-U”).
(Ord. 2005-8, passed 5-23-2005)
§ 34.03 HAULED WASTE.
   (A)   The JSA shall assess a fee for the treatment and proper disposal of
acceptable waste that is generated within the county and hauled to the Paducah
wastewater treatment plant.
   (B)   The following rates will apply for the disposal of hauled waste.
      (1)   From July 1, 2005, through June 30, 2007, the charge will be $30
per 1,000 gallons of hauled waste.
      (2)   From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2009, the charge will be $34
per 1,000 gallons of hauled waste.
      (3)   From and after July 1, 2009, the charge will be $37 per 1,000
gallons of hauled waste.
      (4)   After July 1, 2009, the JSA may adjust these rates in accordance
with the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (“CPI-U”).
   (C)   JSA shall assess a fee for the treatment and proper disposal of
acceptable waste that is generated outside of the county and hauled to the
Paducah wastewater treatment plant. The fee for treatment and disposal of
acceptable waste generated outside the county shall be exactly double the fee
charged for waste generated in the county.
   (D)   Qualified haulers will also pay an annual fee for a disposal permit in
the amount of $300.
(Ord. 2005-8, passed 5-23-2005)
§ 34.04 OTHER FEES.
   (A)   Tap-on fee. This is a fee assessed to recover the costs of
constructing core facilities and appurtenances which make sewer service
available. This fee would be due from every new customer that connects to the
system. The proposed fee is $1,950 per Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU).
   (B)   Capacity fee. This fee is a charge to all new customers connecting to
the JSA sanitary sewer system, and represents the purchase of their share of
capacity. This fee would be due from every new customer that connects to the
system. The proposed fee is $350 per Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU).
   (C)   Lateral connection fee. A lateral connection fee is a charge assessed
to recover the costs associated with constructing a physical sewer connection
for a property from the property line or the right-of-way to the JSA sanitary
sewer system. This fee would be due from any new customer requesting such a
connection. This fee is $625 minimum per connection, but may vary based on the
actual width of the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2005-8, passed 5-23-2005)
§ 34.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The rates adopted herein shall be effective on bills rendered on or after
July 1, 2005.
(Ord. 2005-8, passed 5-23-2005)
STANDARDS FOR SEWER USE
§ 34.20 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for governing the connection
and the contribution of wastewater to JSA facilities through the issuance of
permits to both domestic and non-domestic users. This authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities and allows the JSA latitude to administer adequate
penalties to users who violate the provisions herein.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.21 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      AGENCY. The Paducah McCracken Joint Sewer Agency (JSA).
      AGENCY, FACILITIES. Any structure, appurtenance, wastewater collection
system line, lift station, wastewater treatment equipment or any other part of
the wastewater system owned by the Paducah-McCracken Joint Sewer Agency.
      APPORTIONMENT OF CONSTRUCTION COSTS. The amounts on various tracts of
land liable for payment of the costs of construction of a sewage collection
system and appurtenances to serve a particular described area (assessment zone)
to be benefitted by the collection system.
      ASSESSMENT LIEN. A lien superior to all liens except liens for state,
county, city, school and road taxes and liens prior in time for other public
improvements shall exist against the respective lots or tracts of land for the
costs of the sanitary sewers, appurtenances and property service connections
plus interest there on at the rate of 6% per annum.
      AUTHORIZED INDUSTRIAL USER REPRESENTATIVE. A designated representative
from an industrial user authorized to act on the industrial user’s behalf, as
per 40 C.F.R. part 403.
      AVERAGE RESIDENTIAL FLOW. The average daily design residential flow is
400 gallons per day.
      BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR). A report submitted by categorical
industrial users as per 40 C.F.R. part 403.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of weight and concentration in milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
      BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system, which receives the discharge from soil, water and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER SERVICE LINE. A branch sewer that discharges into a main
line sewer.
      CAPACITY FEE. A fee established as a one-time charge for new wastewater
customers as a way to recover part or all of the cost of additional system
capacity constructed for non-use. It is calculated based on the value of the
utility’s capacity and the amount or capacity needed by the new customer.
      CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD). With chemical inhibition
of nitrification, the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20°C,
expressed in terms of concentration in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
      CATEGORICAL PRESENTMENT STANDARDS. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial
users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to
40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
      CATEGORICAL USER. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
      COLLECTOR SYSTEM. A network of sewer lines, pumping stations and other
structures collecting wastewater from building service lines within a specified
area and forming a sub-system within the JSA collection system.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both wastewater and storm water.
      COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA (CWF). Procedure for calculating
alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated waste
stream is combined with other non-regulated waste streams prior to treatment
(40 C.F.R. § 403.7).
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and
fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the JSA’s
KPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact,
does treat such pollutants so as to ensure compliance with the JSA’s KPDES
permit.
      CONCENTRATION-BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a
pollutant in a waste stream, usually expressed in mg/l.
      CONSENT JUDGMENT. A court order entered in Franklin Circuit Court, Civil
Action No. 07-CI-1252 between the Paducah McCracken Joint Sewer Agency and the
Commonwealth of Kentucky Environmental and Public Protection Cabinet.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Approval Authority or the JSA, when there exists
an approved    pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.11.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      CORE/TRUNK SYSTEM. Fundamental system components, which include
interceptors, regional pumping stations and treatment facilities.
      DILUTED WASTE STREAM. Boiler blow down, sanitary wastewater, non-contact
cooling water and certain process waste streams that have been excluded from
regulation in categorical pretreatment standards because they contain none or
only trace amounts of the regulated pollutant.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the commonwealth.
      DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued to users that authorizes discharges to
the public sewer.
      DISCHARGER. Any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a public
sewer.
      DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from non-
commercial or non-industrial activities and which result from normal human
living processes.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      EFFLUENT. The liquid overflow of any facility designed to treat, convey
or retain wastewater.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
Agency.
      ERU (EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Determined by the JSA as the daily
design flow of 400 gallons per day.
      EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The person designated by the JSA to supervise the
JSA’s wastewater system.
      FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
proportional to the flow of the waste stream at the time of sampling.
      FLOW WEIGHTED AVERAGING FORMULA (FWA). A procedure used to calculate
alternative limits for a categorical pretreatment standard where regulated and
unregulated waste streams combine after treatment, but prior to the monitoring
point as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 403.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods in home kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, motels, hotels and other places where food is stored, prepared or
served. Specifically excluded are food processing wastes from canneries,
slaughter houses, packing plants and similar industries.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample, which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
      INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued to significant industrial
users.
      INDUSTRIAL USER. A user who is owner of record, the lessee, sub lessee,
licensee, permittee or other persons in possession of real property used as a
manufacturing or processing establishment or a commercial or industrial
operation, which contributes wastewater to the JSA treatment facilities.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial or commercial processes
as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
      INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to separate and retain
deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal waste, which permits
normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the sewer or drainage system
by gravity. INTERCEPTOR as defined herein is commonly referred to as a grease,
oil or sand trap.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources:
         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes for use or disposal; and/or
         (b)   Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s KPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or
of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or
more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act;
and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
      KENTUCKY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (KPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky under the authority of § 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1332).
      MAIN LINE SEWER. A sewer main that connects manholes or structures and
serves one or more building sewers.
      MAY. This is permissive. See SHALL.
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infections agents, human blood products
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
      NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, faculty or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
      NINETY (90) DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report submitted by a categorical
industrial user, within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards that documents and certifies the
compliance status of the user (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d)).
      NUISANCE. A use of property which results in annoyance or interference
with the use and enjoyment of another’s property, if the use would
substantially annoy or interfere with the use and enjoyment of property by a
person of ordinary health and normal sensitivities.
      ORDINANCE. This subchapter, unless otherwise specified.
      PARAMETER. A component or property of wastewater which places an
identifiable demand on the wastewater system.
      PASS-THROUGH. A discharge of pollutant, which cannot be treated
adequately by the POTW and therefore exits into waters of the United States in
quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the ISA’s KPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) (40 C.F.R. § 403.3).
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or
assigns.
      pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into water, including medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, CBOD, COD, toxicity or
odor).
      POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
      PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. A representative of the JSA who works with the
industrial users to coordinate and implement the Industrial Pretreatment
Program.
      PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water that, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production of or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste
product.
      PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the
authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403(5).
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). Used as a reference to any JSA
treatment facility.
      PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer dedicated to public use and whose use is
controlled by the JSA.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries domestic and/or industrial
wastewater and to which storm water, surface water and groundwater are not
intentionally admitted.
      SANITARY SEWER PERMIT. As set forth in “Building Sewers and Connections”
(§
34.24).
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
      SEWER LATERAL. The section of a pipe that connects a property owner’s
building sewer to the POTW’s main sewer line.
      SHALL. Mandatory (see MAY).
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). 
         (a)   Except as provided in paragraphs (v)(2) and (v)(3) of 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.8:
            1.   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N: and
            2.   Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of
25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding
sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater) contributes a
process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant: or is
designated as such by the Control Authority on the basis that the industrial
user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the potw’s operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(61)).
         (b)   The Control Authority may determine that an industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40
C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N is a non-significant categorical industrial user
rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user
never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blow down
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
            1.   The industrial user, prior to the Control Authority’s finding,
has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements:
            2.   The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in 403.12(q), together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement: and
            3.   The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
         (c)   Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in 40
C.F.R. § 403.8 paragraph (v)(1)(ii) has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or
requirement, the Control Authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403, determine that such industrial user is not
a significant industrial user.
      SLUG DISCHARGE OR LOAD. Any pollutant (including biochemical oxygen
demand, fats, oils, grease and suspended solids) released in a discharge at a
flow rate or concentration which will cause interference or damage to the
operation of JSA facilities.
      SPLIT SAMPLE. Portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to
another agency to verify or compare laboratory results.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification scheme based
on the type of industry or process at a facility.
      STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in
the recent editions of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation as
specified at 40 C.F.R. part 136.
      STATE. Commonwealth of Kentucky.
      STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER.) A pipe conduit for conveying
storm or surface water but excludes any domestic or industrial wastewater.
      STORM WATER. Water that enters inlets or drains connected to storm or
combined sewers following wet weather events.
      SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic sewer usage for
those users whose contributions contain biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),
chemical oxygen demand (COD), total suspended solids (TSS), oil and grease or
ammonia-nitrogen (NH3N) in concentrations which exceed limits specified herein
for such pollutants. Where authorized by the Control Authority, payment of a
SURCHARGE will authorize the discharge of the referenced pollutants so long as
the discharge does not cause pass through or interference.
      TAP-ON FEE. A connection fee charged to recover the costs of providing
core facilities and appurtenances.
      TIME PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
with fixed volumes taken at specific time intervals.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures
described in Standard Methods.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of EPA under the
provisions of the Clean Water Act, § 307(a) or any amendments thereto.
      UNREGULATED WASTE STREAM. A wastewater that is not regulated by national
categorical pretreatment standards.
      USAGE FEES. Charges for service will commence upon issuance of a sanitary
connection permit.
      USER. An owner or occupant, whether private, governmental or otherwise of
a unit, building, premises or lot in the JSA service area who is responsible
for payment of metered water charges or who contributes to the waste stream
from sources other than those of public water.
      WASTE HAULER PERMIT. A permit issued to septic tank collectors
authorizing the disposal of septic tank or similar non-industrial waste
pursuant to the provisions set forth herein.
      WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. Sanitary or domestic wastes
shall mean the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings and institutions as distinct from industrial wastes.
      WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, carry away, treat domestic and industrial wastes, and dispose of
the effluent.
      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater.
      WATERCOURSE. Channel for the passage of water, either continuously or
intermittently.
   (B)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings.
      ADMI. American Dye Manufacturers Institute.
      ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
      BMP. Best management practices.
      BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
      BPJ. Best professional judgment.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      CIU. Categorical industrial user.
      CBOD. Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand.
      COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
      CWA. Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) or any amendments
thereto.
      CWF. Combined waste stream formula.
      EPA. United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      FWA. Flow weighted average.
      FR. Federal Register.
      gpd. Gallons per day.
      IU. Industrial user.
      l. Liter.
      mg. Milligrams.
      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
      KDOW. Kentucky Division of Water.
      KPDES. Kentucky pollutant discharge elimination system.
      NOV. Notice of violation.
      NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.
      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
      RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
      SIC. Standard industrial classification.
      SNC. Significant noncompliance.
      SIU. Significant industrial user.
      SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. or any
amendments thereto.
      TSS. Total suspended solids.
      TTO. Total toxic organics.
      U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.22 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   Mandatory sewer connection.
      (1)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the
boundaries of the JSA and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is located a public sewer of the JSA, is hereby required, at the
owner’s expense, to install suitable sanitary faculties therein, and to connect
such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater where public sewer service is available, as defined in
division (A)(1) above, except as provided for in “private wastewater disposal”
(§
34.23).
      (3)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public system within 12 months in compliance with this subchapter.
JSA shall provide notice of the availability of public sewers by advertisement
in the Paducah Sun. Said notice shall be published one time only and within 30
days after completion of the sewer project making public sewers available. The
city and county building offices shall not issue a permit for new construction
unless the landowner has complied with this provision.
   (B)   Mandatory sewer disconnection. Wastewater service lines serving
structures that have been demolished or otherwise destroyed shall be
disconnected at or near the right-of-way or easement line and sealed as
approved by a representative of the JSA to prevent water, debris and the like
from entering the system.
   (C)   Unlawful discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to
be deposited, any sanitary wastewater in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the boundaries of the JSA.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or storm
sewer within the boundaries of the JSA, any sanitary wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment or management has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter. No
provision of this subchapter shall be construed to relieve the owner of a
discharge to any natural outlet of the responsibility for complying with
applicable state and federal regulations governing such discharge.
   (D)   Compliance with local, state and federal laws. The discharge of any
wastewater into the public sewer system by any person(s) is unlawful, except in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, and any more stringent state
or federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, the Clean Water Act of 1977 and subsequent
amendments, and 40 C.F.R. part 403.
   (E)   Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer.
      (1)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged, through any
leak, defect or connection any unpolluted waters such as storm water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sanitary
sewer, building sewer, building drain or building plumbing. The JSA shall have
the right, at any time, to inspect the inside or outside of buildings or smoke
test for connections, leaks or defects to building sewers and require
disconnection or repair of any pipes carrying such water to the building sewer.
No sanitary drain sump or sump pump discharge by manual switchover of discharge
connection shall have a dual use for removal of such water.
      (2)   The owners of any building sewers having such connections, leaks or
defects shall bear all costs to remove of such sources.
   (F)   Prohibited discharges. 
      (1)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with performance
of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW
whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
      (2)   The user shall not contribute the following substances to the POTW:
         (a)   Any effluent having a temperature higher than 104°F (40°C);
         (b)   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
         (c)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall the wastewater exhibit a
closed cup flashpoint of less than 60°C (140°F), or pollutants that cause in
excess of 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL), at any point within the POTW
using test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
         (d)   Any garbage which has not been properly shredded;
         (e)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities (i.e., wood, glass,
ashes, sand, cinders, unshredded garbage, paper products such as cups, dishes,
napkins, milk containers and the like);
         (f)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six units or higher
than nine units or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the POTW;
         (g)   Any wastes or waters having an objectionable color that is not
removable in the existing sewage treatment plant process;
         (h)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance
or any other material in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process or constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create
any hazard in the receiving stream at the POTW treatment plant;
         (i)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
         (j)   Any substance which would cause the treatment plant to be in
noncompliance with sludge use, recycle or disposal criteria pursuant to
guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the Federal Act, the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or
other regulations or criteria for sludge management and disposal as required by
the state;
         (k)   Any waters or wastes containing acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
         (l)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations as to exceed limits which may be
established by the POTW as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state or federal government or their agencies
or any entity with jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
         (m)   Any slug load, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, COD
and the like), released at a flow rate and/or concentration that will cause
interference with the normal operation of the POTW;
         (n)   Any radioactive wastes;
         (o)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points
designated by the JSA;
         (p)   Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
         (q)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scum, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the
POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act;
any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used;
         (r)   Any waste or wastewater classified as a hazardous waste by the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) without, at least, a 60-day prior
notification of such to the Executive Director or his or her designee. This
notification must include the name of the waste, EPA hazardous waster number,
type of discharge, volume/mass of discharge and time of occurrence. The
Executive Director or his or her designee may deny or condition this discharge
at any time;
         (s)   Any waste or wastewater containing floating fat, oils, or grease
of animal or vegetable origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through; or
         (t)   Any wastewater or waste containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F (0°C) and 140°F (40°C).
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.23 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Any person who transports septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool
contents, or other batch liquid waste and wishes to discharge such waste to the
public sewer system shall first have a valid waste hauler permit all applicants
for a waste hauler permit shall complete the application form, pay the
appropriate fee, and receive a copy of the JSA’s regulations governing
discharge to sewers of liquid wastes from trucks. All persons receiving a waste
hauler permit shall agree, in writing, to abide by all applicable provisions of
this subchapter, and any other special provisions that maybe established by the
JSA as necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
All hauled waste must be discharged at the Paducah Treatment Plant unless
prior, written approval is granted by the Executive Director.
   (B)   Any person holding a valid waste hauler permit and wishing to
discharge to the POTW treatment plant must submit a waste hauler manifest that
identifies the type of waste and location where generated along with a
signature of the generator. In addition, upon the request of the JSA, any
person holding a valid waste hauler permit and wishing to discharge to the POTW
treatment plant must submit to the JSA a sample of each load prior to
discharge.
   (C)   It shall be illegal to discharge any batch liquid waste into any
manhole or other part of the sewer system, or any building sewer or other
facility that discharges to the sewer system.
   (D)   Any waste hauler illegally discharging to the sewer system or
discharging wastewater not authorized in the waste hauler permit shall be
subject to immediate revocation of discharge privileges.
   (E)   Waste haulers shall pay fees for such discharge in accordance with a
fee schedule established by the JSA, which may be amended from time to time by
the JSA.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall relieve waste haulers of the
responsibility for compliance with County Health Department, state or federal
regulations.
   (G)   Non-commercial domestic waste (i.e., RVs, motor homes and the like)
shall be approved by the JSA on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.24 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   There shall be two classes of sanitary sewer permits:
         (a)   For service to residential establishments; and
         (b)   For service to commercial and industrial establishments. The
person(s) requesting permits shall be required to furnish information about all
waste producing activities and wastewater characteristics. The permit request
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Executive Director or his or her
designee. Sanitary sewer collection fees shall be paid to the JSA at the time
the permit is issued.
      (2)   Users shall promptly notify the JSA in advance of any introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the POTW. The Executive
Director or his or her designee may deny or condition the new introduction or
change in discharge based on the information submitted in the notification or
additional information as may be requested.
      (3)   No person(s) shall uncover, plug or make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without a sanitary sewer permit.
   (B)   Capping and sealing of property service connections. JSA shall issue a
disconnect permit for the demolition of a building only after the applicant
signs a statement certifying that each sewer service connection to the property
has been or shall be capped or plugged with a water seal at the easement or
street right-of-way line prior to the completion of the demolition project.
   (C)   Prohibited connections.
      (1)   No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, basement wall
seepage or floor seepage, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, yard
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sanitary
sewer. Any such connections which already exist on the effective date of this
subchapter shall be completely and permanently disconnected within 60 days of
the effective date of this subchapter. The owner(s) of any building sewers
having such connections, leaks or defects shall bear all costs incidental to
removal of such sources. Pipes, sumps and pumps for such sources of ground and
surface water shall be separate from wastewater facilities. Removal of such
sources of water without presence of separate facilities shall be evidence of
drainage to the public sanitary sewer system.
      (2)   No person shall install or cause to be installed, any sewer service
connection, building sewer or make any service connection to any public sewer
without a plumbing permit secured from the State Plumbing Program Director,
State Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection and the
construction shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Law and
Code, Rules and Regulations.
      (3)   The construction shall also conform to this subchapter.
   (D)   Easement restrictions. No party shall place permanent building
structures on JSA easements. Any non-permanent building structure (i.e.,
fences, portable storage buildings and the like) or vegetation (i.e., trees,
shrubs, flower beds and the like) placed on JSA easements are placed on said
easement at the risk of the property owner. Any damage to such structures or
vegetation due to sewer failure, sewer repair work or other sewer related
problems are not the responsibility of the JSA. Replacement costs are the
responsibility of the property owner.
   (E)   Design and installation.
      (1)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. In such case,
the sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the JSA does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection aforementioned.
      (2)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the JSA; to meet
all requirements of this subchapter. If additional sewer customers are added to
the old building sewers, additional sewer tap fees and capacity fees shall be
charged accordingly even though no new sewer tap is actually made into the JSA
system. At no time shall a refund be payable as a result of a decrease in ERUs.
      (3)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM A-74, latest
revision, PVC (polyvinyl-chloride) sewer pipe, ASTM D-3034, latest revision, or
ductile iron pipe, AWWA specification C-151 cement lined, and shall meet
requirements of State plumbing code. Joints shall be as set out hereinafter.
Any part of the building sewer that is located within five feet of a water
service pipe shall be constructed with cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron
pipe, unless the building sewer is at least one foot deeper in the ground than
the water service line. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe may be
required by the JSA where the building sewer is exposed to damage or stoppage
by tree roots. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe shall be used in filled
or unstable ground, in areas where the cover over the building sewer is less
than three feet, or in areas where the sewer is subject to vehicular or other
external loads.
      (4)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and back filling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the local and state building and plumbing codes, the JSA’s standard
specifications and other applicable rules and regulations of the JSA.
      (5)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection to the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s)
shall indemnify the JSA for any loss or damage to JSA facilities that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
Repair costs shall be as established by the JSA.
      (6)   The owner shall ensure that all excavations for building sewer
installation are adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect
the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the JSA and all owners of such public property.
      (7)   In a building where the sewer main crown is less than three and
one-half feet below the basement floor, wastewater shall be lifted by means of
a sewage pump.
      (8)   A neat workmanlike connection, not extending past the inner surface
of the public sewer shall be made. A wye and six-inch clean-out fitting shall
be installed at the property line between the public sewer and the building
sewer.
      (9)   All building sewer lines will be installed so as to meet or exceed
the most current revision of the State Plumbing Code.
      (10)   The owner of the premises served by a sewer shall be responsible
for all maintenance, operation, cleaning of the building sewer from the
building to the point of connection with the public main line sewer. Repairs
and reconstruction of the building sewer from the building to a public roadway
shall be the responsibility of the owner. If the building sewer is damaged
under publicly owned improved surfaces, the JSA will be responsible for repair.
   (F)   Inspection.
      (1)   All holders of a sanitary sewer permit shall notify the JSA when
the activity described is completed. The construction shall be inspected by JSA
personnel prior to placing backfill material. The connection shall be made gas-
tight and water-tight and verified by proper testing.
      (2)   All building sewers shall be smoke tested, at JSA discretion,
through the wye branch at the public sewer connection, with public sewer
tightly plugged off, after connections at both ends are made and after all pipe
is properly bedded and backfilled at least to the top of the pipe and if
backfill is completed, within two weeks after completion of backfill. At time
of testing, any openings into the building drain inside the building shall be
water trapped or plugged. Any leakage of smoke from building sewer or building
drain and plumbing shall be located at test and repaired to stand repetition of
smoke test without leakage. When smoke testing is completed, the temporary flow
line plug shall be removed and a permanent watertight plug shall be placed in
branch of test wye-branch and carefully backfilled by hand and tamped to at
least six inches above the top of the branch. This test would be in addition to
any testing performed by the applicable plumbing inspector.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors; restaurants and other commercial
users.
      (1)   All restaurants, food service establishments and other commercial
oil and grease generators shall provide grease and/or oil interceptor when, in
the opinion of the Executive Director or his or her designee, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptor shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the JSA and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall be cleaned and
maintained at regular intervals to ensure proper operation. In the maintaining
of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records signed by the owner and the waste hauler with the dates and means of
disposal in accordance with pumping schedules established by the JSA
Pretreatment Coordinator.
      (2)   New restaurant construction and major renovations containing
plumbing revisions shall submit a detailed drawing of the grease interceptor
and complete a grease interceptor application/questionnaire. Said application
shall be available from JSA upon request.
      (3)   The city and county building inspection offices shall not issue a
permit unless the restaurant/land owner has complied with this provision.
   (H)   Destruction of public owned treatment works (POTW). No person(s) shall
maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the
POTW.
   (I)   Prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall or cause to be installed, any sewer service
connection, building sewer or make any service connection to any public sewer
within the JSA district without a JSA permit and a plumbing permit secured from
the State Plumbing Program Director, State Department for Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection. The construction shall conform to the requirements of
the State Plumbing Law and Code, Rules and Regulations as well as the
requirements specified herein.
      (2)   No person or public corporation shall make direct connection of
roof downspouts, exterior or interior foundation drains, area drains, yard
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater directly to a sanitary
sewer.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.25 POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITS.
   (A)   General conditions. The following described substances, materials,
waters or wastes shall be limited in discharges to the JSA sewer system to
concentration or quantities which: will not harm either the sewers, wastewater
treatment process or equipment; will maintain and protect water quality in the
receiving stream; and will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. The Executive Director or his or her designee may set
additional limitations or limitations more stringent than those established in
the provisions below if in his or her opinion more severe limitations are
necessary to meet the above objectives, in forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of a discharge, the Executive Director or his or her designee
shall give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
   (B)   Restricted discharges.
      (1)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, motels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (2)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which: injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, causes the JSA to violate the terms of its KPDES permit, prevents
the use of acceptable sludge disposal methods, or exceed a limitation set forth
in a categorical pretreatment standard;
      (3)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the JSA in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (4)   Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes
in the public sewer system, release noxious gases, form suspended solids that
interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes;
      (5)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed to the
extent required by the JSA’s KPDES permit;
      (6)   Wastes or waters classified as a hazardous waste by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) without a minimum 60-day prior written
notification of such discharge to the Executive Director. Such written
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous
waste number, type of discharge, volume/mass of discharge and time of
occurrence). The Executive Director or his or her designee may prohibit or
condition the discharge at any time;
      (7)   Wastewater identified as causing, along or in conjunction with
other sources, the POTW treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (8)   Any portion of human or animal anatomy;
      (9)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances which will cause excessive foaming in the JSA’s sewer system;
      (10)   Any water or wastes which have characteristics based on a 24-hour
composite sample, grab or a shorter period composite sample, if more
representative, that exceed the following normal maximum domestic wastewater
parameter concentrations:
 
Parameter Maximum      Allowable Concentration Without Surcharges
BOD                    300 ppm
TSS                    350 ppm
NH3-N                  25 ppm
Oil and grease (total) 100 ppm
Any person discharging wastewater exceeding the maximum allowable
concentration as noted above, will be subject to a surcharge fee for each
pound of loading over and above the set limit. Any other amenable constituents
requiring the addition of specific chemicals for proper treatment will also be
subject to surcharge as noted on the discharge permit exceeding the effluent
limits specified above shall not be deemed to constitute a violation of a
permit condition or this subchapter if the appropriate surcharge fee is paid
and the discharge does not cause interference or pass through of the POTW.
 
      (11)   The following limitations are established for characteristics of
any wastewaters to be discharged into the JSA’s sewer system. All significant
industrial users must comply with these limitations where they are more
stringent than applicable state and/or federal regulations.
Parameter Maximum Daily Concentration
Parameter            Maximum Daily Concentration
Arsenic              0.30 ppm
Cadmium              008 ppm
Chloride             10,000 ppm
Chromium, total      0.70 ppm
Chromium, hexavalent 0.39 ppm
Copper               1.06 ppm
Cyanide              0.39 ppm
Lead                 0.14 ppm
Mercury              0.02 ppm
Nickel               1.90 ppm
pH                   6 - 9 units
Selenium             0.10 ppm
Silver               0.53 ppm
Tetrachloroethylene  0.27 ppm
Zinc                 1.70 ppm
 
      (12)   The JSA has received authority through the U.S. EPA and state
statutes to enforce the requirements of 40 C.F.R. subchapter N, 40 C.F.R. part
403, and 40 C.F.R. part 35. Accordingly, in addition to the requirements set
forth above, all users shall comply with the requirements of those regulations.
   (C)   Dilution of wastewater discharge. No user shall ever increase the use
of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in the categorical pretreatment standards, or in any
pollutant specific limitation developed by the JSA or the state.
   (D)   Protection from accidental and slug discharges.
      (1)   Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from
accidental and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this subchapter. Facilities to prevent accidental and/or slug
discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
owner or user’s own cost and expense. At any time, the JSA may require each
industrial user to develop or update a plan to control slug discharges. If the
JSA determines that a slug control plan or revision is necessary, the plan
shall contain the following:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   Procedures for notifying the POTW; and
         (d)   Prevention procedures for spills.
      (2)   In the case of all actual accidental and/or slug discharges, the
user shall immediately telephone to notify the JSA of the incident In any
event, said telephone notification shall be followed by a written confirmation
no later than two hours after the accidental and/or slug discharge. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume, and corrective actions.
      (3)   Within five days following an accidental and/or slug discharge, the
user shall submit to the Executive Director or his or her designee a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability applicable under this
subchapter or other applicable law.
      (4)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or
suffer from such a dangerous discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
   (E)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements
and limitations or those in this subchapter.
   (F)   JSA’s right of revision. The JSA reserves the right to establish more
stringent limitations, or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this subchapter.
   (G)   Categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of
categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this subchapter for
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately and automatically supersede the
limitations imposed under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.26 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Wastewater discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW
any wastewater except as authorized by the JSA in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter. Any person outside the jurisdiction of the JSA
that desires to contribute wastewater to the POTW must execute (through an
authorized representative) an agreement, whereby the person agrees to be
regulated by all provisions of this subchapter and state and federal
regulations. A discharge permit may then be issued by the JSA in accordance
with division (B) below.
   (B)   Discharge permits.
      (1)   All industrial users proposing to connect to or contribute to the
POTW or who are now contributing other than ordinary sewage or waste into the
POTW shall obtain a discharge permit before correcting to or contributing to
the POTW.
      (2)   (a)   Users required to obtain a discharge permit shall complete
and file with the JSA, an application in the form prescribed by the JSA,
accompanied by a permit fee. New users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
         (b)   Existing permit holders shall apply no later than 60 days prior
to expiration of the permit in support of the application, the user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
            1.   Name, address and discharge location if different from the
address;
            2.   SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, United States Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
            3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by
an analytical laboratory acceptable to the JSA; sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to §
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;
            4.   Time and duration of contribution;
            5.   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;
            6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation;
            7.    Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on
the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged;
            8.   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by the JSA, state or categorical pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional pretreatment
is required for the user to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards;
            9.   If additional pretreatment will be required to meet the
categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
categorical pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule.
               a.   The schedule must be acceptable to the JSA.
               b.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards.
               c.   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the Executive Director or his or her designee, including, as a minimum, whether
or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and,
if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress
and the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the schedule established.
            10.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes,
and the rate of production;
            11.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
            12.   Number of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed
or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
            13.   Any other information as may be deemed by the JSA to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application; and
            14.   A copy of the industry’s written environmental control
program, comparable document or policy.
      (3)   The JSA shall evaluate the application and may require additional
information prior to the issuance of the industrial discharge permit. After
evaluation and acceptance of the application, the JSA may issue an industrial
discharge permit or a general discharge permit subject to the terms and
conditions provided herein. If the application is rejected, the person will be
notified of the rejection and the reason(s) therefor.
   (C)   Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
categorical pretreatment standard, the discharge permit of users subject to
such standard shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within
the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to the
categorical pretreatment standards, has not previously submitted an application
for a discharge permit as required, the user shall apply for a discharge permit
within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing discharge permit
shall submit, to the Executive Director or his or her designee within 90 days
after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, the
information required by this subchapter.
   (D)   Permit conditions. 
      (1)   Discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this subchapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the JSA.
      (2)   Discharge permits may contain the following:
         (a)   The unit surcharges or schedule of other charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer;
         (b)   Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
         (c)   Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
         (d)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
         (e)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations; frequency of sampling; number, types and standards for
tests; and reporting schedules;
         (f)   Compliance schedules;
         (g)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
         (h)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a minimum of
three years, all records relating to pretreatment and/or wastewater discharge
as specified by the JSA/and affording the JSA access thereto as required by 40
C.F.R. § 403.12(o)(2);
         (i)   Requirements for notification of the JSA of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system;
         (j)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
         (k)   A requirement that the user reimburse the JSA for all expenses
related to monitoring, sampling and testing performed at the direction of the
Executive Director or his or her designee and deemed necessary by the JSA to
verify that the user is in compliance with the said permit; and
         (l)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the JSA to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.
   (E)   Alternative discharge limits.
      (1)   Where an effluent from a categorical industrial process is mixed
prior to treatment with wastewater other than that generated by the regulated
process, the Executive Director or his or her designee may derive fixed
alternative discharge limits for the discharge permit. These alternative limits
shall be applied to the mixed effluent and shall be calculated using the
combined waste stream formula and/or flow-weighted average formula as defined
in §§
34.20 and
34.21.
      (2)   Where the effluent limits in a categorical pretreatment standard
are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutants per unit of production
(production-based standard), the Executive Director or his or her designee may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or of effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent permit limitations applicable to the permittee. The
permittee shall be subject to all permit limits calculated in this manner under
40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and must fully comply with these alternative limits.
      (3)   All significant industrial users subject to production-based
standards must report production rates annually so that alternative permit
limits can be calculated if necessary. The significant industrial user must
notify the Executive Director or his or her designee 30 days in advance of any
major change in production levels that will affect the limits in the discharge
permit.
   (F)   Permit duration. Discharge permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed three years. A discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or maybe stated to expire on a specific date. The user
shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of 120 days prior to the
expiration of the user’s existing permit. The terms and conditions of the
permit may be subject to modification by the JSA during the term of the permit
as limitations or requirements as identified in §
34.25 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of
any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   (G)   Permit transfer. Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred
or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed
operation without a 30-day prior notification to the Executive Director or his
or her designee. A copy of the existing permit must be provided to the new
owner. The Executive Director or his or her designee may deny the transfer of
the permit if it is deemed necessary.
   (H)   Compliance data reporting. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case
of a new user, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit
to the Executive Director or his or her designee, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and the average
and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user’s facility which are
limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. The report shall state
whether the applicable categorical pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional pretreatment and time schedule is
necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user.
   (I)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   All significant industrial users shall submit, to the Executive
Director or his or her designee, on dates specified in the discharge permit
(unless required more frequently), a report indicating, at a minimum, the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by
categorical pretreatment standards or the discharge permit. In addition, this
report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting
period, exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of the Executive
Director or his or her designee and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like, the Executive
Director or his or her designee may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted.
      (2)   All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory acceptable to the
JSA. Analytical procedures shall be in accordance with procedures established
by the U.S. EPA Administrator pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and contained in
40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto and 40 C.F.R. part 261 or with any
other test procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the U.S. EPA
Administrator.
      (3)   Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant(s) in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication
“Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for
Priority Pollutants,” April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator.
      (4)   A baseline monitoring report (BMR) must be submitted to the
Executive Director or his or her designee by all significant industrial users
at least 90 days prior to initiation of discharge to the sanitary sewer. The
BMR must contain, at a minimum, the following:
         (a)   Production data: process description, SIC code number, raw
materials used, chemicals used, final product, pretreatment industrial category
(if applicable), and a schematic which indicates points of discharge to the
sewer system;
         (b)   Identifying information to include name, address of facility,
owner(s), contact person and any other permits held by the facility;
         (c)   Wastewater characteristics: total plant flow, types of
discharges, average and maximum flows from each process;
         (d)   Nature/concentration of pollutants: analytical results for all
pollutants regulated by this subchapter and/or any applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and sample type and location AU analyses must conform
with 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto; and
         (e)   Information concerning any pretreatment equipment used to treat
the facility’s discharge.
      (5)   New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in
divisions (I)(4)(c) and (I)(4)(d) above, but at no time shall a new source
commence discharges to the public sewer of substances that do not meet
provisions of this subchapter. All new sources must be in compliance with all
provisions of this subchapter, and state and categorical pretreatment standards
prior to commencement of discharge to the public sewer.
   (J)   Permit violations.
      (1)   All significant industrial users must notify the Executive Director
or his or her designee within 24 hours of first becoming aware of a permit
violation. This notification shall include the date of violation, the parameter
violated and the amount by which the parameter was exceeded.
      (2)   The user shall immediately repeat the sampling and analysis of the
parameter(s) in question and submit the results to the Executive Director or
his or her designee within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
Exception to this regulation applies only if the JSA performs the sampling
within the same time period for the same parameter(s) in question.
   (K)   Monitoring.
      (1)   The JSA shall require significant industrial users to provide and
operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities and equipment
necessary to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building
sewer and/or internal drainage system. The monitoring facility should normally
be situated on the user’s premises, but the JSA may, when such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in a public right-of-way. The Executive Director or his or her
designee shall review and approve the location, plans and specifications for
such monitoring facilities and may require them to be constructed to provide
for the separate monitoring and sampling of industrial waste and sanitary
sewage flows.
         (a)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility shall be designed and maintained in a manner such that the safety
of JSA and user personnel shall be the foremost concern. The facility, sampling
and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a proper operating
condition at the expense of the user.
         (b)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the JSA’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
approval of the location, plans and specifications.
      (2)   Any sampling analysis done in accordance with approved federal EPA
procedures by the industrial user during a reporting period shall be submitted
to the Executive Director or his or her designee, regardless of whether or not
that analysis was required by the industrial user’s discharge permit.
      (3)   The industrial user must receive the approval of the Executive
Director before changing the sampling point and/or monitoring faculties to be
used in all required sampling.
   (L)   Pretreatment. All significant industrial users shall provide necessary
wastewater treatment as required to comply with this subchapter and achieve
compliance with any applicable categorical pretreatment standards within the
time limitations as specified by the categorical pretreatment standards. The
JSA may require the development of a compliance schedule for installation of
pretreatment technology and/or equipment by any significant industrial user
that cannot meet discharge limits required by this subchapter. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level required by this subchapter shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
JSA for review, and shall be acceptable to the JSA before construction of the
facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to produce an effluent that complies with the provisions of this subchapter.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation
shall be reported and acceptable to the JSA prior to the user’s initiation of
the changes.
   (M)   Animal publication.
      (1)   The JSA shall annually publish in its jurisdiction’s largest dally
newspaper a list of significant industrial users, which were in significant
noncompliance with any categorical pretreatment standards. The notification
shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during
the same 12 months.
      (2)   All records relating to the JSA’s pretreatment program shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or Control Authority upon request All
records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.12(O)(2).
   (N)   Significant noncompliance. A user is defined as being in significant
noncompliance when it commits one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   Causes imminent danger to human health or the environment or
results in the exercise of emergency authority;
      (2)   In accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(viii), a significant
industrial user for any industrial user which violates divisions (C), (D) or
(H) above, is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more
of the following criteria:
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as
defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(1);
         (b)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC = 1.4 for BOD. TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges. Interference or pass-through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority under 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(l)
(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of Best Management Practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
   (O)   Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections may be available to the public or other governmental
agencies in accordance with the State Open Records Act located at KRS 61.870 et
seq., unless the user requests that any such information, at the time it is
provided to JSA, be kept confidential and is able to demonstrate at the time of
the request, to the satisfaction of the JSA, that the release of such
information is not subject to disclosure pursuant to the State Open Records
Act. Any amendment to KRS 61.870 will serve as an amendment to this subchapter
to the extent this policy is inconsistent with the State Open Records Act. Any
and all information provided by a person furnishing a report required by this
subchapter, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes, even if not required to be disclosed pursuant to the State
Open Records Act, shall be made available to all governmental agencies for uses
related to this subchapter, the KPDES permit, sludge disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs upon request. Such portions of a report shall
be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report wastewater
constituents and characteristics shall not be recognized as confidential
information and shall be available to the public without restriction.
   (P)   Signatory requirements. All applications, reports or information
submitted to the JSA shall be signed and certified.
      (1)   All permit applications shall be signed:
         (a)   For a corporation or limited liability company: by a principal
executive officer of at least the level of vice-president; and/or
         (b)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general partner
or the proprietor, respectively.
      (2)   All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports shall
be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized representative of
that person. A person is a duly authorized representative only if:
         (a)   The authorization is made in writing by a person described
above; and
         (b)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
of responsibility having facility or activity, such as the position of plant
manager, superintendent or position of equivalent responsibility.
      (3)   Any person signing a document under this section shall make the
following certification:
“I certify under penalty of law that I am familiar with the information
contained in this report and its attachments and that to the best of my
knowledge and belief such information is true, complete and accurate.”
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.27 INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available to a premises, the
building sewer shall be connected to an individual private sewage disposal
system complying with the requirements of the appropriate public authority.
   (B)   The owner shall, at his or her own expense, operate and maintain the
individual private sewage disposal facility to the satisfaction of the
appropriate public authority.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any individual private residential sewage
disposal facility to be connected to the JSA sanitary sewer system without
written approval and securing proper permits and payment of required connection
fees.
   (D)   All entities who enter the JSA system whether voluntarily,
involuntarily or by mandate from others are subject to fees and charges
applicable at the time.
   (E)   Rules and regulations regarding private sewage disposal systems is the
responsibility of sewer boards of health and their appearance here is for
information only.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.28 FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section provides for the recovery of costs from users of
the POTW for the matters covered by this subchapter. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in the JSA’s schedule of rates and charges, as amended
from time to time by the JSA.
   (B)   Sewer service charges.
      (1)   The sewer service charge for normal strength sewage is based on the
water discharged to the sewer system as measured by the public water supply
meter(s). The basic sewer service charge shall be determined upon the metered
flow and at rates as provided by the JSA’s fee schedule approved by resolution
of the Board of Directors.
      (2)   Tap-on fees and capacity fees will be charged per Equivalent
Residential Unit (ERU) according to the schedule of rates and charges.
Replacement service tap-on fees and capacity fees will be calculated on the
difference in ERUs between the prior and upgraded development. At no time shall
a refund be payable as a result of a decrease in ERUs.
      (3)   A lateral connection fee will be charged for a new service that
requires the construction of a lateral connection from the sewer main to the
right-of-way line or easement line where none exists or where a relocation is
required by the JSA. The fee recovers construction expenses from the
benefitting property owner(s).
      (4)   Wells or sources of water supply other than municipal water
supplies shall be registered in writing to the Executive Director, giving name
of individuals or firm, address, source and amount of water supply other than
that from the public water supplies, together with a sketch to a scale showing
plan of property, water distribution system, sewer layout and existing meters.
All sources of water that enter the sewer system shall be properly metered and
subject to the sewer service charge.
      (5)   Any customer who is found to be connected to the sewer system but
has not been billed shall be billed back one year from time the connection is
discovered.
   (C)   Payment for services.
      (1)   The sewer service charges are billed and collected by the JSA and
for the JSA by its assigned billing and collection agents (Paducah Water and
Hendron Water District).
      (2)   Bills not paid by the payment due date will be considered
delinquent. A penalty, according to the policies of JSA’s assigned agents
(Paducah Water and Hendron Water District) shall be added to those not paid by
the payment due date.
      (3)   Failure of any user to pay for services rendered shall subject the
said user to the water shutoff policies of JSA’s assigned agents (Paducah Water
and Hendron Water District).
      (4)   The JSA shall suspend wastewater treatment service to the user for
failure to pay for services when required by the Executive Director.
Reconnection of sewer service shall be charged according to the rate schedule
for lateral connection fees.
   (D)   Pretreatment and other charges and fees. The JSA may adopt charges and
fees which may include:
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
JSA’s pretreatment program;
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
      (4)   Fees for inspection of pretreatment and/or monitoring devices;
      (5)   Fees for pretreatment and wastewater permit applications;
      (6)   Fees for filing appeals;
      (7)   Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of excessive strength
conventional pollutants; and
      (8)   Other fees as the JSA may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.29 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Right to enter premises. The Executive Director and other duly
promulgated employees and representatives of the JSA and authorized
representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing pertinent to discharges to the public sewer system in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Right to obtain information regarding discharge. The Executive
Director and other duly authorized employees of the JSA and authorized
representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing
proper credentials and identification are authorized to obtain information
including, but not limited to, copying of records concerning character,
strength and quantity of industrial wastes which have a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.
   (C)   Access to easements. Duly authorized employees and representatives of
the JSA bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the JSA holds duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, construction, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any, portions of
the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms
of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
   (D)   Authority to serve notice of violations. Duly authorized employees and
representatives of the JSA bearing proper credentials and identification shall
have the authority to serve notices of violations of this subchapter. The
Executive Director shall be responsible for the enforcement of and shall have
authority to issue orders and impose penalties as authorized therein, assess
and require payment for consequential damages, to establish limits for the
discharge of toxic or objectionable substances and shall have any other powers
or authority necessary and proper for the enforcement and the achievement of
the goals of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The JSA, through the Executive Director or his or her designee, to
ensure compliance with this subchapter, and as permitted through 40 C.F.R.
subchapter N, and 401 KAR 5:055, may take the following enforcement steps
against users in noncompliance with the ordinance. The remedies available to
the JSA include injunctive relief, civil and criminal penalties, immediate
discontinuance of wastewater treatment service, and the publishing of the list
of significant violators annually.
      (2)   The JSA may suspend wastewater treatment service and/or a discharge
permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Executive
Director or his or her designee, in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to
the POTW, or causes the JSA to violate any condition of its KPDES permit.
      (3)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily
with the suspension order, the JSA shall take such: steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The JSA shall
reinstate the discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon
proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written
statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be
submitted to the Executive Director or his or her designee within 15 days of
the date of occurrence.
   (B)   Notice of violation. Any user found to be violating any provisions of
this subchapter, any permit, or any order issued hereunder, shall be served by
the JSA with written notice stating the nature of the violation(s). The NOV
requires the user to evaluate and explain the cause of the violation, states
actions to be taken to achieve compliance, and required steps to be taken to
ensure the violation will not reoccur. The NOV requires the user to return to
compliance and may state conditions or requirements for achieving compliance.
The NOV may also state deadlines for a response demonstrating compliance has
been achieved. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to
the Executive Director or his or her designee. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of potential liability for any violation occurring before
or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (C)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The Executive Director or his or her designee may issue to any user
who causes or contributes to violations of this subchapter, any permit or any
order issued hereunder, an order to appear and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of the hearing, the proposed enforcement action,
the reasons for such proposed action and directing the user to show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any
agent or officer of the user. Whether or not a duly notified user or its
representative appears, immediate enforcement action may be pursued.
      (2)   The JSA may, itself, conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or
designate a representative to:
         (a)   Issue, in the name of the JSA notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in such hearing;
         (b)   Take the evidence; and
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the JSA for
action thereon.
      (3)   At any hearing held pursuant to this subchapter, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded by a stenographer. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
      (4)   After the JSA has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order as
set forth below. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate
may be issued.
   (D)   Administrative orders. An administrative order may take any of the
following three forms.
      (1)   Consent orders. A negotiated settlement between the JSA and a user
found to be in noncompliance with this subchapter. The consent order differs
from the other forms of administrative orders in that the signatures of both
the JSA and user representative are required. The consent order may also
contain a compliance schedule (general reporting requirement, compliance
schedule) for meeting progress milestones dates and possibly fines or remedial
actions.
      (2)   Show cause orders. An order to direct the user to appear before the
JSA, explain its noncompliance, and show cause why more severe enforcement
actions against the user should not be taken. Show cause maybe used in
circumstances where previous enforcement actions have failed to resolve the
noncompliance. This could lead to further enforcement actions.
      (3)   Cease and desist orders. When the Executive Director finds that a
user has violated or continues to violate this subchapter or any permit or
order issued hereunder, the Executive Director or his or her designee may issue
an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to: comply forthwith; or take such appropriate remedial or
preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the
discharge.
   (E)   Emergency suspension.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the JSA may suspend wastewater
treatment service and/or any permit immediately whenever such suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or
causing any of the following conditions:
         (a)   An imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons or the environment;
         (b)   An interference or pass-through; and/or
         (c)   A violation of any condition of the JSA’s KPDES permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service
and/or any permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. A
hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension to determine
whether the suspension maybe lifted or the user’s permit terminated. In the
event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order,
the JSA shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer’s connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer
system or endangerment to any individuals. The JSA shall reinstate the
wastewater treatment service and permit upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliance.
      (3)   Prior to the hearing described in division (E)(2) above, the user
shall submit, to the Executive Director or his or her designee, a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence.
   (F)   Additional enforcement remedies.
      (1)   Judicial remedies. If any person discharges sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes into the JSA’s sewer system contrary to the provisions
of this subchapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, the JSA may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
appropriate court of this jurisdiction.
      (2)   Injunctive relief. If any person discharges any waste or wastewater
into the JSA’s sewer system contrary to the provisions of this subchapter or
any order or permit issued hereunder, the JSA may petition the court for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be
appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.31 COMPLIANCE.
   Other statues, codes, regulations and standards.
   (A)   Present and prospective users of the sewage works of the JSA are
herewith advised and warned of other existing regulations, codes, ordinances
and laws governing the requirements for use and control of sewage systems and
the requirements of their compliance.
   (B)   Users and plumbers employed by the user are required to comply with
the State Plumbing Law and Code, Rules and Regulations issued by the Division
of Plumbing, Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.
   (C)   Every person and public corporation desiring to install or enter into
a contract for the installation of a public, semi-public or industrial sewage
system, or to make additions or alterations in such treatment or pretreatment
plant or to alter or extend any such sewer shall comply with all design and
construction standards and specifications of the JSA, all rules and regulations
of the county board of health in which the facility exists or is to be
constructed and comply with all codes, rules and regulations of the State
Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection. No such
installations, additions or alterations shall begin until the plans and
specifications, therefor, have been submitted to and approved by the JSA.
   (D)   State law prohibits the installation of sanitation improvements
without JSA approval, reproduced verbatim herein.
   (E)   Special attention is drawn to Commonwealth of Kentucky, Franklin
Circuit Court Civil Action No. 07-CI-1252 consent judgment entered September 5,
2007.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Revocation of permit. In addition to any other provision
contained herein, any user who violates the following conditions of §§
34.20 through
34.31, or applicable state or federal regulations, is subject to having this
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of §§
34.20 through
34.31:
         (a)   Failure of the user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;
         (b)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations
or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
         (d)   Violation of conditions of any permit.
      (2)   Penalties.
         (a)   Civil penalties.
               1.   Any person who violates any provision of §§
34.20 through
34.31 or any permit condition or who violates any cease and desist order,
prohibition, effluent limitation or pretreatment or toxicity standard, may be
liable for a court ordered civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 per violation.
Each day in which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to the fine imposed pursuant to this division (B), the JSA may recover
its attorney fees, related court costs and other expenses associated with the
enforcement action.
               2.   Any such penalty imposed shall not be construed as
liquidated damages and shall accrue in addition to any liability for any
consequential damages resulting from the violation for which the penalty is
imposed.
         (b)   Judicial enforcement remedies. The judicial process maybe
implemented to secure court ordered action to correct violations and to secure
penalties for violators. Judicial administrative remedies may be sought: when
notices of violation or administrative orders have proven ineffective in
returning the violating user to compliance; when emergency situations require
injunctive relief to halt or prevent discharges which threaten human health or
the environment or interfere with the treatment system; or to impose civil
penalties and recover losses incurred due to noncompliance. The Executive
Director shall have the discretion to pursue any and all judicial remedies.
            1.   Injunctive relief. The JSA, through counsel, may petition for
a court order of injunction to restrain or compel the activity of a
noncompliant user. Injunctive relief can be used where an administrative order
does not achieve compliance, or where immediate action is required to prevent a
danger to human health, the treatment works or the environment Injunctions can
be temporary in nature, permanent or both.
            2.   Cost recovery. The judicial process can be used by the JSA to
recover the cost associated with noncompliant acts of a user. These costs may
be due to actual physical damage to the treatment works or collection system,
personal injury to JSA personnel, damage to the environment or other related
costs such as increased testing/monitoring.
            3.   Termination of wastewater treatment service. The Executive
Director may, upon written findings, revoke any wastewater discharge permit or
terminate or cause to be terminated wastewater treatment system service to any
premises if a violation of any provision of §§
34.20 through
34.31 is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to
cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance as defined in this
subchapter. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or
regulations authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment
      (3)   Criminal prosecution.
         (a)   Falsifying information or data. Any person who knowingly makes
any false statement, representation or certification in any application,
record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to §§
34.20 through
34.31 or wastewater treatment discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
§§
34.20 through
34.31, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, upon conviction, punishable by
a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 12
months, or by both. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
         (b)   Violations. Any person who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of §§
34.20 through
34.31 or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 per violation per day, or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 12 months or by both. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2012-6, passed 1-28-2013)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Fees and Fee Pooling
   
35.01   Fee-pooling
   
35.02   Reserved
   
35.03   Franchise fees on bank deposits
   
35.04   Daily storage rate; motor vehicles impounded
   
35.05   Court costs
   
35.06   Per diem fees; out-of-county prisoners
   
35.07   Occupied real estate fee; funding 911 services
Investment, Management of County Funds
   
35.20   General investments
   
35.21   Allocation of funds; motor vehicle license fee
Occupational License Tax
   
35.35   Definitions
   
35.36   License application required
   
35.37   Occupational license tax payment required
   
35.38   Apportionment
   
35.39   Employers to withhold
   
35.40   Returns required
   
35.41   Extensions
   
35.42   Refunds
   
35.43   Federal audit provisions
   
35.44   Administrative provisions
   
35.45   Information to remain confidential
   
35.46   Regulation, administration, enforcement and collection of the
occupational license tax and the use thereof
Transient Room Tax
   
35.60   Purpose
   
35.61   Transient room tax levy and use
   
35.62   Exceptions
   
35.63   Collections
   
35.64   Disbursements
   
35.65   Designation of Convention Center
   
35.66   Audit authorized
Insurance Premium Tax
   
35.75   Definitions
   
35.76   Imposition of tax
   
35.77   General insurance premium tax - not a life insurance policy
   
35.78   Life insurance policy premium tax
   
35.79   Countywide application
   
35.80   Exceptions to insurance premium tax application
   
35.81   Due date; interest and penalties
   
35.82   Annual reconciliation
   
35.83   Remittance of payments
 
   
35.99   Penalty
FEES AND FEE POOLING
§ 35.01 FEE-POOLING.
   (A)   Incorporation by reference. The full text of Ord. 2011-6 is hereby
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Ratification of authorized act. The fee-pooling procedure set forth in
Ord. 2011-6 constituted a lawful action of the County Fiscal Court; authorized
by the statutory and common law authorities cited therein. Despite the failure
of the County Clerk to attest to said ordinance, it has been fully implemented
and effectuated from its effective date of July 1, 2011 until the present time.
It is the intent of all parties concerned that said fee-pooling procedure is to
continue to be so implemented in the future. As such, the entirety of Ord.
2011-6 is hereby ratified and given full force and effect from its inception,
to the present date, and into the future.
(Ord. 2011-6, passed - -2011; Ord. 2016-16, passed 10-24-2016; Ord. 2018-004,
passed 6-25-2018; Ord. 2018-06, passed 9-24-2018)
§ 35.02 RESERVED.
§ 35.03 FRANCHISE FEES ON BANK DEPOSITS.
   (A)   General provisions. Pursuant to KRS Chapter 136, there is hereby
imposed on each “financial institution,” as defined in division (B) below,
located within the jurisdiction of the county, a franchise tax measured by the
deposits in such institutions. All moneys collected pursuant to these sections
shall be paid into the General Fund of the county to be used for the payment of
proper expenditures as determined by the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEPOSITS. All demand and time deposits, excluding deposits of the United
States government, state and political subdivisions, other financial
institutions, public libraries, educational institutions, religious
institutions, charitable institutions and certified and officers’ checks.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
         (a)   A national bank organized and existing as a national bank
association pursuant to the provisions of the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. §§
21 et seq., in effect on December 31, 1995, exclusive of any amendments made
subsequent to that date, or a national bank organized after December 31, 1995,
that meets the requirements of the National Bank Act in effect on December 31,
1995;
         (b)   Any bank or trust company incorporated or organized under the
laws of any state, except a banker’s bank organized under KRS 286.3-135;
         (c)   Any corporation organized under the provisions of 12 U.S.C. §§
611 to 631, in effect on December 31, 1995, exclusive of any amendments made
subsequent to that date, or any corporation organized after December 31, 1995,
that meets the requirements of 12 U.S.C. §§ 611 to 631, in effect on December
31, 1995; or
         (d)    Any agency or branch of a foreign depository as defined in 12
U.S.C. § 3101, in effect on December 31, 1995, exclusive of any amendments made
subsequent to that date, or any agency or branch of a foreign depository
established after December 31, 1995, that meets the requirements or 12 U.S.C. §
3101 in effect on December 31, 1995.
   (C)   Rate of franchise tax.
      (1)   The rate of the franchise tax imposed on financial institutions
shall be 0.025% of the deposits located in the jurisdiction of the county.
      (2)   The amount and location of deposits in the financial institutions
shall be determined by the method used for filing the summary of deposits
report with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
      (3)   The accounting method used to allocate deposits for completion of
the summary of deposits shall be the same as has been utilized in prior
periods.
   (D)   Administration.
      (1)   The Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall certify to the local
jurisdiction the amount of deposits within the jurisdiction and amount of the
tax due.
      (2)   The county shall issue bills to the financial institution by
December 1 of each year.
      (3)   In the transition year of 1996, the tax bills shall be issued to
financial institutions no later than May 1, 1997.
   (E)   Due date.
      (1)   The tax bill shall be due January 31 of the next year after it has
been issued; thereafter, the bill shall be delinquent and subject to a penalty
of 10% and interest of 12% per annum.
      (2)   The financial institution shall be allowed a 2% discount if the tax
bill is paid by December 31 of the same year as the tax bill is issued.
      (3)   The 2% discount shall be allowed on bills paid by May 31, 1997 for
the transitional year. All other bills during this year shall be due June 1,
1997; thereafter, the bill shall be delinquent and subject to a penalty of 10%
and shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
      (4)   The county shall have a lien for taxes upon any and all property
subject to the tax imposed by these sections, which lien shall be superior to
all encumbrances prior or subsequent.
   (F)   Records.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the County Treasurer to collect and account
for the franchise taxes imposed by this section. The County Treasurer shall
keep records of the amount received from each financial institution and the
date of receipt.
      (2)   The Revenue Cabinet shall be notified of the tax rate imposed upon
adoption of this section and of any subsequent rate changes.
(Ord. 96-5, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 96-5.1, passed 2-28-2000)
§ 35.04 DAILY STORAGE RATE; MOTOR VEHICLES IMPOUNDED.
   (A)   The county imposes a daily storage charge on each motor vehicle placed
in the county impoundment facility by the County Sheriff’s Office, or other
police agencies, in the sum of $10 per day so long as any such vehicle remains
in impoundment. That said charges must be paid in full before any such
impounded vehicle is removed from the impoundment facility.
   (B)   Records of the receipt of impounded vehicles be maintained by the
office of the County Engineer and said office shall be responsible for the
receipt of impoundment fees.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the county to maintain a reasonable
standard of security at the vehicle impoundment facility to ensure that
vandalism and/or thefts shall be kept to an absolute minimum. The office of the
County Engineer shall direct all agencies that deliver motor vehicles to the
impoundment facility to notify said office as to identity of the motor
vehicles, names of the registered owners, known lien holders, and condition of
said motor vehicles at the time delivered to the impoundment facility; and
that, all personal items have been removed from the vehicles or otherwise
secured.
   (D)   (1)   If, within ten business days of impoundment, a motor vehicle
impounded at the county impoundment facility on Coleman Road has not been
claimed, or a hearing has not been requested pursuant to KRS 82.625, notice
shall be mailed by certified mail to the registered owner, if known, and lien
holders of record, if any; affording the parties the right within ten days from
the date of notice to claim the vehicle or request a hearing pursuant to KRS
82.625. The notice shall state that, if no hearing is requested, the vehicle
shall be deemed abandoned unless the charges thereon are paid within 45 days of
receipt of notice.
      (2)   After 45 days from the date of notice required by statute, an
impounded motor vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and the vehicle shall
escheat, to the county.
      (3)   If the vehicle is judged suitable for use, the local government may
obtain a certificate of registration and ownership from the County Clerk
pursuant to KRS 186.020 and either use the vehicle for governmental purposes or
sell the vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder. If the vehicle is not
suitable for use, it may be sold for its scrap or junk value.
      (4)   The county shall possess a lien on a motor vehicle impounded
pursuant to KRS 82.625 for all storage charges, fines, penalties and fees
imposed thereon. Such lien shall be superior to and have priority over all
other liens thereon.
      (5)   If said vehicle is required to be held as evidence in a pending
court case, the vehicle may not be removed from the impoundment facility, or
otherwise disposed of, until a release has been given by the court in which the
case is pending.
(Ord. 96-1, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 35.05 COURT COSTS.
   (A)   Circuit Court fees. Pursuant to KRS Chapter 23A, the County Fiscal
Court assesses the following additional fees for the purpose of paying expenses
for the courthouse, its courthouse bonds, and administrative expenses as
follows.
      (1)   In civil cases; a fee of $25 shall be added to filing fees.
      (2)   In criminal cases, a cost of $25 shall be added to the court costs
that the defendant is required to pay.
      (3)   In civil cases that are appealed from the Circuit Court to the
Court of Appeals, a fee of $25 shall be added to the filing fees.
   (B)   District Court fees. Pursuant to KRS Chapter 24A, the County Fiscal
Court assesses the following additional fees for the purpose of paying expenses
for the courthouse, its courthouse bonds and administrative expenses as
follows:
      (1)   In all traffic offense cases, a fee of $10 shall be added to the
court costs.
      (2)   In probate cases, a filing fee of $10 shall be added to the court
costs.
      (3)   In misdemeanor cases, a cost of $20 shall be added to the court
costs.
      (4)   In small claims cases, a fee of $10 shall be added to all filing
fees.
      (5)   In civil cases, a fee of $10 shall be added to all filing fees.
   (C)   Sheriff fees. Pursuant to KRS Chapter 64, the County Fiscal Court
assesses the following additional fees on subpoena and civil summons service by
the Sheriff for the purpose of paying expenses for the courthouse, its
courthouse bonds, and administrative expenses of the courthouse as follows.
      (1)   In addition to the fees normally charged for the service of a
subpoena, the person requesting service shall be charged a fee of $10.
      (2)   In addition to the fees normally charged for the service of a civil
summons, the person requesting service shall be charged a fee of $10.
   (D)   Administration. Nothing in this section shall change all other fee
allocations allowed by statute. This section shall be in full force and effect
on the first day of July 2002. Hereafter, the Clerk of the Circuit and District
Court and the County Sheriff shall no later than monthly remit the Finance and
Administration Cabinet, or the County Treasurer, as appropriate, all the
increase fees set forth herein. The Fiscal Court shall expend said fees for the
purposes set forth.
(Ord. 2002-5, passed 6-24-2002)
§ 35.06 PER DIEM FEES; OUT-OF-COUNTY PRISONERS.
   (A)   A per diem fee per prisoner will be negotiated for all out-of-county
prisoners incarcerated in the county regional jail with said fee to be
determined by contract between Fiscal Court and the contracting county’s Fiscal
Court.
   (B)   The transferring county wishing to lodge a prisoner in the county jail
must first have the permission of the county jailer and must be responsible for
the transporting of the prisoner to and from the county regional jail.
   (C)   The transferring county shall remain fully responsible for any special
or unusual expenses incurred by the county in housing their prisoner or
prisoners, including, but not limited to, medical, dental and hospital
treatment, as well as for the repair of or replacement of any property
destroyed by said prisoner.
   (D) The transferring county shall immediately pick up and remove the
prisoner from the county regional jail upon notification by the county jailer.
   (E)   The county jailer shall have complete authority in acceptance,
supervision and removal of any out-of-county prisoners.
   (F)   All fees and expenses claimed owing to the county are payable within
30 days of presentation of a bill from the County Fiscal Court to the Fiscal
Court of the county of the prisoner’s origin.
   (G)   This section shall apply only to prisoners who have attained the age
of at least 18 years.
   (H)   The effective date of this section shall be November 25, 1991.
(Ord. 91-5, passed 11-12-1991)
§ 35.07 OCCUPIED REAL ESTATE FEE; FUNDING 911 SERVICES.
   (A)   There is hereby established, imposed, and implemented an annual parcel
fee on all occupied individual residential units and all occupied individual
commercial, religious, charitable, educational, and public use units located
within the territorial limits of the county, outside the limits of the City of
Paducah, as determined from the records of the County Property Valuation
Administrator's office. The fee shall be used for the delivery of enhanced 911
emergency telephone service as provided for by KRS 65.760 and the associated
maintenance of systems and devices, including but not limited to, operating
costs of the Paducah- McCracken County 911 Services Center and purchase and
maintenance of E911 equipment.
   (B)   (1)   The County Fiscal Court hereby imposes the following annual
parcel fees on all parcels of occupied real property, as more accurately
defined in division (C) below, which are located within the jurisdictional
limits of the county, outside the limits of the City of Paducah:
         (a)   Super commercial unit (contains structure in excess of 25,000
sq. ft.): $1,550.
         (b)   Large commercial unit (contains structure between 7,500 and
25,000 sq. ft.): $860.
         (c)   Medium commercial unit (contains structure between 2,500 and
7,500 sq. ft.): $325.
         (d)   Small commercial unit (structure between one and 2,500 sq. ft.):
$210.
         (e)   Parking lots (which shall include, but not be limited to,
parking lots, garages, or other areas designed for the parking of motor
vehicles as defined by KRS 186.010(4) whereby the owner, occupant, lessee, or
possessor of any portion of the parcel leases, rents, licenses, bails, or
otherwise allows the parking or storage of motor vehicles in exchange for
consideration): $150.
         (f)   Public use units (emergency service, governmental, religious,
charitable, and educational): $35.
         (g)   Residential units: $45.
      (2)   In the event a parcel is mixed use, the parcel shall be assessed at
the highest applicable assessment rate.
   (C)   Definitions.
      OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Each residential space designed and/or
utilized for occupancy for residential purposes and includes each apartment
and/or duplex unit, house, and mobile home as a separate residential unit.
      OCCUPIED COMMERCIAL UNIT. A non-residential building space of any size
designed and/or utilized for occupancy by an individual nonresidential business
or private enterprise which involves the manufacture, sale. lease, or rental of
goods, or services to the public.
      OCCUPIED PUBLIC USE UNIT. Any parcel owned or leased by:
         (a)   Any city, county, state, or federal government in which the
parcel is used for the purposes of conducting the regular business of its
government, its police department, or its fire department.
         (b)   A fire district so long as the parcel is used by the district to
deliver fire protection services pursuant to KRS Ch. 75.
         (c)   A non-residential building space of any size designed and/or
utilized for occupancy for religious activities and/or worship.
         (d)   A non-residential building space of any size designed and/or
utilized for occupancy for the carrying out a charitable purpose as determined
by § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   A non-residential building space of any size designed and/or
utilized for occupancy for the purpose of education, the administration thereof
or extracurricular activities.
   (D)   The 911 parcel fee shall be placed upon the county's property tax
bills prepared by the County PVA, County Sheriff and the County Clerk beginning
with the 2024 tax bill and continuing every year thereafter. The due dates
shall be the same as the property tax due dates set by statute.
   (E)   For the first year only, owners of all occupied residential rental
units shall be eligible to claim a rebate of $22.50 per unit against the annual
fee due. This rebate, which is the equivalent of a six-month share of the fee,
is granted to allow owners of rental property additional time to recover some
or all of the amount of the fee from tenants. In subsequent years, the full
amount of the annual 911 parcel fee shall be paid for all occupied residential
rental units. In order to be eligible forr this rebate, the property owner of
the occupied rental unit(s) shall complete and submit the form, attached to
Ordinance No. 2024-06, to the County Judge Executive, which shall be received
by the Judge Executive on or before March 1, 2025.
   (F)   Any property owner may appeal the classification of their property
under the terms of this section. However, an appeal shall not affect the date
the parcel fee is due. A property owner wishing to appeal a classification
shall file an appeal by delivering a notice of appeal to the County Judge
Executive by no later than December 1 of the year for which the fee is clue.
The Joint Appeals Board shall set a date for a meeting in which the property
owner can present evidence and otherwise be heard on the issue of
classification. The property owner shall bear the burden of proof that the
property has been incorrectly classified by clear and convincing evidence. The
county shall also have the right to present evidence of proof that the
classification is appropriate. If the property owner presents sufficient proof
of lack of occupancy and/or any other evidence to indicate that the parcel was
inappropriately classified, the Joint Appeals Board shall provide relief to the
party by a majority vote, including, but not limited to, a refund of all or a
portion of the parcel fee paid during the applicable tax year.
   (G)   All real estate parcel fees shall be collected by the County Sheriff.
   (H)   The real estate parcel fees collected shall be accounted for and kept
separate and apart from other accounts and may only be used for the funding of
emergency 911 services as permitted by state law and as more fully set forth in
§
30.09.
   (I)   The failure of any owner of real property to pay the fee as set forth
in this section shall be punishable as a Class A misdemeanor and/or by civil
collection process.
   (J)   As more fully set forth in §
30.09, the 911 Board shall review the fee imposed by this section and by no
later than April 1 of each year make a recommendation to the Fiscal Court as to
any adjustments to the then-effective parcel fee to ensure adequate funding of
the joint 911 services.
   (K)   Unless otherwise determined by the County Fiscal Court, commencing
April 1, 2025, and on April 1 of each successive year thereafter, all parcel
fees set forth in this section shall be automatically adjusted based on the
Urban Consumer Price Index for the South Region as published by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the prior January.
(Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-24-2024)
INVESTMENT, MANAGEMENT OF COUNTY FUNDS
§ 35.20 GENERAL INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court of the county at its December 19, 1994, meeting
hereby adopts the following investment policy and strategy with respect to the
investment of all funds, as required by KRS 66.480.
   (B)   The county hereby authorizes the following parties and individuals to
invest the county’s funds, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
section: the County Treasurer.
   (C)   Funds not needed for current expenses or obligations of the county may
be invested in any of the following:
      (1)   Obligations of the United States and of its agencies and
instrumentalities, including obligations subject to repurchase agreements,
provided that delivery of these obligations subject to repurchase agreements is
taken either directly or through an authorized custodian. The investments may
be accomplished through repurchase agreements reached with sources including,
but not limited to, national or state banks chartered in the state;
      (2)   Obligations and contracts for future delivery or purchase of
obligations backed by the full faith and credit of the United States or a
United States government agency, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   United States Treasury;
         (b)   Export-Import Bank of the United States;
         (c)   Farmers Home Administration;
         (d)   Government National Mortgage Corporation; and
         (e)   Merchant Marine bonds.
      (3)   Obligations of any corporation of the United States government,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation;
         (b)   Federal Farm Credit Banks;
         (c)   Bank for Cooperatives;
         (d)   Federal Intermediate Credit Banks;
         (e)   Federal Land Banks;
         (f)   Federal Home Loan Banks;
         (g)   Federal National Mortgage Association; and
         (h)   Tennessee Valley Authority.
      (4)   Certificates of deposits issued by or other interest-bearing
accounts of any bank or savings and loan institution which are insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar entity or which are
collateralized to the extent uninsured, by any obligations permitted by KRS
41.240(4);
      (5)   Uncollateralized certificates of deposit issued by any bank or
savings and loan institution rates in one of the three highest categories by a
nationally recognized rating agency;
      (6)   Bankers’ acceptances for banks rated in one of the three highest
categories by a nationally recognized rating agency;
      (7)   Commercial paper rated in the highest category by a nationally
recognized rating agency;
      (8)   Bonds or certificates of indebtedness of this state and of its
agencies and instrumentalities; and
      (9)   Securities issued by a state or local government, or any
instrumentality or agency thereof, in the United States, and rated in one of
the three highest categories by a nationally recognized rating agency.
   (D)   The investment authority outlined above shall be subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   The amount of money invested at any time by the county in one or
more of the categories of investments authorized by divisions (C)(5), (C)(6),
(C)(7) and (C)(8) above shall not exceed 20% of the total amount of money
invested by the county; and
      (2)   The county shall not purchase any investment on a margin basis or
though the use of any similar leveraging technique.
   (E)   The county hereby adopts the following standards for written
agreements pursuant to which investment are made.
      (1)   The Fiscal Court should determine who is authorized to sign the
written agreement, whether that agreement needs to be signed by more than one
party; whether the agreement as a whole will need to be approved by Fiscal
Court.
      (2)   The county should include any other requirements that it may want
to make as a standard for the written agreement.
   (F)   The county hereby adopts the following procedures for monitoring
controls, deposit or retention of investments and collateral:
      (1)   Working with the county’s investment advisor, the county should
make such determinations as to how often a report will be received on the
deposits;
      (2)   Where the deposits or investments will be physically located;
      (3)   Whether a third-party custodian is desired or required for the
collateral;
      (4)   Whether the county actually wants to take possession and control of
the investment security, or if that will be left with the county’s bank/
trustee; and
      (5)   The county should include any additional controls recommended by
the investment advisor or the county’s Auditor.
   (G)   The county hereby adopts the following standards for diversification
investments, including diversification with respect to the types of investments
and firm with which the county transacts business. The Fiscal Court should
determine how much of the county’s investment should be in any one type of
investment and how transactions will be executed.
   (H)   The county hereby adopts the following standards for the qualification
of investment agents authorized to transact business with the county: the
Fiscal Court should determine what criteria to use in choosing investment
advisors, such as licensed to do business in the state, the investment
advisor’s experience, the capitalization of the investment advisor or any other
factors the Fiscal Court deems appropriate in determining whether the firm is
capable and qualified to transact business with the county.
   (I)   The county hereby requests that it receive reports on the status of
investment of funds on a (monthly, quarterly) basis.
(Res. passed 12-19-1994)
§ 35.21 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS; MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Allocation of motor vehicle rental license fee. The corporation has
made a written request for funds from the county’s motor vehicle license fees
to pay, in part, the principal and interest due on the interim financing
through Citizens Bank & Trust Co., Paducah, Kentucky and/or the notes and to
provide for the costs of such additional airport improvements as may be needed
from time to time, and the Fiscal Court does herewith allocate to the
corporation the motor vehicle license fee receipts for such purposes
semiannually on May 31 and November 30 of each year for the purpose of
promoting the economic development of the county, which receipts may be used by
the corporation for its lawful purposes, including but not limited to the
payment of such interim financing and/or notes and the costs of such additional
airport improvements as may be needed from time to time; provided, however,
such allocation may be terminated by the Fiscal Court on any May 31 or November
30, by ordinance of the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Further acts and deeds. The County Judge/Executive, the County Clerk
and the County Attorney are hereby authorized and directed to execute,
acknowledge and deliver on behalf of the County all documents, and to do all
things necessary or desirable for effecting this section, provided that neither
the county nor any of its magistrates, commissioners, officers, employees or
agents incur any general liability thereby.
(Ord. 95-1, passed 5-22-1995)
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
§ 35.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit. BUSINESS shall not
include a board of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations or unions,
or other associations performing services usually performed by trade
associations or unions as recognized by the Internal Revenue Service. BUSINESS
shall not include funds, foundations, corporations or associations organized
and operated for the exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable,
scientific, literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where no part
of the earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group or association, inures
to the benefit of any private shareholder or other person.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company,
business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership, registered
limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association, joint stock
company, receivership, trust, professional service organization or other legal
entity through which business is conducted.
   CITY OF PADUCAH OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX CREDIT. The credit allowable to a
business or business entity within the territorial boundaries of the City of
Paducah, to apply to the amount owed by the same to the county pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter in an amount equal to the amount actually paid by
such business or business entity to the City of Paducah as an occupational
licensing fee. The CITY OF PADUCAH OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX CREDIT shall apply
and be allowable only to the immediately preceding taxable year for which the
business or business entity is presently required to submit a return in the
current year. The CITY OF PADUCAH OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE CREDIT is expressly
inapplicable to delinquent returns that pre-date the immediately preceding
taxable year.
   COMPENSATION. Wages, salaries, commissions or any other form of remuneration
paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an employee, which are
required to be reported for federal income tax purposes and adjusted as
follows:
      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any retirement,
profit sharing, or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred for federal
income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar arrangement,
including, but not limited to, salary reduction arrangements under §§ 401(a),
401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h) or 457 of the Internal Revenue
Code; and
      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any welfare
benefit, fringe benefit, or other benefit plan made by salary reduction or
other payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce federal taxable
compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including, but not limited to, §§
125 and 132 of the Internal Revenue Code.
   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business entity’s
federal income tax return become final and unappealable.
   COUNTY. McCracken County of Kentucky.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any business
entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and any officer,
employee, or elected official of the United States, a state, or any political
subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any one or more of
the above. A person classified as an independent contractor under the Internal
Revenue Code shall not be considered an EMPLOYEE.
   EMPLOYER. The person for whom an individual performs or performed any
service, of whatever nature, as the employee of such person, except that:
      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or performed the
services does not have control of the payment of the wages for such services,
the term EMPLOYER means the person having control of the payment of such wages;
and
      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a nonresident
alien individual, foreign partnership, or foreign corporation, not engaged in
trade or business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER means such
person.
   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent’s report or
other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service.
   FISCAL YEAR. Fiscal year as defined in § 7701(a)(24) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code in effect on December 31,
2003, exclusive of any amendments made subsequent to that date, other than
amendments that extend provisions in effect on December 31, 2003, that would
otherwise terminate.
   NET PROFIT. Gross income as defined in § 61 of the Internal Revenue Code
minus all the deductions from gross income allowed by Chapter 1 of the Internal
Revenue Code, and adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax or local
tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or net income
and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States, local taxing
authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, any territory or possession of the United States, or any foreign country
or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly or
indirectly is allocable to income, which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;
      (3)   Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss carryback or
carryforward allowed under § 172 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      (4)   Include any amount of income and expenses passed through separately
as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business entity that
is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and
      (5)   Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state taxation by
the State Constitution, or the Constitution and statutory laws of the United
States.
   PERSON. Every natural person, whether a resident or nonresident of the
county. Whenever the word PERSON is used in a clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as applied to a
partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the partners
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and
directors thereof.
   RETURN or REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form,
statement, certification, declaration or any other document permitted or
required to be submitted or filed with the county.
   SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods, services or
property.
   TAX DISTRICT. Any county or city with the authority to levy net profits or
occupational license taxes.
   TAXABLE NET PROFIT. In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue only within the county means net profit as defined herein.
   TAXABLE NET PROFIT. In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue both within and without the county means net profit as defined herein,
and as apportioned under §
35.38.
   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar
year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007; Ord. 2018-05, passed 8-13-2018)
§ 35.36 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Every person or business entity engaged in any trade, occupation or
profession, or other activity for profit or anyone required to file a return
under this subchapter in the county shall be required to complete and execute
the questionnaire prescribed by the occupational tax office. Each person shall
be required to complete a separate questionnaire for each separate business
before the commencement of business or in the event of a status change, other
than change of address. Licensees are required to notify the occupational tax
office of changes of address, or the cessation of business activity, and of
other changes, which render inaccurate the information supplied in the
completed questionnaire.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.37 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) and (E) below, every person or
business entity engaged in any business for profit and any person or business
entity that is required to make a filing with the Internal Revenue Service or
the Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and pay to the county an
occupational license tax for the privilege of engaging in such activities
within the county. The occupational license tax shall be measured by 1% of:
      (1)   All wages and compensation paid or payable in the county for work
done or services performed or rendered in the county by every resident and
nonresident who is an employee; and
      (2)   The net profit from business conducted in the county by a resident
or nonresident business entity.
   (B)   All partnerships, S corporations, and all other entities where income
is “passed through” to the owners are subject to this section. The occupational
license tax imposed in this subchapter is assessed against income before it is
“passed through” these entities to the owners.
   (C)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or withdraws from
the county during any taxable year, or if any business entity in any manner
surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the dissolution,
cessation of business, withdrawal or loss or surrender of charter shall not
defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and collection of any
occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year during which the
business entity had business activity in the county.
   (D)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal income
tax return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for the purposes of
this subchapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year required by
the federal government, and shall employ the same methods of accounting
required for federal income tax purposes.
   (E)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not apply
to the following persons or business entities:
      (1)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust company, combined
trust, banking and title business organized and doing business in this state,
any savings and loan association whether state or federally chartered;
      (2)   Any compensation received by members of the state national guard
for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual field training;
      (3)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training
or work at election booths in state, the county, and local primary, regular or
special elections;
      (4)   Public Service Corporations that pay an ad valorem tax on property
valued and assessed by the State Department of Revenue pursuant to the
provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are predominantly non-
public service who are also engaged in public service activity are required to
pay a license fee on their net profit derived from the non-public service
activities apportioned to the county;
      (5)   Persons or business entities that have been issued a license under
KRS Chapter 243 to engage in manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic
beverages. Persons engaged in the business of manufacturing or trafficking in
alcoholic beverages are required to file a return, but may exclude the portion
of their net profits derived from the manufacturing or trafficking in alcoholic
beverages;
      (6)   Insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing
business in the Commonwealth of Kentucky except as provided in KRS 91A.080;
      (7)   Any profits, earnings, distributions of an investment fund which
would qualify under KRS 154.20-250 to 154.20-284 to the extent any profits,
earnings or distributions would not be taxable to an individual investor;
      (8)   All employees earning compensation within the county whose gross
receipts does not exceed $2,500, shall be exempt from the payment of this
license fee or tax. If the employers of any such exempt taxpayers have withheld
from such taxpayers and paid the taxes or fees to the county, the employees who
earn less and $2,500 during the fiscal year shall be required to file returns
in order to be entitled to a refund of the fees or taxes paid during such
fiscal year; or
      (9)   All business’s or business entities whose net profits realized from
such activity does not exceed $2,500 taxable year (based on the prior taxable
year used for reporting state income taxes) shall be exempt from the payment of
this license fee or tax.
   (F)   All businesses or business entities within the territorial boundaries
of the City of Paducah, and paying a license fee to the City of Paducah shall
be entitled to credit for such fees paid to the City of Paducah against the
fees imposed by the county in an amount equal to the amount actually paid by
the business or business entity to the City of Paducah during the immediately
preceding taxable year for which the business of business entity is presently
required to submit a return in the current year. The City of Paducah
Occupational License Credit is expressly inapplicable to delinquent returns
that pre-date the immediately preceding taxable year.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007; Ord. 2018-05, passed 8-13-2018)
§ 35.38 APPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) below, net profit shall be
apportioned as follows.
      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales revenue in more
than one tax district, by multiplying the net profit by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in division (B) below, plus
the sales factor, described in division (C) below, and the denominator of which
is two.
      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than one tax
district, by multiplying the net profit by the sales factor as set forth in
division (C) below.
      (3)   For the purposes of divisions (A) through (D) herein, the business
entity shall file an apportionment form provided by the occupational tax
office.
   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
amount paid or payable in The county during the tax period by the business
entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total compensation
paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax period.
Compensation is paid or payable in the county based on the time the
individual’s service is performed within the county.
   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
sales revenue of he business entity in the county during the tax period, and
the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity
everywhere during the tax period.
      (1)   The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property is in the
county if:
         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than
the United States government, or to the designee of the purchaser within the
county regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions of the sale; or
         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse,
factory or other place of storage in the county and the purchaser is the United
States government.
      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenue from the sale, lease or rental
of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real property, are
apportioned to the county based upon a fraction, the numerator of which is the
time spent in performing such income-producing activity within the county and
the denominator of which is the total time spent performing that income-
producing activity.
      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real property is
allocated to the tax district where the property is located.
   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity’s activity in the county, the
business entity may petition the county or the county may require, in respect
to all or any part of the business entity’s business activity, if reasonable:
      (1)   Separate accounting;
      (2)   The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;
      (3)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors which will fairly
represent the business entity’s business activity in the county; or
      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable
allocation and apportionment of net profit.
   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the county, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or payable
as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the county.
The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage, which the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the county bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the county to
verify the accuracy of a taxpayer’s reported percentages under this division
(E), the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.39 EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.
   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee shall
deduct and withhold upon the payment of the compensation any tax imposed
against the compensation by the county. Amounts withheld shall be paid to the
county in accordance with §
35.37.
   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter ending
thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of each
quarter, make a return and report to the county, and pay to the county, the tax
required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is permitted or
required to report within a reasonable time after some other period as
determined by the county.
   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the county any sums
required by this subchapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the county for any sum or sums withheld or required to
be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   The county shall have a lien upon all the property of any employer who
fails to withhold or pay over to the county sums required to be withheld under
this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the amounts withheld
to the county, the lien shall commence as of the date the amounts withheld were
required to be paid to the county. If the employer fails to withhold, the lien
shall commence at the time the liability of the employer is assessed by the
county.
   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and file on a
form furnished or approved by the county a reconciliation of the occupational
license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to employees. Either
copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage and tax statements, or
a detailed employee listing with the required equivalent information, as
determined by the county, shall be submitted.
   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or before
January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and occupational
license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid to the employee
for payment to the county during the preceding calendar year.
   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be
deducted and withheld under this section.
   (H)   The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any other
person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity subject to
this subchapter shall be personally and individually liable, both jointly and
severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation paid to one or
more employees of any business entity, and neither the corporate dissolution or
withdrawal of the business entity from the county, nor the cessation of holding
any corporate office, shall discharge that liability of any person; provided
that the personal and individual liability shall apply to each or every person
holding the corporate office at the time the tax becomes or became obligated.
No person shall be personally and individually liable under this division (H)
who had no authority to collect, truthfully account for, or pay over any tax
imposed by this subchapter at the time that the taxes imposed by this
subchapter become or became due.
   (I)   Every employee receiving compensation in the county subject to the tax
imposed under §
35.37 shall be personally liable for the tax notwithstanding the provisions of
divisions (G) and (H) above. In all cases where the employer does not withhold
the tax levied under this subchapter from the employee, such employee or
employees shall be responsible for filing with the county each quarter in the
same manner as if they were the employer. If an employer fails to or is not
required to withhold, report or pay the license fee, it shall become the duty
of the employee to file with the county.
      (1)   The only employer that is not required to withhold, report and pay
the occupational license tax is the federal government, including the United
States Postal Service. The payment required to be made by an employee, can be
made quarterly, for the periods ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and
December 31 of each year, or at any time the employee wishes to make an
estimated payment for the year in which wages are earned. All license fees must
be received by February 28 for the preceding calendar year, together with a
copy of the employee’s W-2 form. Employers not required to withhold, report or
pay the license fee must annually during the month of January of each year,
make a return to the Occupational Tax Administrator, in which is set forth the
name and Social Security number of each employee of the employer during the
preceding calendar year, giving the amount of salaries, wages, commissions or
other compensation earned during such preceding year by each such employee.
      (2)   This list shall include all current full-time employees, part-time
employees, temporary employees and terminated employees whether it be voluntary
or involuntary.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.40 RETURNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be
made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a fiscal
year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be supplied by the
occupational tax office.
   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of its federal income tax
return and all supporting statements and schedules at the time of filing its
occupational license tax return with the county. Whenever, in the opinion of
the county, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax return of any
business entity in order to audit the return, the county may compel the
business entity to produce for inspection a copy of any statements and
schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. the county
may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the federal
government.
   (C)   Every business entity subject to a occupational license tax governed
by the provisions of this subchapter shall keep records, render under oath
statements, make returns and comply with rules as the county from time to time
may prescribe. Whenever the county deems it necessary, the county may require a
business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a return,
render statements under oath, or keep records, as the county deems sufficient
to determine the tax liability the business entity.
   (D)   The county may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the
taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of
the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as
appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the county at the time
prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return, determined without
regard to any extension of time for filing the return.
   (F)   It shall be the responsibility of persons who make Federal Form 1099
non-employee compensation payments to natural persons other than employees for
services performed within the county, to maintain records of such payments and
to report such payments to the county.
      (1)   Said payments must be reported on by remitting Federal Form 1099 by
February 28 of the year following the close of the calendar year in which the
non-employee compensation was paid. If a business entity or person is not
required to remit Federal Form 1099 to the IRS, including, but not limited to,
payments less than $600, they are still liable to remit the equivalent
information to the county.
      (2)   The information required to be reported by said licensee shall
include:
         (a)   Payer’s name, address, Social Security and/or federal
identification number;
         (b)   Recipient’s name and address;
         (c)   Recipient’s Social Security and/or federal identification
number;
         (d)   Amount of non-employee compensation paid in the calendar year;
and
         (e)   Amount of non-employee compensation earned in the county for the
calendar year.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.41 EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The county may grant any business entity an extension of not more than
six months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue
Service or is agreed to by the county and the business entity, for filing its
return, if the business entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment of
the occupational license tax, requests the extension and pays the amount
properly estimated as its tax.
   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business entity shall
pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on
the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously paid, from the time
the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the
county. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.42 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under §
35.39, a refund or credit shall be made to the employer only to the extent that
the amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld under §
35.39 by the employer.
   (B)   Unless written application for refund or credit is received by the
county from the employer within two years from the date the overpayment was
made, no refund or credit shall be allowed.
   (C)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities performed
outside the county, based on time spent outside the county, whose employer has
withheld and remitted to the county, the occupational license tax on the
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the county, may file
for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing of a
return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation sufficient to
verify the refund claim and the county may confirm with the employer the
percentage of time spent outside the county and the amount of compensation
attributable to activities performed outside the county prior to approval of
the refund.
   (D)   In the case where the tax computed under this subchapter is less than
the amount, which has been declared and paid as estimated tax for the same
taxable year, a refund shall be made upon the filing of a return.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.43 FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   As soon as practicable after each return is received, the county may
examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by the county is
greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional tax
shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by
the county within five years from the date the return was filed, except as
otherwise provided in this division (A).
      (1)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent return
the additional tax may be assessed at any time.
      (2)   In the case of a return where a business entity understates net
profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net profits, or both, which
understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of 25% of the amount of net
profit stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time
within six years after the return was filed.
      (3)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly to
adjustments resulting from a final determination of a federal audit, the
additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the times provided in
this division (A), or six months from the date the county receives the final
determination of the federal audit from the business entity, whichever is
later.
         (a)   The times provided in this division (A)(3) may be extended by
agreement between the business entity and the county.
         (b)   For the purposes of this division (A), a return filed before the
last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall be considered as filed
on the last day.
         (c)   Any extension granted for filing the return shall also be
considered as extending the last day prescribed by law for filing the return.
   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination
of the federal audit within 30 days of the conclusion of the federal audit.
   (C)   The county may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) above.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.44 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the
collection or payment of the tax levied by this subchapter.
   (B)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may be
refunded or credited within two years of the date prescribed by law for the
filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the county, whichever is
the later, except that:
      (1)   In any case where the assessment period contained in §
35.43 has been extended by an agreement between the business entity and the
county, the limitation contained in this division (B) shall be extended
accordingly;
      (2)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to adjustments
resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file a claim for
refund or credit within the time provided for in this division (B) or six
months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later. For the
purposes of this division (B)(2) and division (B)(3) below, a return filed
before the last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall be considered
as filed on the last day; and
      (3)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected
pursuant to this subchapter is vested exclusively in the county.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.45 INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   No present or former employee of the county shall intentionally and
without authorization inspect or divulge any information acquired by him or her
of the affairs of any person, or information regarding the tax schedules,
returns or reports required to be filed with the county or other proper
officer, or any information produced by a hearing or investigation, insofar as
the information may have to do with the affairs of the person’s business.
      (1)   This prohibition does not extend to information required in
prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or any other
infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public record, nor
does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer’s properly authorized
agent with information respecting his or her own return.
      (2)   Further, this prohibition does not preclude any employee of the
county from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence returns or
reports filed with the county, in an action for violation of a the county tax
laws or in any action challenging county laws.
   (B)   The county reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of
Revenue of the commonwealth or his or her duly authorized agent all such
information and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the county if
the Commissioner of Revenue of the commonwealth grants to the county the
reciprocal right to obtain information form the files and records of the State
Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged character of the information
so furnished; provided, further, that the county may publish statistics based
on such information in such a manner as not to reveal data respecting net
profits or compensation of any person or business entity.
   (C)   In addition, the county is empowered to execute similar reciprocity
agreements as described in division (B) above with any other taxing entity,
should there be a need for exchange of information in order to effect diligent
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007)
§ 35.46 REGULATION, ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION OF THE
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX AND THE USE THEREOF.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to collect all license fees
and deposit the same in the General Fund of the county, to be used to defray
the general expenses of the county government. The Administrator shall have the
power, and it shall be his/her duty to make and publish such rules and
regulations as may be required for reporting, paying, and receipting all such
license fees and for all other requirements in the proper and efficient
administration of this subchapter.
   (B)   McCracken County Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce
the criminal penalty provisions of the penalties section of this subchapter.
Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to investigate into alleged criminal
violations and issue criminal complaints against any person, business, business
entity, or employer which the Officer has probable cause to believe has
committed a criminal violation of this subchapter. Code Enforcement Officer
participation in the enforcement of this subchapter shall not exclude other law
enforcement agencies or officers from engaging in enforcement. At all times
during and after their enforcement of this subchapter, Code Enforcement
Officers are subject to the rules of confidentiality as stated in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-16, passed - -2007; Ord. 2024-17, passed 12-16-2024)
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
§ 35.60 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the procedures for the
collection, use, disbursements, and enforcement of the transient room tax.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 35.61 TRANSIENT ROOM TAX LEVY AND USE.
   (A)   A transient room tax, which may be adjusted from time to time, shall
be levied within the geographical jurisdiction of the county on every person,
group, or organization doing business as a motor court, motel, hotel, inn, bed
and breakfast, or like or similar accommodations, consisting of a percentage of
the rent charged for every occupancy of a suite, room, rooms, cabins, lodgings,
campsites, or other accommodations charged by any hotel, motel, inn, tourist
camp, tourist cabin, campground, recreational vehicle park, or any other place
in which accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for consideration
or by any person that facilitates the rental of the accommodations by
brokering, coordinating, or in any other way arranging for the rental of the
accommodations.
   (B)   This transient room tax within the geographic jurisdiction of the
county shall be in a total amount equal to 6% of the rent charged for each
individual occupancy referenced above, and shall consist of the following
individually-identified percentages with revenues from these percentages being
used for the following individually-identified purposes:
      (1)   A tax of 3% on the rent for every occupancy of a suite room, rooms,
cabins, lodgings, campsites, or other accommodations charged by any hotel,
motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, recreational vehicle park,
or any other place in which accommodations are regularly furnished to
transients for consideration or by any person that facilitates the rental of
the accommodations by brokering, coordinating, or in any other way arranging
for the rental of the accommodations is hereby levied for use by the McCracken
Sports Tourism Commission for the purpose of promoting and developing
convention and tourist activities and facilities in the county.
         (a)   Pursuant to KRS 91A.390(3), a portion of the money collected
from the imposition of this tax as determined by the County Fiscal Court, upon
advice and consent of the Sports Tourism Commission, may be used to finance the
cost of acquisition, construction, operation and maintenance of facilities
useful in the attraction and promotion of tourist and convention business.
         (b)   Pursuant to KRS 91A.390(3) and KRS 91A.350, the balance of the
money collected from the imposition of this tax shall be used for the purpose
of promoting and developing convention and tourist activities and facilities.
      (2)   An additional tax of 2% shall be levied on the rent for every
occupancy of a suite, room, rooms, cabins, lodgings, campsites, or other
accommodations charged by any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin,
campground, recreational vehicle park, or any other place in which
accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for consideration or by
any person that facilitates the rental of the accommodations by brokering,
coordinating, or in any other way arranging for the rental of the
accommodations, and shall be applied to the retirement of bonds issued pursuant
to KRS 91 A.390(a) to finance in part the expansion or construction or
operation of a governmental or non-profit convention center or fine arts center
useful to the promotion of tourism located in the county.
      (3)   An additional tax of 1% shall be levied on the rent for every
occupancy of a suite, room, rooms, cabins, lodgings, campsites, or other
accommodations charged by any hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, tourist cabin,
campground, recreational vehicle park, or any other place in which
accommodations are regularly furnished to transients for consideration or by
any person that facilitates the rental of the accommodations by brokering,
coordinating, or in any other way arranging for the rental of the
accommodations for the purpose of meeting and paying the operating expenses of
a convention center designated by the County Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 35.62 EXCEPTIONS.
   Transient room taxes shall not apply to rooms, lodgings, campsites, or
accommodations supplied for a continuous period of 30 days or more to a person.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 35.63 COLLECTIONS.
   All persons, groups, organizations or businesses, as identified in §
35.61 above, must file a monthly report in a manner and on a form prescribed by
the County Treasurer.
   (A)   The report shall be filed with the County Treasurer on or before the
twentieth day of every month for the previous month, and covering a period
beginning on the first day of the previous month and ending on the last day of
the previous month. A report must be filed, regardless of any funds or taxes
collected.
   (B)   A report shall be filed, regardless of whether any funds were
collected and taxes are due.
   (C)   Any tax payments shall be remitted with the report.
   (D)   Any late fee and interest shall be remitted with the report.
   (E)   Any filing received, or United States postmarked, after the twentieth
day following the reporting period, shall be deemed late, and shall be charged
the following interest and penalties.
      (1)   A late fee of 10% of the tax due per month (or daily fraction
thereof) shall be assessed. The minimum late fee assessed shall be not less
than $25.
      (2)   An interest charge of 7% per annum on all late remittances shall be
assessed.
   (F)   For the purpose of verifying information, the Treasurer may require
the submission of certified copies of other state and federal tax documents.
   (G)   All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be maintained in a
separate account.
   (H)   All host participants in internet-brokering arrangements to rent
rooms, houses, farms, cabins, campsites, dwellings, recreational vehicles with
companies such as Air BNB, VRBO, or similar type businesses shall register with
the County Treasurer, providing the precise location of their rental-type unit
(s), along with their tax identification numbers, for the individual or company
receiving the income from the rental-type unit(s).
      (1)   The host participant shall be required to file all reports and
comply with all sections of this subchapter.
      (2)   However, if the internet-brokering service enters into an
enforceable written agreement with the County Fiscal Court to report, collect
and remit the taxes imposed by this subchapter, then the host participant shall
be excepted from the reporting requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022) Penalty, see
§
35.99
§ 35.64 DISBURSEMENTS.
   The County Treasurer shall make monthly disbursements, which may be adjusted
from time to time by the County Fiscal Court, in the following manner:
 
Agency                              Transient Room Tax Distribution Percentage
County Sports Tourism Commission    3%                 50%
Convention Center and Fine Arts     2%                 33.33%
Center Escrow Account
County Convention Center designated 1%                 16.67%
by the County Fiscal Court
TOTALS                              6%                 100%
Penalties and interest as a result of late payments shall be disbursed at the
same rates. The County Treasurer must use reasonable efforts to make
disbursements on or before the tenth day of the month.
 
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 35.65 DESIGNATION OF CONVENTION CENTER.
   Effective September 1, 2019, and until further orders of the County Fiscal
Court indicate otherwise, the Paducah-McCracken County Convention Center
Corporation is designated as the County Convention Center to which the above-
referenced 1% of transient room tax funds will be disbursed.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
§ 35.66 AUDIT AUTHORIZED.
   All persons, groups, organizations or businesses, as identified in §
35.61 above and subject to the provisions of this subchapter, shall maintain a
record showing gross room rentals and permanent guest rentals, but a separate
record shall not be required if the taxpayer’s regular records contain such
information. Whenever the County Treasurer considers it necessary for the
proper administration of this subchapter, a taxpayer shall permit an officer or
employee of the county to make an audit of such records and any other books,
papers, files and property of the taxpayer, and to examine witnesses under oath
for the purpose of determining whether any provisions of this subchapter are
being violated.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX
§ 35.75 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INSURANCE COMPANY. Any entity authorized to transact insurance business in
the Commonwealth of Kentucky in accordance with KRS Chapter 304. Also included
within the definition of an INSURANCE COMPANY is any surplus lines broker
licensed in accordance with KRS Chapter 304, Subtitle 10.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A city, county, charter county, consolidated local
government, urban-county government, or unified local government that imposes a
license fee or tax upon insurance premium receipts.
   PREMIUM. The consideration paid to obtain insurance, by whatever name
called. Any assessment, or any membership, policy, survey, inspection, service
or similar fee or other charge in consideration for an insurance contract is
deemed part of the premium. (KRS 304.14-030)
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.76 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   Pursuant to KRS 91A.080, there is hereby imposed on each insurance company a
tax for the privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the
county.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.77 GENERAL INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX - NOT A LIFE INSURANCE POLICY.
   Except as provided in §
35.80, the tax imposed upon each insurance company with respect to any
insurance policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be calculated on
the basis of the premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter by
reason of the issuance of such policies on risks located within the county and
shall be of the specific percentages delineated below. The tax shall apply only
to those classes of business which such insurance company is authorized to
transact, less all premiums returned to policyholders. The present levy shall
be based upon the following specific percentages of calendar quarter premiums
actually collected with respect to the taxable policies below:
   (A)   Casualty: 4.9%;
   (B)   Automobile: 6.9%;
   (C)   Inland marine: 4.9%;
   (D)   Fire and allied perils: 4.9%;
   (E)   Health: none;
   (F)   Life: 6.9%;
   (G)   All other risks: 4.9%.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.78 LIFE INSURANCE POLICY PREMIUM TAX.
   The license tax imposed upon an insurance company with respect to life
insurance policies shall be 6.9% and shall be based upon the first year’s
premiums only. The tax shall be applied to the amount of the premiums actually
collected within each calendar quarter upon the lives of persons residing
within the county.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.79 COUNTYWIDE APPLICATION.
   Pursuant to KRS 91A.080(14), the tax created herein shall apply to the
entirety of the county, including the incorporated portions thereof within the
geographical boundaries of the City of Paducah.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.80 EXCEPTIONS TO INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX APPLICATION.
   The present tax imposed upon insurance premium receipts shall not apply to
the following:
   (A)   Policies of employee group health insurance regardless of whether such
policies are provided for state employees, local governmental employees,
municipal employees or employees engaged in the various private sector
operations;
   (B)   Health insurance policies issued to individuals including policies
issued through Kentucky Access;
   (C)   Worker’s compensation insurance;
   (D)   Annuities;
   (E)   Federal flood insurance;
   (F)   Municipal bonds, leases, or other debt instruments issued by or on
behalf of the county unless the bonds, leases, or other debt instruments are
issued for profit or on behalf of for-profit or private organizations;
   (G)   Policies of high deductible health plans as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 223
(c)(2), commonly referred to as health savings accounts;
   (H)   Policies of insurance, insured or reinsured by the Federal Crop
Insurance Corporation, 7 CFR 400.352(b)(2);
   (I)   Policies insuring or naming the state or one of its agencies or
political subdivisions as an insured and surety bonds where the state or one of
its agencies or political subdivisions is the obligee. For the purposes of
local government premium tax payments, school districts are considered agencies
of the state and policies insuring school districts and bonds with school
districts as the obligee are exempt from local government premium taxes;
   (J)   Policies issued to public service companies which pay ad valorem
taxes;
   (K)   Entities issued a certificate of authority to do business in Kentucky
only as a health maintenance organization pursuant to KRS 304.38-060;
   (L)   Entities issued a certificate of authority to do business in Kentucky
as a captive insurer pursuant to KRS 304.49-010;
   (M)   Domestic life insurance companies electing to be taxed under the
provisions of KRS 136.320;
   (N)   Fraternal benefit societies pursuant to KRS 304.29-241.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.81 DUE DATE; INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   The insurance premium tax created herein shall be due no later than 30 days
after the end of each calendar quarter. The payment shall be submitted to the
local government, together with Form LGT-141, on or before the due date. Any
tax not paid on or before the due date shall bear interest from the date due
until paid at the interest rate established annually by the Department of
Revenue for unpaid or underpaid taxes pursuant to KRS 131.010(6). This interest
shall be paid to the local government together with the license fee or tax that
is due. In addition, the insurance company shall pay to the local government a
penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax due on a tax not paid within 30 days
after the due date.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.82 ANNUAL RECONCILIATION.
   In accordance with KRS 91A.080(8) and 806 KAR 2:095, each insurance company
subject to the tax imposed herein shall annually, by March 31, furnish the
local government a written breakdown of all premium collections in the
preceding calendar year for the following categories of insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine;
   (D)   Fire and allied perils;
   (E)   Life; and
   (F)   All other risks.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.83 REMITTANCE OF PAYMENTS.
   All tax payments shall be remitted to McCracken County Treasurer, 301
Clarence Gaines Street, Paducah, Kentucky 42001.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   A business entity subject to tax on net profits may be subject
to a penalty equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month or fraction
thereof if the business entity:
         (a)   Fails to file any return or report on or before the due date
prescribed for filing or as extended by the county;
         (b)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on or
before the due date prescribed for payment; or
         (c)   The total penalty levied pursuant to this division (B) shall not
exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less than
$25.
      (2)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or
before the date prescribed under §
35.39 may be subject to a penalty in an amount equal to 5% of the tax due for
each calendar month or fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to
this division (B) shall not exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the
penalty shall not be less than $25.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to
12% per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously paid,
from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the county. A fraction
of a month is counted as an entire month.
      (4)   Every tax imposed by §§
35.35 through
35.45, and all increases, interest and penalties thereon, shall become, from
the time the tax is due and payable, a personal debt of the taxpayer to the
county.
      (5)   The county may enforce the collection of the occupational tax due
under §
35.37 and any fees, penalties and interest as provided in divisions (B)(1), (B)
(2), (B)(3) and (B)(4) above by civil action in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction. To the extent authorized by law, the county shall be entitled to
recover all court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by it in
enforcing any provision of §§
35.35 through
35.45.
      (6)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
person, business entity or employer who willfully fails to make a return,
willfully makes a false return, or who willfully fails to pay taxes owing or
collected, with the intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected, or
any part thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
      (7)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels
or advises the preparation or presentation under, or in connection with, any
matter arising under §§
35.35 through
35.45 of a return, affidavit, claim, or other document, which is fraudulent or
is false as to any material matter, whether or not the falsity or fraud is with
the knowledge or consent of the person authorized or required to present the
return, affidavit, claim or document, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
      (8)   A return for the purpose of this section shall mean and include any
return, declaration or form prescribed by the county and required to be filed
with the county by the provisions of §§
35.35 through
35.45, or by the rules of the county or by written request for information to
the business entity by the county.
      (9)   Any person violating the provisions of §
35.45 by intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer information without
authorization, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not longer
than six months, or both.
      (10)   Any person violating the provisions of §
35.45 by divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be fined not more
than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
35.60 through
35.66 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both, for each offense. Every month for which a report was not properly filed
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 8-21-2019; Ord. 2022-09, passed 11-21-2022)
CHAPTER 36: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Section
   
36.01   Administrative Code incorporated by reference
§ 36.01 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   Pursuant to KRS 67.077(4), the McCracken County Administrative Code is
attached hereto Ordinance No. 2024-05 as Exhibit "A" and hereby incorporated by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 6-24-2024; Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024; Ord. 2025-10,
passed 6-23-2025)
TITLE V: ANIMALS
   Chapter
      
50.   ANIMAL CONTROL AND LICENSING
      
51.   INTERLOCAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT
CHAPTER 50: ANIMAL CONTROL AND LICENSING
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Powers of County Animal Control
   
50.03   Licensing and registration of dogs
   
50.04   Rabies vaccination
   
50.05   Inhumane treatment of animals
   
50.06   Animals to be under control
   
50.07   Wild and exotic animals
   
50.08   Secondary animal shelters
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. Any animal left more than 24 hours without a person checking on the
condition of the animal(s) and providing food and water. Any animal left on
private property without the owner’s consent or deserted or dumped on public
property or roadways.
   ANIMAL. Any live vertebrate creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL. The department of the county that is designated by the
Fiscal Court to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person designated by the Director of Animal
Control who is qualified to perform duties under the laws and ordinances of the
commonwealth and the county. An ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER shall be a law
enforcement officer for the purpose of animal control only.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises operated or approved for operation by the
Fiscal Court, as required by KRS 258.119 for the purpose of impounding and
caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
   BOARDING FEE. Fee paid to the animal shelter or the county for the daily
living care of the animal. It does not include medical care.
   CAT. Any feline three months of age or older for which there exists a United
States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine.
   DAY. For the purpose of this chapter, a 24-hour period shall constitute a
DAY.
   DIRECTOR OF ANIMAL CONTROL. The person appointed by the Judge/Executive to
administer the provisions of this chapter. The Chief Animal Control Officer.
   DOG. Any canine three months of age or older for which there exists a United
States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Animals as are habituated to live in or about the
habitations of human beings, and which are kept, cared for, sheltered, fed or
harbored for use as a pet or as a source of food, raw materials or income.
   EXCESSIVE RUNNING AT LARGE. Any public nuisance animal that is off the
property of the owner, custodian, possessor or harborer and is not restrained
that has been witnessed by an Animal Control Officer for the second time or by
video evidence within a 90-day time period.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal not indigenous to the United States and not
ordinarily tame and which is by nature an animal that lives apart from human
beings.
   FERRET. Any musteline three months of age or older for which there exists a
United States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine.
   HUMANE SOCIETY. The McCracken County Humane Society, 4000 Coleman Road,
Paducah, Kentucky.
   IMPOUNDED. Having been received into the custody of Animal Control or any
authorized representative thereof.
   IMPOUNDMENT FEE. Fee paid to the animal shelter or McCracken County for the
administration, documentation and record keeping requirements, and for the
return and adoption of impounded animals.
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, emus, ostriches, horses or any other
animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, ratite or equine species.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or sheltering one or more
animals.
   PERSON. All natural persons, corporations, partnerships, firms,
associations, governmental bodies, agencies or other entities.
   PET. Domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal(s), which engages in, but not limited to, the
following activity:
      (1)   Molests passers-by or passing vehicles;
      (2)   Attacks people or other animals;
      (3)   Damages public or private property;
      (4)   Is excessively at large;
      (5)   Makes noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely manner;
      (6)   Creates unsanitary conditions; or
      (7)   Disturbs the peace, comfort or health of persons in any other
manner.
   PROPER QUARANTINE. Confinement to a secure enclosure which shall not permit
the animal to come in contact with another animal or person, except the owner
or care giver, for a period of ten days.
   QUALIFIED PERSON. Any person granted a permit by the state to vaccinate his
or her own animal against rabies.
   RESTRAINT. Enclosed in an area by a form of fencing designed to control the
movement of the animal or secured by a leash or chain. An animal shall be
deemed to be RESTRAINED if it remains on the premises of its owner or if a
responsible person accompanies it and is under that person’s control.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Any public nuisance animal that is off the property of the
owner, custodian, possessor or harborer and is not restrained. Except that a
hound or other hunting dog which has been released from restraint for hunting
purposes shall be deemed to be under reasonable control of its owner or handler
while engaged in or returning from hunting, and, if the hunting dog becomes
temporarily lost from a pack or wanders from actual control or sight of its
owner or handler it shall not be deemed to be a violation.
   STRAY. Any animal running at large.
   VETERINARIAN. One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and injuries of
animals.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal:
         (a)   Which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or domestic
animals due to a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or
bite which results in serious bodily harm;
         (b)   Which when unprovoked, approaches in a terrorizing manner, any
person in an attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks or any public grounds
or places;
         (c)   With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to unprovoked
attacks which causes injury or endangers the safety of human beings or domestic
animals;
         (d)   Which bites multiple times or to the extent of causing severe
injury and assaults or otherwise attacks human beings or domestic animals; and
         (e)   Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting with animals.
      (2)   It shall be prima facie evidence that an animal is vicious if the
animal bites a human being or domestic animal more than once in the same
attack.
      (3)   An animal shall not be deemed VICIOUS solely because:
         (a)   It bites, attacks or menaces:
            1.   Any person assaulting its owner; or
            2.   Any person or animal who has tormented or abused it.
         (b)   It is otherwise acting in defense of any attack from a person or
other animal upon its owner or another person; or
         (c)   It is protecting or defending its young or the young of any
other animal.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal not domesticated, not ordinarily tame or which is by
nature an animal that lives apart from human beings.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013)
§ 50.02 POWERS OF COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL.
   (A)   The Director and all officers of Animal Control shall have the powers
of a peace officer for the purpose of enforcing animal control laws or
ordinances in the county, if they otherwise qualify as a peace officer under
the laws of the commonwealth.
   (B)   All officers of Animal Control shall comply with KRS 61.300.
   (C)   Whenever it is necessary for Animal Control to make an inspection in
order to perform any duty or enforce any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable state statute, they are hereby empowered to enter property at a
reasonable time and inspect the premises. Animal Control shall not have the
power
to enter enclosed building and structures unless the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property is freely given, a search warrant is obtained or such
exigent circumstances exist that a warrantless, non-consensual search is
required.
   (D)   All animals, of any age, running at large, as defined in this chapter,
and found in the county, may be picked up by Animal Control and impounded in
the animal shelter. All animals of any age which have bitten or scratched a
human being and which can not be properly quarantined or found not properly
quarantined may be picked up by Animal Control and impounded in the animal
shelter for any applicable quarantine period. A law enforcement officer or
Animal Control Officer may order any animal which has bitten or scratched a
human being to be quarantined at the animal shelter if the officer has reason
to believe such animal is vicious or may pose a threat to the safety of the
community. In the event an animal is impounded for a quarantine period, the
owner shall be responsible for a reasonable fee for board, administration and
medical attention during the impoundment.
      (1)   Fee required of any owner or person for first-time animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Dog license fee $10 (if not currently licensed)
Impoundment fee $30 per incident
 
      (2)   Fee required of any owner or person for each subsequent animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Dog license fee $20 (if not currently licensed)
Impoundment fee $60 per incident
 
   (E)   Any animal required to be licensed, but found unlicensed, or any
animal, except cats, whose owner is unknown, shall be impounded until its owner
claims it. Subject to KRS Chapter 258, the polices of the county, and the
policies of the animal shelter, if the animal is not claimed by its owner, the
animal may then be offered for adoption or may be euthanized at the discretion
of the Director of Animal Control, Animal Shelter Director and veterinarian.
Any person claiming or reclaiming an animal pursuant to this section shall pay
a reasonable fee for board, administration and medical attention for the animal
during impoundment and obtain proper licensing for such animal, if applicable,
from Animal Control.
      (1)   Fee required of any owner or person for first-time animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Dog license fee $10 (if not currently licensed)
Impoundment fee $30 per incident
 
      (2)   Fee required of any owner or person for each subsequent animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Dog license fee $20 (if not currently licensed)
Impoundment fee $60 per incident
 
   (F)   Any cat impounded by Animal Control shall be held at the animal
shelter until claimed by its owner, the animal may then be offered for adoption
or may be euthanized at the discretion of the Director of Animal Control,
Animal Shelter Director and veterinarian. Any person claiming or reclaiming an
animal pursuant to this section shall pay a reasonable fee for boarding,
administration and medical attention for such animal during impoundment.
   (G)   When any licensed animal is impounded in the animal shelter, Animal
Control shall notify the owner of the impoundment. The animal shall be held a
minimum of seven days from the date of impoundment, before the animal may be
adopted or euthanized at the discretion of the Director of Animal Control,
Animal Shelter Director and veterinarian.
      (1)   Fee required of any owner or person for first-time animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day (or fraction thereof)
Impoundment fee $30 per incident
 
      (2)   Fee required of any owner or person for each subsequent animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Impoundment fee $60 per incident
 
   (H)   Any dog found by Animal Control not bearing a valid rabies tag shall
be impounded. Subject to the polices of the county and the animal shelter, if
the dog is not claimed by its owner, the animal may then be offered for
adoption or may be euthanized at the discretion of the Director of Animal
Control, Animal Shelter Director and veterinarian.
      (1)   Fee required of any owner or person for first-time animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Dog license fee $10
Impoundment fee $30 per incident
 
      (2)   Fee required of any owner or person for each subsequent animal
impoundment.
 
Boarding fee    $8 per animal per day
Dog license fee $20
Impoundment fee $60 per incident
 
   (I)   An Animal Control Officer may choose to issue a misdemeanor notice in
lieu of a uniform citation. The misdemeanor notice will stipulate the
violations observed, associated fee and compliance date. The misdemeanor notice
shall allow up to, but not exceed, seven days to correct certain violations.
Should the violation not be corrected and/or fees paid within the allotted
time, then the notice shall serve as a uniform citation and the violating party
shall report to County District Court at the designated court date and time.
   (J)   Any animal observed by a law enforcement officer or Animal Control
Officer to be in immediate danger may be removed from such situation by the
quickest and most reasonable means available.
   (K)   In the event that any law enforcement officer or Animal Control
Officer witnesses a vicious animal, as defined, the animal may be impounded and
the owner cited for violation of this chapter. If the owner is cited and the
animal impounded, the animal shall remain in the custody of the animal shelter
pending a decision by District Court, unless ownership is voluntarily
relinquished to Animal Control.
   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to interfere with,
hinder, harass or abuse any officer or individual authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, Animal Control Officers may
impound any animal(s) found to be in violation of any part of this chapter. All
animals shall be held a minimum of seven days at the animal shelter, unless
redeemed by their owner and the impounding officer or the Director of Animal
Control authorizes its release. After seven days, Animal Control may release
the animal(s) for adoption or euthanasia.
   (N)   If a person has been charged with possessing a vicious animal,
inhumane treatment of an animal, cruelty to an animal or a similar charge,
Animal Control Officers or law enforcement officers are authorized to impound
all animals or livestock related to the charge. The animal(s) shall be held
pending a decision by the District Court unless the animal(s) are voluntarily
surrendered to Animal Control. Animal Control may then offer the animals for
adoption, release them to the animal shelter, sell the animals at public
auction, or otherwise arrange for their final disposition in a manner that is
in the interest of the county.
   (O)   Upon first warning of a violation, the Animal Control Officer shall
issue to the owner a summary of the county animal control ordinance.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   The owner of all dogs over the age of four months or those who harbor
or maintain dogs in the county shall license and register their dog(s) with
Animal Control, in accordance with regulations established by Fiscal Court.
Licenses shall be issued by the animal shelter during regular operating hours,
or any Animal Control Officer. The Fiscal Court may authorize veterinarians to
issue licenses in accordance with the county ordinances and policies.
   (B)   Upon application for license, the owner must present a current valid
rabies certificate for the dog that is to be licensed.
   (C)   The license fees for dog(s) shall be $3, except as may otherwise be
provided for in this section. License fees may be changed by order of the
fiscal court. The license fee shall be waived for authorized police, law
enforcement, rescue dogs and service dogs trained for the purpose of aiding a
person who is totally or partially blind, totally or partially deaf, or
otherwise physically disabled.
   (D)   Upon payment, the owner shall be issued a certificate of registration
and the license tag(s). Dog license tags must be attached to a collar and worn
by the dog at all times.
   (E)   The initial license issued under this section shall be valid for one
year from the last day of the month of issuance. A renewal license shall
validate the license for one year from the previous date of expiration.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 RABIES VACCINATION.
   (A)   All animals, as required by KRS Chapter 258, shall be vaccinated for
rabies and revaccinated for rabies at the expiration of the immunization period
as certified by a veterinarian, or any person as may be qualified by state law.
   (B)   Any dog, cat or ferret reclaimed or adopted from the animal shelter
must have a valid rabies vaccination. The purchase or issuance of a rabies
voucher through a veterinarian shall constitute temporary compliance with this
section until the expiration date of said voucher.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 INHUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhumanely treat any animal,
including, but not limited to, the deprivation of necessities, beating,
mutilating, torturing, killing, overloading, overworking or otherwise abuse any
animal. Nothing herein shall prevent Animal Control from humanely euthanizing
any animal.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, display or keep any
animal without providing food, water, adequate shelter from the elements,
adequate space, ventilation, shade from the sun, proper sanitation, care and
medical attention.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an animal within the
passenger compartment of an automobile without adequate ventilation in the
summer or adequate warmth in the winter. No person shall enclose any animal in
the trunk of an automobile. An Animal Control Officer or law enforcement
officer shall rescue any animal confined in such a manner by any reasonable
means necessary.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, cause, instigate,
permit, observe or attend any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat
between animals or between animals and humans.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 ANIMALS TO BE UNDER CONTROL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned or
harbored by him or her, to run at large. When livestock are running at large,
Animal Control or the Law Enforcement Officer shall make reasonable efforts to
notify the owner as soon as possible. If reasonably possible and feasible, the
owner of the livestock shall be notified prior to the actual capture and
impoundment of the livestock. Owners of impounded livestock shall pay
reasonable fees for the pick-up, transportation, boarding and medical care of
the animals.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to own or possess a vicious animal.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to own or possess an animal that conducts itself
in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to allow a female dog to be exposed during estrus
(in season, in heat) so as to attract male dogs. Every female that is in season
(in heat, estrus) shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a
manner that such female dog cannot come in contact with a male dog except for
planned breeding.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own, harbor or keep as a pet any wild or
exotic animal, not indigenous to the United States, except state and federal
conservation officers, licensed nuisance wildlife officers and licensed
rehabilitators.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own, harbor or keep as a pet any wild
animal native to the United States, except state and federal conservation
officers, licensed nuisance wildlife officers and licensed rehabilitators.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own harbor or keep any venomous reptile.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 SECONDARY ANIMAL SHELTERS.
   The Director of Animal Control or the Animal Shelter Director may for the
causes of over capacity, refusal, inadequacy or exigent circumstances, shelter
or impound animals at facilities other than the animal shelter. All fees,
including impoundment and boarding, shall be paid by the county.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; each animal may
constitute a separate violation, unless the context clearly indicated
otherwise.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with the licensing requirements of §
50.03 or the vaccination requirements of §
50.04 shall, on a first offense, be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100;
on a second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $50 not more
than $250.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
50.05 relating to the inhumane treatment of animals shall be fined a sum not to
exceed $500, or sentenced up to 12 months in the county jail, or both. Any
person who has been convicted, entered an Alford plea, or pled guilty, shall
forfeit ownership of the animals involved to Animal Control. The animals shall
be disposed in a manner that is in the best interest of the county. Further,
the court may assess reasonable fees for boarding and veterinary treatment for
reimbursement payments to the county. The court may order all other animals of
the same species in control of said person to be forfeited to Animal Control.
   (D)   Any person violating §
50.06 relating to animals to be under control of this chapter, shall on the
first offense be fined not less than $30 nor more than $100; on the second or
subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $60 nor more than $250.
   (E)   Any livestock owner who violates §
50.06 shall, on the first offense, be fined not less than $60, nor more than
$250 and required to reimburse the county for all reasonable expenses incurred
in capturing, impounding, boarding and providing necessary medical services to
the livestock. On a second or subsequent offense, the owner shall be fined not
less than $150 nor more than $500, and the owner shall reimburse the county for
all reasonable expenses incurred in capturing, impounding, boarding and
providing necessary medical services to the livestock.
   (F)   Upon conviction under §
50.06 relating to the possession of a vicious animal, the penalty shall be a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, or up to 90 days in the county
jail or both. In addition, the court shall order one of the following:
      (1)   The following regulations be followed as a condition of the owner
retaining ownership of the animal.
         (a)   The vicious animal shall be neutered; microchip implanted for
identification purposes and registered with Animal Control.
         (b)   The vicious animal shall be confined in an enclosure constructed
of an uncovered fence or structure of at least seven feet in height with anti-
climbers or a covered structure of sufficient height to allow the animal to
stand erect without touching the top or cover. All such enclosures shall be
designed to prevent the entry of small children and shall be suitable to
confine the vicious animal. Such enclosures shall be securely closed and
locked, and shall be designed to prevent the animal from digging out or
otherwise escaping from the enclosure.
         (c)   The enclosure shall display a sign warning of the vicious animal
and shall be visible from the public roadway or public access if applicable.
         (d)   The vicious animal shall not be permitted outside of the
dwelling of its owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is necessary to
obtain veterinary care or under the direction of Animal Control. If the vicious
animal must be allowed outside the permitted areas, it shall be under the
direct control and supervision of its owner or keeper and shall be muzzled and
restrained with a lead or leash not to exceed three feet in length, or placed
in a secure animal carrier.
         (e)   The owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall immediately notify
Animal Control if the animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked an animal or
human being, or is deceased.
      (2)   In the alternative to division (F)(1) above, the court may order
that the animal be immediately surrendered to Animal Control to be euthanized.
   (G)   Upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense under §
50.06, relating to he possession of a vicious animal, the penalty shall be a
fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500, or up to one year in the county
jail, or both; and if the violation involves the same animal, the court shall
order the animal immediately surrendered to Animal Control to be euthanized.
   (H)   Upon conviction under §
50.06(A), (C) or (D) relating to animals running at large, possessing nuisance
animals, and exposing female dogs during estrus, the penalty shall be a fine of
not less than $30 or more than $250. The court may order the abatement of the
nuisance animal(s).
   (I)   Any person violating the provisions of §
50.07 relating to wild and exotic animals shall on the first offense be fined
not less than $30 nor more than $100 for each such animal; on the second or
subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $60 nor more than $500. Upon
conviction of a first offense for each such animal, the Department of Animal
Control shall take possession of said animal.
   (J)   Any person violating §
50.02, relating to interference of duty, on the first offense be fined not less
than $60, nor more than $250 or up to 30 days in the county jail, or both; on a
second or subsequent offense be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500, or
sentenced up to 90 days in the county jail, or both.
   (K)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be fined not less than $30 or more
than $500, or be sentenced up to 90 days in the county jail, or both, for each
offense.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed 5-28-2013)
CHAPTER 51: INTERLOCAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT
Section
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Administration
   
51.03   Scope of authority
   
51.04   Appropriation, acquisition and disposition of property
   
51.05   Budget funding
   
51.06   Operations
   
51.07   Personnel
   
51.08   Duration of agreement
   
51.09   Miscellaneous provision
§ 51.01 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the Kentucky Interlocal Cooperation Act, KRS 65.210 et seq., the
city and county do hereby agree to continue to cooperatively administer a
single animal control program utilizing existing personnel and resources.
Future facilities may need to be constructed and financed that are mutually
agreeable to both parties.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The cooperative program shall be administered by the County Judge/Executive
and/or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.03 SCOPE OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Employees of the city and county charged with executing the
cooperative animal control program shall possess extraterritorial powers.
   (B)   While in the performance of their duties under this agreement, said
employees shall have the right to exercise all powers they possess pursuant to
state or local law in any territory within the county.
Further, while in performance of their duties hereunder, employees shall retain
the immunities and privileges, if any, to which they are entitled by law.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.04 APPROPRIATION, ACQUISITION AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city or county, in their respective discretion, may appropriate
property, real or personal, for use in the cooperative undertaking. Such
property shall remain the property of the appropriating entity.
   (B)   The city or county, or both, may purchase such property as they may
hereinafter deem useful or necessary in furtherance of the cooperative
undertaking. Property may also be purchased by the Judge/Executive; utilizing
funds budgeted by the parties for the cooperative undertaking.
   (C)   When in the determination of the Judge/Executive, any item of property
is obsolete or no longer useful or needed in furtherance of the cooperative
undertaking, if such item of property was donated by either the city or county,
such item of property shall be returned to the donating entity. All other
obsolete, or unnecessary property which has been acquired by the Judge/
Executive with funds budgeted by the city and county shall be disposed of in
accordance with law, with the proceeds of such sale to be retained by the
Judge/Executive and to be included within the budget for the operation of the
cooperative undertaking.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.05 BUDGET FUNDING.
   (A)   The Judge/Executive, with assistance from the County Treasurer and
City Finance Director, shall prepare a budget for each ensuing year for the
operation of the cooperative undertaking and will submit to the City Manager
the proposed city share of the service costs, net of revenue offsets, on or
before May 1 of each year. The budget shall include the projected cost of
operation for each ensuing year. The budget shall also make a forecast of
program revenue including, but not be limited to, all fines, fees, licenses,
rentals, grants and private donations made to the program. The budget shall be
prepared, submitted and recommended to the city and county on or before May 1
of each year.
   (B)   Each governmental unit shall have an opportunity to review the
proposed budget and shall have the right to accept or reject the budget, which
acceptance or rejection shall be made within 30 days of receipt.
      (1)   The funding formula shall be apportioned based upon cases responded
to in the respective jurisdictions in the previous year. The information shall
come from the daily log records kept by the chief Animal Control Officer. For
example: If 60% of the working case load comes from calls made in the City of
Paducah, then the proposed budget shall request an appropriation from the city
equal to 60% of the budget.
      (2)   Capital expenses approved by the city and county will be equally
shared provided they are part of the approved budget.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.06 OPERATIONS.
   (A)   The county, as primary operators of the animal control function of the
city and county may choose to abandon the usual third-party relationship
(Paducah-McCracken Humane Society) for animal shelter operations (reference §
51.01) and develop its own shelter program provided that the county.
   (B)   Maintains an animal control sheltering facility that complies with
state statutes and administrative regulations, to provide services that:
      (1)   Segregate male and female animals by species in runs and holding
areas;
      (2)   Provide separate runs or holding areas for ill or injured animals.
An ill or injured animal shall be treated with proper veterinary care or
euthanized in accordance with the law of the commonwealth governing the same;
      (3)   Provide quarantine for dogs and cats presented to the shelter when
quarantine by the owner is not feasible or desirable, the cost of quarantine to
be borne by the animal owner at the shelter’s regular housing costs and fees.
Quarantined dogs and cats shall be held in isolation for observation of
symptoms of rabies for a period of ten days from the date the dog or cat bit a
person. If the dog or cat dies or is euthanized while in quarantine, it shall
be submitted to the local health department for testing for the presence of the
rabies virus. The cost of the testing shall be borne by the animal owner or the
local health department may bear the cost at its discretion;
      (4)   Provide holding areas with protection from the weather, including
heated quarters during cold weather. Holding areas shall be free of debris or
standing water; shall provide adequate lighting, ventilation and sanitary
conditions to promote a safe, healthy environment; and shall provide adequate
space to allow for normal movement, including standing to full height, sitting,
turning and lying down in a natural position without coming in contact with the
top or sides of the enclosure or another animal;
      (5)   Provide runs and cages built of materials which can be readily
cleaned and disinfected, including floors made of an impervious material;
      (6)   Provide access to the public for no less than 24 hours in one week,
with the hours that the facility is open to the public posted in a visible
location;
      (7)   Employ euthanasia methods specified as acceptable for that species
by the most recent report of the American Veterinary Medical Association Panel
on Euthanasia;
      (8)   Provide potable, uncontaminated water to every animal at all times,
and palatable, uncontaminated food daily; and
      (9)   Maintain a record on each animal impounded. Records shall be
maintained for a period of two years, and shall include:
         (a)   Date impounded;
         (b)   Location found or picked up;
         (c)   Sex of animal and spay or neuter status, if known;
         (d)   Breed or description, and color;
         (e)   Date reclaimed, adopted or euthanized; and
         (f)   The amount fees, fines and licenses of any type collected.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.07 PERSONNEL.
   County employees utilized in furtherance of the cooperative undertaking
shall remain county employees. Salaries and benefits, including pension plans,
vacation, holiday and sick leave accrual, if any, shall remain the
responsibility of the respective employer.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.08 DURATION OF AGREEMENT.
   This agreement shall remain in full force and effect for a period of two
year(s). Such term shall automatically renew for an additional period of two
year(s) unless either the city or the county terminates this agreement. Either
party may terminate the agreement by providing to the other a 12-month prior
written notification of such governmental unit’s intent to terminate this
agreement.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
§ 51.09 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISION.
   This agreement represents the entire understanding and agreement reached
between the parries, and all prior covenants, agreements, representations and
understandings are merged herein. This agreement shall be fully binding upon
the parties hereto and shall be deemed fully enforceable in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof. If any provision of this agreement shall be held
invalid or unenforceable under any applicable laws, such invalidity shall not
affect any other provision of this agreement.
(Ord. 2012-7-7958, passed 10-8-2012)
TITLE VII: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
70.   BUILDING CODE
      
71.   FEE SCHEDULES
      
72.   HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS
      
73.   STANDARDS OF SAFETY
CHAPTER 70: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
70.01   Adoption
   
70.02   Designated enforcement office
   
70.03   Building inspection program
   
70.04   Permits and fees
   
70.05   Non-guarantee of workmanship
   
70.06   Jurisdiction
   
70.07   Insurance and other requirements
   
70.08   Appeals
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The State Building Code, promulgated in the State Administrative
Regulations and the State Residential Code, promulgated in the State
Administrative Regulations by the Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction,
Commonwealth of Kentucky, are hereby adopted in full as an ordinance of the
county as if set out at length herein.
   (B)   A copy of the State Building Code and the State Residential Code is on
file in the Office of the County Clerk, and the Clerk shall at all times keep a
copy of said building code for reference.
   (C)   An attested copy of this chapter shall be transmitted to the
Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction of the commonwealth.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.02 DESIGNATED ENFORCEMENT OFFICE.
   The Building Official shall be designated as the local enforcement agent for
said State Building Code and the State Residential Code. All building code
inspections shall be performed by persons certified by the State Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction. All electrical inspections shall be
performed by a certified electrical inspector specifically approved by this
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.03 BUILDING INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(8), a building inspection program is hereby
established in the county for application to all buildings, including single-
family dwellings as provided in the adopted codes, except that permits only are
required for residential accessory storage buildings.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.04 PERMITS AND FEES.
   Fees for permits and inspections shall be as provided for in the attached
schedule.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.05 NON- GUARANTEE OF WORKMANSHIP.
   No permit or certificate of compliance or occupancy certificate issued by
the County Department of Building and Electrical Inspection pursuant to this
chapter shall be construed as a guarantee or representation against any defect,
faulty material or workmanship or any hazard which may exist on inspected or
approved property.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.06 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter pertains to all of the county, excluding the corporate limits
of the City of Paducah.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.07 INSURANCE AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person, entity or business applying for a building or electrical
permit or performing work under said permit shall be required to provide their
Kentucky Employer ID number and proof of Worker’s Compensation Insurance for
workers to be employed to perform work or sub-contracted under said permit or
as provided for in KRS 198B.060(10)(a). Anyone performing electrical work shall
provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $250,000. The applicant
for said building or electrical permit will be required to list all persons
entities, or businesses that will be employed or sub-contracted to perform work
under any building or electrical permit.
   (B)   The applicant for any building permit must secure a release from the
County Planning and Zoning Administrator, the County Health Department, the
County Tax Administrator and the County Floodplain Administrator, if
applicable, before a permit may be issued.
   (C)   It is expressly provided that any private citizen who undertakes to
construct a single-family dwelling for his or her own personal residence, and
not intended for resale, shall be exempted from the worker’s compensation/
unemployment insurance provisions of this section; however, any sub-contractors
for hire by such private citizen shall be required to comply with the
requirements of this section hereof.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.08 APPEALS.
   Any party to a decision by the local Building Official may appeal that
decision according to KRS 198B.070.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of KRS 198B.140, or of the Uniform
State Building Code, or any directive or order issued pursuant thereto shall be
fined not less than $10, nor more than $1,000. Each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2002-7, passed 9-9-2002)
CHAPTER 71: FEE SCHEDULES
Section
   
71.01   Building plan review
   
71.02   Electrical plan review
§ 71.01 BUILDING PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Occupancy classifications. “A” = Assembly; “B” = Business; “E” =
Education; “F” = Factory and Industrial; “M” = Mercantile; “R” = Residential;
“S” = Storage; and “U” = Utility.
   (B)   Building plan review and inspection fees. Building plan review and
inspection fees shall be in accordance with divisions (B)(1) through (B)(10)
below. The total square footage shall be determined by the outside dimensions
of the building.
      (1)   Fee for use groups A, B, E, M and R shall be $0.15 per square foot
for first floor at or above grade and $0.10 per square foot for other floor
areas, with a $150 minimum.
      (2)   Fee for use groups F, S and U shall be $0.10 per square foot for
all floor areas with a $150 minimum.
      (3)   Fee for remodel, alteration or work not otherwise covered by any
use group shall be according to construction cost with a minimum fee of $60 for
up to and including $5,000 of construction cost, plus $4 for each additional
$1,000 of construction cost or fractional part thereof.
      (4)   A fee of $50 shall be charged for permits on buildings that are
under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction.
      (5)   Fee for residential accessory structure (not greater than 3,000
square feet and located on same lot) shall be $0.10 per square foot with a $60
minimum.
      (6)   The fee for building shell only shall be $0.10 per square foot.
      (7)   The fee for buildings with multiple or mixed occupancies shall be
calculated using the cost per square foot multiplier of the predominate use.
      (8)   The fee for in-ground swimming pools shall be $75.
      (9)   The fee for demolition/wrecking/razing of existing structure(s)
shall be $50.
      (10)   The McCracken County Inspection Department is hereby authorized to
set a reasonable inspection fee for any other use or special inspection not
specifically covered herein.
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 6-27-2016; Ord. 2021-12, passed 9-13-2021)
§ 71.02 ELECTRICAL PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court may contract with a certified electrical
inspector to provide electrical plan review and inspection services for new
construction, additions, remodels, repairs, upgrades, and other projects
requiring electrical permits.
   (B)   An electrical permit fee shall be required before any electric work
commences, with the fee set at $25.
   (C)   The electrical contractor, property owner, or other person responsible
for the electrical work shall be responsible for the payment of established
fees to the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall be responsible
for the collection of said fees.
   (D)   A certificate of inspection, certificate of compliance, or other forms
of final approval of an electrical construction, installation, alteration, or
repair shall not be issued by the inspector until all fees required by this
section have been paid.
   (E)   Copies of the inspection documentation and the certificate of
compliance shall be provided to the County Inspection Department.
   (F)   The fees for electrical plan review and/or inspection shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The fee for an electrical plan review, if required, shall be $125.
      (2)   The fee for a certificate of occupancy inspection on an existing
building shall be $75.
      (3)   If the inspector must return to the project to inspect work that
should have been completed following a previous inspection within an allotted
time frame and the work was not completed within the allotted time frame, the
inspector may charge an additional $100 fee for each trip to the project to
inspect said uncompleted work.
      (4)   The fee to inspect electrical work having a complete value of less
than $8,000 shall be $125.
      (5)   The fee to inspect electrical work having a complete value of more
than $8,000 but less than $16,500 shall be $250.
      (6)   The fee to inspect electrical work having a complete value of more
than $16,500 but less than $25,000 shall be $500.
      (7)   The fee to inspect electrical work having a completed value of
$25,000 or more shall be calculated as a percentage of the completed value of
the work in accordance with the schedule established in this section.
 
Fee schedule
Value of work        Permit fee
$25,000 to $199,999  2%
$200,000 to $299,999 1.9%
$300,000 to $499,999 1.5%
$500,000 to $699,999 1.3%
$700,000 to $999,999 1%
 
(Ord. 2016-10, passed 6-27-2016; Ord. 2021-12, passed 9-13-2021; Ord. 2023-02,
passed 1-23-2023)
CHAPTER 72: HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Code Enforcement Officer; enforcement
   
72.03   Authority to go on private property
   
72.04   Report
   
72.05   Compliance
   
72.06   Cost; lien
   
72.07   Authority
   
72.08   Appeal procedure
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURE. This chapter is not applicable to structures or premises used
primarily for active agricultural purposes.
   EXEMPT STRUCTURES. This chapter is not applicable to structures that are at
least 200 feet in distance from any neighboring property line and at least 200
feet in distance from adjacent public right-of-way line. This distance is
measured from the property and/or right-of-way line to the closest point of the
structure, including overhanging roofs.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property; including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   UNSAFE PREMISES. In addition to and including unsafe structures, UNSAFE
PREMISES means any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, abandoned shafts, abandoned swimming pools,
abandoned ponds, abandoned basements, abandoned excavations and any abandoned
mobile homes, abandoned manufactured homes, abandoned refrigerators, abandoned
iceboxes, abandoned ice chests or other similar abandoned devices or abandoned
appliances assessable by children.
   UNSAFE STRUCTURE. A structure that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure
because the structure is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay,
faulty construction or damaged by fire to the extent so as not provide shelter
or is in danger partial or complete collapse.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.02 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; ENFORCEMENT.
   The County Fiscal Court designates the Code Enforcement Officer as the
county official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.03 AUTHORITY TO GO ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Pursuant to KRS 67.083(3)(j), the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
go upon private property containing any structures intended for human and/or
commercial occupancy of any kind which have been damaged by fire, explosion or
structural collapse, and inspect said structures in order to determine whether
or not said structures are readily susceptible to being repaired.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.04 REPORT.
   (A)   Within five days from the date of said inspection, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall make and file in the Office of the County Judge/
Executive a written report, which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner of record of the structure;
      (2)   The book and page number of the deed of record of the property with
a copy of said deed attached to the report;
      (3)   The date of the inspection;
      (4)   A statement setting forth whether or not the structure, in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, is susceptible to being repaired or
should be demolished If the structure is susceptible to being repaired, the
Code Enforcement Officer should state specifically what repairs are necessary
to make the structure suitable for human and/or commercial occupancy;
      (5)   A statement to the owner of record that if he disagrees with the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer, he or she may appeal to the
County Fiscal Court;
      (6)   A statement to the owner that said owner has 60 days from the date
the report is filed in the Office of the County Judge/Executive to:
         (a)   Repair the structure or provide sufficient proof to the Code
Enforcement Officer, with approved surety, that the repairs will be timely
made;
         (b)   To demolish and remove the structure and all debris; or
         (c)   File a written statement in the office of the Code Enforcement
Officer to the County Fiscal Court.
      (7)   A statement to the owner of record that if he or she takes no
affirmative action within the time provided in division (A)(6) above, he or she
shall be presumed to consent his or her abandonment of his or her interest in
said structure and to all action taken by the county or its agents.
   (B)   If the owner of record is a resident of the county at the time of
filing the written report in the Office of the County Judge/Executive, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall deliver two copies of said report to the County
Sheriff with instructions to the Sheriff to serve one copy of the report upon
the owner of record of said structure; to reflect the service of said copy of
the report upon the second copy, and to return the second copy of the Office of
the County Judge/Executive.
   (C)   If the owner of record of said structure is a nonresident of the
county at the time of filing the written report in the Office of the County
Judge/Executive, the Code Enforcement Officer shall mail by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a copy of said report to the owner of record of said
structure to his or her last known address as same may be reflected in the
public records contained in the county courthouse.
   (D)   In the event the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to deliver a copy
of the report to the owner of record of the structure as provided in divisions
(A) and (B) above, then in that event the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify
the owner of record by publishing said report pursuant of KRS Chapter 424.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.05 COMPLIANCE.
   In the event the owner of record of said structure fails to comply with the
report of the Code Enforcement Officer within the 60-day period, the Code
Enforcement Officer may cause the structure to be demolished and removed, upon
Judge/Executive approval.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.06 COST; LIEN.
   The cost of said demolition and removal of said structure, less any credit
for salvage, shall be a lawful debt of the owner of said property. If the
county advances these costs, then the county shall have a lien of record upon
the real estate in the amount of costs plus interest at the legal rate until
said costs are reimbursed to the county.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.07 AUTHORITY.
   The authority created and granted herein shall apply only to structures
intended for human and/or commercial occupancy which are located in the county,
but outside the corporate limits of the City of Paducah.
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
§ 72.08 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court shall provide an appeal procedure for owners
of record who file a written statement of appeal in the Office of the County
Judge/Executive within 30 days from the date the Code Enforcement Officer files
his or her written report.
   (B)   In the event an appeal is timely filed, proceedings initiated
hereunder shall be stayed until all matters raised on said appeal are resolved;
otherwise, the Code Enforcement Officer shall proceed according to the terms of
the written report and §
72.04(D).
(Ord. 2008-9, passed 6-23-2008)
CHAPTER 73: STANDARDS OF SAFETY
Section
   
73.01   Adoption
§ 73.01 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The Standards of Safety, and all codes, incorporated therein, as
promulgated in 815 KAR 10:015 by the Commissioner of Housing, Buildings and
Construction, Commonwealth of Kentucky, hereby adopted in full as an ordinance
of the county as if set out at length herein.
   (B)   A copy of said Standards of Safety together with a copy of each
Standard or pamphlet adopted thereunder, is on file in the office of the County
Court Clerk, and the Clerk shall at all times keep a copy of said Standards of
Safety for reference.
   (C)   An attested copy of this section shall be transmitted to the office of
the State Fire Marshal, Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction of
the commonwealth.
   (D)   Such persons appointed by the County Judge/Executive, with the
approval of the Fiscal Court, shall be the designated local enforcement agent
or agents for said Standards of Safety.
(Ord. 340.0, passed 7-12-1979)
TITLE IX: BUSINESSES
   Chapter
      
90.   RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES
      
91.   CABLE RATES
      
92.   HOG FACILITIES
      
93.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
94.   JEWELRY, COINS AND PRECIOUS METALS
      
95.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
96.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
97.   SOLID WASTE FACILITIES
      
98.   PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PRECIOUS METALS AND STONE
DEALERS
CHAPTER 90: RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Effective date
   
90.03   Fees, charges
   
90.04   Enforcement and collection
   
90.05   Use of proceeds
   
90.06   Audit of records and records required
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The McCracken County Tax Administrator who presently enforces
the county occupational tax ordinance (codified in
Chapter 35 of this code of ordinances).
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The all-inclusive total amount due to a company from its
customers, whether payment terms are cash, credit, barter, exchange or
otherwise in connection with company’s operation of its business.
   LICENSE FEE. A tax for the privilege of exercising the right to engage in
the rental of motor vehicles in McCracken County.
   PERSON. Includes all natural persons, particularly firms, associations and
corporations, and whenever used in any interpretation.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
§ 90.02 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall apply and be in effect from and after July 1, 2009, and
shall remain in full force and effect until repealed or modified in a lawful
manner.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
§ 90.03 FEES, CHARGES.
   (A)   All persons engaged in the rental of motor vehicles for periods of 30
days or less and whose gross receipts generated from the rental of motor
vehicles exceed 75% of their total gross receipts generated in the county shall
be obligated to pay to the County Tax Administrator 3% of the gross rental
charges which are subject to this levy.
   (B)   Any license fee levied pursuant to KRS Chapter 68 and as covered in
this chapter shall be collected by the retailer from the rental of motor
vehicles; provided, however, the retailer shall have the responsibility to
report and pay the license fees to the county.
   (C)   Receipts from rental of motor vehicles shall not be included in the
gross rental charges on which the license fee is based if:
      (1)   The declared gross weight of the motor vehicle exceeds 11,000
pounds;
      (2)   The rental is part of the services provided by a funeral director
for a funeral; or
      (3)   The rental is exempted from the state sales and use pursuant to KRS
139.470.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
§ 90.04 ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   The County Tax Administrator shall be responsible for the enforcement
of this license fee levy and the collection of the same.
   (B)   The Administrator shall deposit all receipts from this levy in an
account to be known as the “Motor Vehicle License Fee Account.”
   (C)   The Administrator shall have the power, and it shall be his or her
duty, to make and publish such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
administer this chapter and to provide such printed forms as may be required
for reporting, paying and receipting all such license fees and for all other
requirements in the proper and efficient administrator of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
§ 90.05 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   The county shall use the proceeds of the license fee for economic
development activities. It shall distribute semiannually, by June 30 and
December 31, all receipts not shared to one or more of the following entities
if it has established, or contracted with, the entity for the purposes of
economic development activities:
      (1)   A riverport authority established by the county pursuant to KRS
65.520;
      (2)   An industrial development authority established by the county
pursuant to KRS 154.50-316; or
      (3)   A non-profit corporation as defined in KRS 273.161(3), which has
been organized for the purpose of promoting economic development
   (B)   The entity qualified to receive funds from this license levy shall
make a written request for funds from the motor vehicle license fee account by
May 31 and November 30, respectively.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
§ 90.06 AUDIT OF RECORDS AND RECORDS REQUIRED
   (A)   If a license or retailer believed to be subject to the payment of the
license fee on rental motor vehicles maintains its gross receipts from motor
vehicle rentals does not equal 75% or more, such fact shall be subject to
verification and determination by the Administrator or his or her agent or
employees through examination and audit of the books and records of such
licensee or retailer, or both, as required by the Administrator.
   (B)   The reports required by this chapter shall be in forms prescribed by
the Administrator and shall contain all essential information, dates and
figures upon which the license fees required by this chapter are computed.
Every person required to pay any license fee provided by this chapter shall be
required to make all books, records and account upon which information required
by this chapter is based available to the Administrator, his or her agents or
employees for the purpose of examination, audit or verification.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent or preclude the Administrator from
conducting an examination and audit of the books, records and accounts as
herein provided at any time he or she may have reasonable grounds to believe
that the licensee has not correctly reported and paid the license fees due
under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   All information obtained by the Administrator or any of his or her
agents or employees, or any other official or employee of the county, from any
reports, examination or audit of books, records, accounts, income tax returns
or any other source in the administration of this chapter shall be treated and
considered as confidential and privileged, except for official purposes, unless
otherwise treated by judicial decree or specific provision of law and shall not
be open to inspection by the public.
   (E)   It is further provided that the Administrator or any county official
or employee shall have the right to disclose to the Commissioner of Revenue of
the state, or his or her duly authorized agent or employee, any of the
information provided by this section, provided reciprocal right to information
concerning any person liable for license fees under the provision of this
chapter is made available to the county by such state authorities and provided
further that the county may publish statistics based upon information obtained
in the administration of this chapter so long as such published statistics do
not reveal the identity of any licensee.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter by
failing to pay any license fee when due or failing to withhold and pay any
license fee when due, or failing to file any report or submit to any
examination required by this chapter, or in any other manner fails or refuses
to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100, nor
more than $500 or punished by confinement for not more than 30 days, or both.
Such penalties shall be in addition to other penalties imposed by this chapter.
Each failure or refusal to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that such failure or refusal
continues without compliance shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any official, agent or employee of the county who divulges any
information obtained under the provisions of this chapter, except for the
purposes of administering this chapter as herein provided, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more
man $500 or punished by confinement for not more than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. 94-3, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 2009-6, passed 6-24-2009)
CHAPTER 91: CABLE RATES
Section
   
91.01   Subscriber rates, charges and refunds
   
91.02   Miscellaneous provisions
   
91.03   Interpretation
   
91.04   Non-exclusive cable television franchise provisions
§ 91.01 SUBSCRIBER RATES, CHARGES AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   Rates subject to regulation by the county. Rates subject to regulation
by the county include rates for the basic cable television service plus the
leased equipment necessary for the rendition of basic service (including
converter boxes, remote control units and wiring) and installation and extra
set charges.
   (B)   Rate changes and discrimination.
      (1)   Unless approved by the county and to the extent consistent with
federal law, no franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability
of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or
grant undue preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber
to the system, including preferences based on the geographic location of the
subscriber, or to any user or potential user of the system, nor subject any
such persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a franchisee may afford reasonable discounts for senior citizens and
other economically disadvantaged groups.
      (2)   Rates may be changed by the franchisee following a minimum 30 days’
prior notice to the county and the subscribers.
   (C)   Rate regulation.
      (1)   Upon certification of the county by the FCC to institute rate
regulation, the following procedures shall apply to those rates that are
subject to local regulation.
         (a)   When the county, on recommendation from the County Cable
Communications Authority, desires to initially review the basic service rates
and other rates subject to local regulation under federal law, it shall notify
the franchisee to file its schedule or rates with the County Cable
Communications Authority within 30 days of the receipt of such notice, together
with the data and information necessary to determine whether the rates meet the
FCC rate standards. Such supporting information shall include, at minimum, the
completed worksheets of FCC Form 393 and all relevant supporting information
and notes.
         (b)   When the franchisee desires to increase rates subsequent to the
initial rate review, it shall submit to the County Cable Communications
Authority the revised rate schedule, together with data and supporting
information necessary to determine whether the new rates meet the FCC rate
standards. Before filing for such rate increases, the franchisee shall give
notice to its subscribers as required herein, and by FCC rules.
         (c)   If the County Cable Communications Authority finds that the
rates submitted by the franchisee are consistent with FCC rate standards
following the procedure specified below, it shall so notify the franchisee
within 30 days of the filing of the rates, and any rate increases will become
effective on the thirty-first day after their filing. If the Authority cannot
find the rates are reasonable under the FCC standards within the 30-day period,
it shall so notify the franchisee and may issue a brief order postponing the
effectiveness of any rate increases for up to an additional 90 days; provided,
however, if the franchisee is depending on a cost of service study to
demonstrate reasonableness, the Authority may postpone the effectiveness of any
rate increase for up to an additional 150 days.
      (2)   Members of the public and other interested parties may file written
comments with the County Cable Communications Authority within 14 days of the
date a franchisee files its rates for initial review or for review of a rate
increase. The Authority shall schedule a public hearing on rates before it for
review following appropriate advance announcement to the public and the
franchisee. The hearing may be before the County Fiscal Court, or it may
delegate the Authority to take public testimony and report to the Fiscal Court.
Whenever the Fiscal Court disapproves rates or rate increases, in whole or in
part, or approves rates over the objections of interested parties, it shall do
so by written order explaining its reasons and provide public notice thereof.
   (D)   Remedies. Whenever the Fiscal Court disapproves a schedule of rates
upon initial review or subsequent rate increases, it may employ any combination
of the following remedies.
      (1)   A prospective reduction in rates may be ordered consistent with FCC
rate standards or the results of a cost of service study.
      (2)   New rates may be prescribed by the city, upon recommendation of the
County Cable Communications Authority, to bring rates found to be unreasonable
into compliance with FCC rate standards or a cost of service study.
      (3)   Upon recommendation of the County Cable Communications Authority,
the county may, consistent with division (D)(4) below, order the franchisee to
refund to subscribers an amount by which rates are found to be unreasonable
under any of the following circumstances:
         (a)   As part of the initial review of rates;
         (b)   When the franchisee has failed to comply with a rate decision
and has continued to charge unreasonable rates; or
         (c)   Where the county has tolled a prospective rate increase for 90
to 150 additional days (as applicable) and the rate increase later found to be
unreasonable has gone into effect.
      (4)   When refunds may become applicable under division (D)(3) above, the
county shall issue a brief order when the tolled rates go into effect directing
the franchisee to keep accurate account of all amounts paid by individual
subscribers relative to the rates in question (an “accounting order”). The
period for which refunds may be ordered shall not exceed one year or extend
back in time before September 1, 1993, whichever period is less. Before
ordering a refund, the county must give the franchisee prior notice and an
opportunity to make a presentation, either orally in a hearing context or by
paper filings. Refunds shall include interest computed at the rate used by the
Internal Revenue Service for refunds and additional tax payments. Normally,
refunds shall be made to individual subscribers that paid the unreasonable
charges; however, where no accounting order has been issued or the franchisee
can demonstrate that such specific refunds will entail undue burden compared
with the amount of the refund, the county may authorize a one-time credit to
all subscribers of the class that paid the unreasonable rates.
   (E)   Conflicts and interpretations. If any provision in this section shall
be determined to be in conflict with a rule, regulation, policy or order of the
FCC, then in that circumstance the FCC requirement shall take precedence over
the requirement of this section. If any requirement of this section shall have
ambiguity in interpretation or in applicability, it shall be interpreted in a
way that is consistent with FCC rules, requirements and opinions.
(Ord. 94-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.02 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   In connection with the county’s regulation of cable rates under §
91.01, the Cable Authority shall be delegated the authority to perform the
following functions:
   (A)   To give notices to the franchisee on behalf of the county concerning
the rate regulation and receive all notice and filings from the franchisee
relative to such regulation;
   (B)   Analyze the data submitted by the franchisee in support of rates, seek
additional information from the franchisee as necessary, and, where
appropriate, issue orders tolling the effectiveness of rate increases and/or
imposing an accounting order;
   (C)   Schedule and conduct public hearings relative to an initial review of
rates subject to county regulation, and subsequent changes to such rates, and
receive comments thereto, both written and oral;
   (D)   Make recommendations to the Fiscal Court for final county action
concerning an initial review of rates or subsequent rate changes, including the
drafting of a recommended decision relevant to such final action, as
appropriate;
   (E)   Perform all administrative tasks concerning rate regulation and take
all actions on behalf of the county relevant thereto other than final action on
the approval or disapproval of rates and the imposition of remedies; and
   (F)   Provide general advice to the Fiscal Court relative to rate regulation
and the procedures related to such regulation.
(Ord. 94-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.03 INTERPRETATION.
   Any reference to County Cable Communication Authority in the foregoing
sections of this chapter shall be interpreted and construed as the County
Fiscal Court until such time as the Fiscal Court establishes a Cable
Communications Authority by amendment thereto.
(Ord. 94-2, passed 5-9-1994)
§ 91.04 NON-EXCLUSIVE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE PROVISIONS ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.
   The county adopts the non-exclusive cable television franchise provisions
providing for the term, selection of franchisee, franchise provisions and
restrictions, rates, charges and fees as set forth in full in Ord. 2021-14. A
copy of this ordinance is available for public inspection during normal
business hours in the office of the County Clerk.
(Ord. 2021-14, passed 9-27-2021)
CHAPTER 92: HOG FACILITIES
Section
   
92.01   Permit required
   
92.02   Definition
   
92.03   Application
   
92.04   Financial assurance
   
92.05   Setbacks
   
92.06   Inspection; compliance
   
92.07   Violation
   
92.08   Exemption
§ 92.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person (which includes an individual, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, government agency or business entity of
any kind) to construct, establish or operate a confined hog facility in the
county, or expand an existing facility by increasing the number of swine,
without a permit issued upon the approval and authority of the County Fiscal
Court.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONFINED HOG FACILITY. Includes, but is not limited to, hog waste holding
ponds or lagoons, confined hog barns, farrowing houses, gestation barns,
nursery barns; feeding floor and finishing floors, with over 1,000 hogs per
farm or per farm operation.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 92.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for such permits shall be made to the office of the County
Judge/Executive, County Courthouse, Paducah, Kentucky.
   (B)   The application shall be signed by the owner and operator of the
proposed facility and contain the following information:
      (1)   A blueprint showing building design configuration, both exterior
and interior, dimensions and construction materials;
      (2)   A survey plat prepared by a registered land surveyor, showing the
proposed facility location and the surrounding area to show compliance with
setback requirements hereinafter provided;
      (3)   A list of names and mailing addresses of all adjoining property
owners;
      (4)   A statement of manure management identifying all recorded manure
easement agreements, if any, obtained for the facility including a manure
disposal plan. The plan shall include the annual gallons of animal waste to be
land applied and the number of acres to be designated to receive this waste. If
a facility is subject to the jurisdiction of the State Cabinet for Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection, a copy of any management and disposal
plans as required by the Cabinet shall be deemed sufficient for purposes of
this permit;
      (5)   A statement of the responsible parties who will supervise the
construction and initial operation of the facility; and
      (6)   A statement of a plan for runoff management of waste disposal.
   (C)   The completed application shall be filed with the County Clerk and a
copy sent to the County Judge/Executive. The applicant shall then publish
notice of the application in the local newspaper in accordance with KRS Chapter
424 at the applicant’s own expense, stating the date, time and place of a
public hearing to be held by the Fiscal Court. The date, time and place of the
hearing will be provided by the County Judge/Executive and shall be at least 30
days from the date of publication. In addition, the applicant must send written
notice by certified mail to each adjoining property owner. At the conclusion of
the public hearing, the Fiscal Court may issue a permit provided all
requirements stated herein are met.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 92.04 FINANCIAL ASSURANCE.
   (A)   No person as defined herein shall operate a confined hog facility
without providing to the Fiscal Court financial assurance as herein required.
The owner or operator must submit a detailed written estimate, in current
dollars, of the cost to clean up the natural resources which could be
contaminated, polluted, defiled or soiled by leaks or spills from the manure
storage structures including lagoons which are part of the facility. The owner
or operator must annually adjust the cost estimate for inflation using the U.S.
Consumers Price Index for rural areas.
   (B)   The cost estimate shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   Cost of clean-up of above-ground facilities. The clean-up of above
ground facilities and manure shall be calculated by determining the costs of a
third party:
         (a)   Disposing of all manure stored on-site at an identified site;
and
         (b)   Cleaning or removing all above ground structures. For purposes
of this calculation, it is assumed that the manure storage container is 100%
full. The estimate submitted shall be certified by a registered engineer and
shall set out how the cost was determined.
      (2)   Cost of remediation of off-site contamination. The costs of
remediation of off-site contamination shall be calculated by multiplying the
animal weight capacity of the operation by $2 for those facilities which store
manure in earthen manure storage basins; by $1 for those facilities which store
manure in anaerobic lagoons; and by $0.50 for those facilities which store
manure in formed manure storage structures.
      (3)   Credit for maintaining wells. 
         (a)   The financial assurance amount for a facility that has installed
groundwater monitoring wells with at least one well located upgradient, and two
wells located downgradient from the manure lagoon, basin or structure shall be
reduced by 50% provided the test results are submitted to the Fiscal Court
annually and reveal no groundwater contamination.
         (b)   Using EPA approved methods and procedures for chemical analysis,
each water sample drawn shall be tested for the following chemical
constituents:
            1.   pH;
            2.   Conductivity;
            3.   Total dissolved solids;
            4.   Temperature;
            5.   Total alkalinity;
            6.   Chemical oxygen demand;
            7.   Ammonia-nitrogen;
            8.   Total Kjeldahl nitrogen;
            9.   Sulfate;
            10.   Chloride;
            11.   Total organic carbon;
            12.   Sodium; and
            13.   Nitrate-nitrogen.
         (c)   If appropriate, the facility may substitute Vadose Zone
monitoring devices for groundwater monitoring wells, subject to the approval of
the Cabinet for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.
      (4)   Amount of financial assurance required. 
         (a)   The cost determined under divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above and
the credit, if any, under division (B)(3) above shall be added together and the
sum shall be the financial assurance amount required under the provisions of
this section.
         (b)   The mechanisms used to demonstrate financial assurance must
insure that the funds necessary to meet the costs of clean-up and remediation
will be available if needed. In establishing financial assurance, owners and
operators must choose from the following options:
            1.   A facility may obtain a payment or performance surety bond.
The bond must be effective before the initial receipt of hogs into the
facility, and a copy filed with the Fiscal Court. The surety company issuing
the bond must, at a minimum, be as acceptable sureties on Federal Bonds and
Circular 570 of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. In addition, the bond
shall:
               a.   Be in an amount at least equal to the cost estimates
established above;
               b.   Provide that the surety will become liable under the bond
if the facility fails to perform as guaranteed by the bond; and
               c.   Provide that the surety may cancel the bond by sending
notice of cancellation by certified mail to the facility and Fiscal Court 120
days before cancellation. If cancelled, the facility must obtain alternate
financial assurance or cease operations.
            2.   A facility may obtain insurance which shall be effective
before the initial receipt of hogs at the operation. At a minimum, the insured
must be authorized to transact the business of insurance in the state. A copy
of the policy must be filed with the Fiscal Court and shall provide:
               a.   All funds will be available for any on- or off-site clean-
up resulting from the operation. The policy must guarantee that the insurer
will be responsible for: paying out funds to the facility or others authorized
to conduct the clean-up in an amount equal to the face amount of the policy;
               b.   The policy must be issued for a face amount at least equal
to the cost estimate for financial assurance established herein. The term FACE
AMOUNT means the total amount the insurer is obligated to pay under the policy.
Actual payments to the insurer will not change the face amount, although the
insurer’s future liability will be lowered by the amount of payments;
               c.   The policy must contain a provision allowing assignment of
the policy to a successor facility. Said assignment may be conditional upon
consent of the insurer, provided that such consignment is not unreasonably
refused; and
               d.   The policy must provide that the insurer may not cancel,
terminate or fail to renew the policy except for failure to pay the premium.
The automatic renewal of the policy must, at a minimum, provide the insurer
with the option of renewal at the face amount of the expiring policy. If there
is a failure to pay the premium, the insurer may cancel the policy by sending
notice of cancellation by certified mail to the facility and Fiscal Court 120
days before the cancellation. If the insurer cancels the policy, the facility
must obtain alternate financial assurance or cease operation.
            3.   A facility may demonstrate financial assurance by deposits
with the Fiscal Court of unsubordinated debentures, U.S. government bonds or
notes, or certificates of deposit issued by federal or state chartered banks
with a market value equal to or exceeding the sum of the financial assurance
requirement. Said financial instruments shall beheld by the Fiscal Court for so
long as the provisions of this chapter apply and may not be otherwise pledged
by the facility. Interest payments, if any, from the financial instruments
pledged as security shall be paid to the owner.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 92.05 SETBACKS.
   (A)   Confined hog facilities and waste treatment lagoons shall be located
at least 1,500 feet from a property boundary line or public roadway. Should the
owner of any affected property give written consent to a lesser setback
requirement, then this guideline shall be modified by the language of the
written consent and filed in the office of County Clerk.
   (B)   In addition to the setback described above, no confined hog facility
or waste treatment lagoon shall be located within 2,500 feet of any church,
public school or accredited private school.
   (C)   Distances will be measured from the nearest corner of a building or
the lagoon to the nearest corner of the affected property.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 92.06 INSPECTION; COMPLIANCE.
   The county shall have the right to inspect such facilities to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 92.07 VIOLATION.
   Any person as defined herein violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. Each day’s violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
§ 92.08 EXEMPTION.
   All confined hog facilities which have been in operation and have marketed
hogs within the last five years prior to July 1, 1997, shall be exempt from
this chapter, except as to expansion.
(Ord. 97-5, passed 11-19-1997)
CHAPTER 93: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Definitions
   
93.002   Scope
   
93.003   Adoption of state alcoholic beverage control laws
   
93.004   Mandatory compliance
Term and Issuance of License
   
93.015   License required
   
93.016   Application
   
93.017   Issuance standards
   
93.018   Refusal of issuance
   
93.019   Term of license
Licenses Required; Fees
   
93.030   Activities permitted by licenses
   
93.031   Distilled spirits and wine licenses
   
93.032   Distilled spirit, wine and malt beverage combination licenses
   
93.033   Malt beverage licenses
   
93.034   Special and limited purpose licenses
Retail Business Operating Regulations
   
93.045   Hours of operation
   
93.046   Patio and outdoor sales
   
93.047   Keeping of books and records
   
93.048   Posting of signs and display of license
Prohibited Practices
   
93.060   Advertising by handbills, circulars, and cards
   
93.061   Prizes prohibited
   
93.062   Intoxicated persons
   
93.063   Consumption on licensed premises
   
93.064   Retail premises not to be disorderly
   
93.065   Underage drinking
   
93.066   Bring your own beverage AKA “BYOB” expressly prohibited
Enforcement and Penalties
   
93.080   Enforcement; investigation and inspection of premises
   
93.081   Civil fines
 
   
93.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning; and, in
addition to the definitions and rules of construction set out in this section,
the definitions contained in KRS 241.010 are adopted as the meaning of such
words used in this chapter.
   ADMINISTRATOR, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR or COUNTY
ADMINISTRATOR. The County Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator. The County
Deputy Judge/Executive serves as the County Alcoholic Beverage Administrator
and shall administer and see to the enforcement of this chapter and all
statutes of the Commonwealth of Kentucky relating thereto and the regulations
of the Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Every liquid or solid, whether patented or not,
containing alcohol in any amount in excess of more than 1% of alcohol by
volume, which is capable of being consumed by human beings. It includes every
beverage for which the Commonwealth of Kentucky requires a license under KRS
Chapter 243.
   BOARD. - The State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board created by KRS 241.030.
   COUNTY. McCracken County, Kentucky.
   DISTILLED SPIRITS. Any product capable of being consumed by a human being
which contains alcohol in excess of the amount permitted by KRS Chapter 242
obtained by distilling, mixed with water or other substances in solution,
except wine, hard cider and malt beverages.
   HOTELS. Includes both “motels” and “inns”.
   LICENSE. Any license issued pursuant to KRS 243.020 to 243.670.
   LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license has been issued, pursuant to KRS
243.020 to 243.670.
   MALT BEVERAGE. Any fermented undistilled alcoholic beverage of any name or
description, manufactured from malt wholly or in part, or from any substitute
for malt, and having an alcoholic content greater than that permitted under KRS
Chapter 242.
   PREMISES or LICENSED PREMISES. A building or structure that does not include
any apartment structures, parking lots, or areas outside the confines of such
building or structure.
   RESTAURANT or BONA FIDE RESTAURANT. A facility where the usual and customary
business is the serving of meals to consumers and that has a bona fide kitchen
facility which has been inspected, approved, and holds a valid certification by
the McCracken County Health Department, and that derives at least 50% of its
total gross receipts from the sale of food.
   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter for consideration, and includes all
sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor or agent, servant or
employee, of any alcoholic beverage. SALE further means to solicit or receive
an order for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, and the
delivery of any alcoholic beverage.
   STATE LICENSE. Any license issued pursuant to KRS Chapters 241 to 244.
   WHOLESALE SALE. A sale to any person for the purpose of resale.
   WINE. The product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juices of
fruits, with the usual process of manufacture and normal additions, and
includes champagne and sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic content not
to exceed 24% by volume. It includes cider, hard cider, and perry cider and
also includes preparation or mixtures vended in retail containers if these
preparations or mixtures contain not more than 15% of alcohol by volume. It
includes ciders, perry, or sake.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.002 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall be construed to apply to the manufacture and trafficking
in distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages. Nothing in this chapter shall
excuse or relieve the licensee, or the owner, proprietor, employee, agent, or
person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are sold
from the restrictions, requirements, and penalties of any other ordinance or
any statutes of the Commonwealth relating to violations pertaining to alcoholic
beverages. Pursuant to this chapter, licensees shall be permitted to sell only
such type of alcoholic beverage for which the licensee holds a license.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.003 ADOPTION OF STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL LAWS.
   The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, including KRS Chapters 241, 243, and 244 as well as the regulations
of the Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, as the same may be amended,
are hereby adopted as part of this chapter except as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.004 MANDATORY COMPLIANCE.
   No person shall sell or possess for sale, give away, barter or exchange, or
act in any way with regard to an alcoholic beverage, that violates this chapter
or the applicable statutes and regulations of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
applicable thereto, or cause, conspire or facilitate the same to be done.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
TERM AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
§ 93.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or dispense at retail or wholesale, or have in
his or her possession for sale, any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages,
or manufacture the same in the county unless he or she shall first procure and
have issued to him or her a license under the provisions of this chapter. Each
license issued shall be applicable only to the specific premises shown thereon
and shall not entitle the holder of the licensee to sell from any other
premises within the county.
   (B)   No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail shall be used
for any premises unless the applicant for the license is the owner of the
premises or is in possession of the premises under a written lease for a term
of not less than the license period.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.016 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to obtain a license required by this chapter shall make
application to the County Clerk or his or her designee. The application shall
include the name and residence of the applicant and the physical address within
the county where alcoholic beverages are to be sold or dispensed. County
licensing fees shall be collected at the time at which the application is
approved by the Commonwealth of Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.017 ISSUANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the County
Clerk. If, in the judgment of the County Clerk, the applicant has complied with
all requirements of the commonwealth alcoholic beverage control laws, as well
as the regulatory provisions of this chapter, the license shall be issued. In
such case the County Clerk shall prepare and issue the license to the applicant
upon payment of the license fee required by this chapter.
   (B)   The standards for the issuance and renewal of all licenses required by
this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   The applicant has complied with all requirements of the
commonwealth's alcoholic beverage control laws as verified by the Commonwealth
of Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
      (2)   The applicant has complied with all regulatory provisions of this
chapter.
      (3)   The applicant has been issued an occupational business license and
has paid all fees and taxes required by the same.
      (4)   The applicant has paid all county ad valorem taxes which are due
and payable against the real property where the applicant’s business is to be
conducted and where alcoholic beverages are to be sold or dispensed.
      (5)   The applicant has paid all fees required by this chapter.
      (6)   The applicant has paid all county property maintenance liens due
and payable against the real property where the applicant’s business is to be
conducted and where alcoholic beverages are to be sold or dispensed.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.018 REFUSAL OF ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The County Clerk shall refuse to issue a license if the applicant
fails to comply with all of the terms and provisions set forth in §
93.017 above.
   (B)   Appeals of any such refusal by the County Clerk shall be taken before
the Commonwealth of Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control Board as provided in
KRS 241.200.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.019 TERM OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All licenses required by this chapter shall be valid for a term of one
year. The expiration date for all licenses required by this chapter is the same
date scheduled for the expiration of such licenses’ statewide counterpart.
   (B)   The fees set forth in §§
93.030 through
93.034 below shall be prorated commensurate with the number of months such
license(s) shall be in effect during the calendar year.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
LICENSES REQUIRED; FEES
§ 93.030 ACTIVITIES PERMITTED BY LICENSES.
   The activities permitted by the licenses outlined in §§
93.031 through
93.034 below are set forth in KRS Chapter 243, which is incorporated by
reference as if set forth fully herein.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.031 DISTILLED SPIRITS AND WINE LICENSES.
   (A)   Quota retail liquor package license: $630 per annum.
      (1)   The holder of this license may sell only distilled spirits and wine
for consumption off of the premises.
      (2)   The holder of this license must also obtain a non-quota malt
beverage retail package license in order to sell malt beverages for consumption
off of the premises.
   (B)   Quota retail liquor drink license: $787 per annum.
      (1)   The holder of this license may sell only distilled spirits and wine
by the drink.
      (2)   The holder of this license must also obtain a non-quota type 4 malt
beverage retail drink license in order to sell malt beverages by the drink.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.032 DISTILLED SPIRIT, WINE AND MALT BEVERAGE COMBINATION LICENSES.
   (A)   Non-quota Type 2 Retail Drink License (NQ-2): $840 per annum.
      (1)   The holder of this combination license may sell distilled spirits,
wine, and malt beverages by the drink. A second retail malt beverage license is
not required.
      (2)   The NQ-2 license incorporates the following former license types:
         (a)   Restaurant drink license;
         (b)   Motel drink license;
         (c)   Restaurant wine license;
         (d)   Airport drink license;
         (e)   Riverboat license.
   (B)   Non-quota type 3 retail drink license (NQ-3): $300 per annum
      (1)   The holder of this combination license may sell distilled spirits,
wine and malt beverages by the drink. A second retail malt beverage license is
not required.
      (2)   The NQ-3 license incorporates the former special private club
license.
      (3)   An NQ-3 licensee that qualifies as a special private club may not
hold a non-quota retail malt beverage package license.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.033 MALT BEVERAGE LICENSES.
   (A)   Non-quota type 4 malt beverage retail drink license (NQ-4): $52.50 per
annum.
      (1)   The holder of this license may sell only malt beverages by the
drink.
      (2)   For $50 per annum, the holder of this license may add a non-quota
retail malt beverage package license, allowing the sale of malt beverages for
consumption off the premises.
   (B)   Non-quota malt beverage retail package license (NQ): $52.50 per annum.
      (1)   The holder of this license may sell only malt beverages for
consumption off the premises.
      (2)   For $50 per annum, the holder of this license may add a non-quota
type 4 malt beverage retail drink license, allowing the sale of malt beverages
by the drink.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.034 SPECIAL AND LIMITED PURPOSE LICENSES.
   (A)   Special temporary license, per event: $90 per event.
      Nonprofit organizations are exempted from the licensing fee above.
   (B)   (1)   Special Sunday retail drink license: $300 per annum.
      (2)   Licensees that are authorized to sell distilled spirits, wine, and
malt beverages by the drink must also obtain a special Sunday retail drink
license to authorize these sales on Sundays.
   (C)   Limited restaurant license LR100 & LR50:   $840 per annum.
   (D)   Limited golf course license: $840 per annum.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018; Ord. 2024-08, passed 6-24-2024)
RETAIL BUSINESS OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 93.045 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The lawful hours of operation for licensed retail premises under this
chapter for retail package sales and retail sales by the drink of distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages shall be Monday through Saturday during the
following periods of time:
 
License                   Opening hour Closing hour
Retail package sales      6:00 a.m.    12:00 midnight
Retail sales by the drink 6:00 a.m.    3:00 a.m. the following day
 
   (B)   The lawful operating hours for licensed retail premises under this
chapter for retail package sales and retail sales by the drink of distilled
spirits, wine, and malt beverages on Sunday shall be during the following
periods of time:
 
License                   Opening hour Closing hour
Retail package sales      10:00 a.m.   10:00 p.m.
Retail sales by the drink 10:00 a.m.   10:00 p.m.
 
   (C)   Licensees selling retail sales by the drink shall not sell alcoholic
beverages during the 24 hours of Sunday without a Sunday retail drink license
issued pursuant to § 93.034(B).
   (D)   The licensee shall ensure that at the closing hours all patrons have
vacated the premises. Operators and their employees engaged in regular and
ordinary post-closing activities may be on the premises during the closed
hours, provided that the licensee has complied with division (E) below.
   (E)   If a licensee provides a separate department within the licensed
premises capable of being locked and closed off, within which is kept all
stocks of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine, and all fixtures and
apparatus connected with such licensee’s business as a licensee, and said
department is kept locked during the times mentioned in divisions (A) or (B)
above, such licensee shall be deemed to have complied with this section.
   (F)   Retail sales by the drink at hotels, motels, and restaurants. The
retail sales of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by the drink shall
be permitted on Sundays during the hours stated in division (B) above for
hotels, motels and restaurants holding a nonquota type 2 license, as defined
herein, provided such licensee meets each of the following express conditions
precedent:
      (1)   The dining facility of the hotel, motel, and restaurant has a
minimum seating capacity of 50 people at tables;
      (2)   At least 50% or more of the gross annual receipts from the dining
facilities are received from the sale of food; and
      (3)   The licensee shall obtain a Sunday sales license.
   (G)   Golf course sales. Pursuant to KRS 244.290(4) and 244.280(4) a holder
of a limited golf course license shall be permitted to purchase, receive,
possess, and sell distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages at retail by the
drink from the hour of 6:00 a,m. until the hour of 12:00 midnight, Monday
through Sunday. Sunday sales of distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages by
the drink is expressly permitted.
   (H)   Small farm wineries. A licensed small farm winery shall be permitted
to engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday from the hour of
10:00 a.m. until the hour of 12:00 midnight.
   (I)   New Years Eve sales. A licensee shall be permitted to sell distilled
spirits, wine, or malt beverages by the package or by the drink on New Years
Eve until 3:00 a.m. on January lst. If New Years Eve falls upon a Sunday,
distilled spirits, wine, and/or malt beverages may be sold by the package or by
the drink commencing at 10:00 a.m. on December 31 until the hour of 3:00 a.m.
on January 1.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018; Ord. 2024-08, passed 6-24-2024) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.046 PATIO AND OUTDOOR SALES.
   (A)   Patio and outdoor sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only
on premises licensed for sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink.
   (B)   No licensee shall offer alcoholic beverages for sale in a patio or
outdoor area of the licensee’s premises except in a clearly defined patio or
outdoor area. All outdoor areas shall be subject to the approval of the County
Administrator. The operation of patio and outdoor sales shall be governed by
the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the regulation of local
zoning authorities as well as code enforcement and public safety officers.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.047 KEEPING OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every licensee shall keep and maintain adequate books and records of all
transactions involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the same manner
required by the rules and regulations of the Kentucky Alcoholic Beverages
Control Board. Such books and records shall be available at all reasonable
times for inspection by the Administrator or his designee.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.048 POSTING OF SIGNS AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In accordance with KRS 244.083, every retail licensee shall cause to
be at all times displayed in a conspicuous, prominent place on the licensed
premises each of the following documents so that they may be seen and observed
by all persons entering the licensed premises;
      (1)   A printed card at least eight inches by 11 inches in size which
shall show, in 30 point or larger type, the following legal warnings:
         Persons under the age of 21 are subject to a fine up to $100 if they:
         (a)   Enter a licensed premises to buy, or have served to them,
alcoholic beverages;
         (b)   Possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase, or get another to
purchase alcoholic beverages; or
         (c)   Misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or
obtaining alcoholic beverages.
      (2)   The license to sell alcoholic beverages pertaining to the
particular premises. The licensee shall not at any time post the license on a
premises other than the licensed premises or upon a premises where traffic in
alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any person other than the licensee.
Nor shall the licensee or any other person deface, destroy, or alter the
license in any way.
   (B)   Failure to so display such license shall be prima facie evidence that
no such valid license has been issued or exists and all actions, business, and
transactions authorized thereby conducted on the premises are illegal and in
violation of the provisions of this chapter as well as the state statutes and
regulations of State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board pertaining thereto.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
PROHIBITED PRACTICES
§ 93.060 ADVERTISING BY HANDBILLS, CIRCULARS, AND CARDS.
   No licensee shall distribute or cause to be distributed any handbills,
circulars, or cards as a medium for advertising alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.061 PRIZES PROHIBITED.
   No licensee shall give away or offer to give away anything tangible of value
as a premium or prize, or for any other purpose in connection with the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.062 INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   No licensee shall permit any person to become manifestly under the influence
of an alcoholic beverage upon the licensed premises, nor shall any licensee
permit any person manifestly under the influence of an alcoholic beverage to
remain on the licensed premises. Each licensee shall strictly comply with all
applicable statutes regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages, including but
not limited to KRS 244.080 regarding prohibited sales.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.063 CONSUMPTION ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   Any person or licensee that owns, operates, or controls any premises
upon which alcoholic beverages are sold shall prohibit the removal of any such
alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises if said alcoholic beverage is in
an open container.
   (B)   Any person or licensee who owns, operates, or controls any premises
upon which alcoholic beverages are sold shall prohibit the drinking of
alcoholic beverages on any parking lot which is adjacent to, connected with, or
used by the patrons of such premises.
   (C)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage on or in any parking lot
which is made available for use by the patrons of the licensed premises and
which is under the direct control of a licensee or which is part of a licensed
premises.
   (D)   No person shall consume or be in possession of any alcoholic beverage
on the licensed premises other than alcoholic beverages sold and dispensed by
the licensee. The licensee or his or her agent shall have the authority to
order the immediate removal of any alcoholic beverage carried onto the licensed
premises in violation of this division (D).
   (E)   Exemption for outdoor festivals. There is an exemption from this
section for any licensee who holds as special temporary event license
permitting the operation of an outdoor festival.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.064 RETAIL PREMISES NOT TO BE DISORDERLY.
   (A)   A licensee, a patron, or the licensee’s agents, servants, or employees
shall not cause, suffer, or permit the licensed premises to be disorderly.
   (B)   Acts which constitute a disorderly premises consist of causing,
suffering, or permitting patrons, the licensee or the licensee’s servants,
agents, or employees to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, or
create the risk of public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm by:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening
behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise;
      (3)   Refusing to obey an official order to disperse issued to maintain
public safety in dangerous proximity to a fire, a general hazard or other
emergency;
      (4)   Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
that serves no legitimate purpose;
      (5)   Creating a public nuisance;
      (6)   Engaging in criminal activity that would constitute a misdemeanor
or felony offense; or
      (7)   Failing to maintain the minimum health, fire, safety, or sanitary
standards established by the state or local government, or by state
administrative regulations pertaining to the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.065 UNDERAGE DRINKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person under the
age of 21 years in purchasing, delivering, serving, or in any way procuring,
directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages, whether or not remuneration is
received or contemplated.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.066 BRING YOUR OWN BEVERAGE AKA “BYOB” EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
   As set forth in KRS 243.020(3) and (4), the practice commonly referred to as
bring your own beverage AKA “BYOB” is expressly prohibited. Specifically, any
person conducting a place of business patronized by the public, who is not a
licensee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, shall not permit any person to
sell, barter, loan, give away, or drink alcoholic beverages on the premises of
the licensee’s place of business. Further, a licensee shall not permit any
consumer to possess, give away, or drink alcoholic beverages on the licensed
premises that are not purchased from the licensee.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018) Penalty, see §
93.999
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 93.080 ENFORCEMENT; INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Local law enforcement officers and the County Administrator are
authorized to enforce this chapter.
   (B)   The County Administrator and any investigator acting under the
authority of the County Administrator shall have the full police powers of
peace officers within the boundaries of the county. They, as well as any
authorized law enforcement officer, may inspect any premises where alcoholic or
beverages are manufactured, sold, stored, or otherwise trafficked without first
obtaining a search warrant.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.081 CIVIL FINES.
   (A)   The following penalties shall be in addition to any criminal
prosecution instituted in McCracken District Court against an alleged violator
and fines hereunder shall be payable to the County Administrator.
      (1)   The County Administrator may assess a civil fine, for a first time
offender of not more than $500 per violation.
      (2)   For the second and each subsequent offense, the County
Administrator may assess a civil fine of not more that $1,000 per violation.
   (B)   The payment of this fine shall be transmitted to the County Treasurer
to be deposited in the appropriate designated account.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any of the provisions
of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall, for the first
offense be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $250 and incarceration
in the county jail for a period not to exceed 45 days.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any of the provisions
of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall, for the second
and each subsequent offense shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to
exceed $500 and incarceration in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90
days.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 3-12-2018)
CHAPTER 94: JEWELRY, COINS AND PRECIOUS METALS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Duties of secondary jewelry or precious metal dealers
   
94.03   Duties of investment grade metal dealers
   
94.04   Exceptions
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BULLION. Gold, silver or platinum at a level of purity above 80%, in the
form of a bar or coin, and used only for investment purposes.
   COIN. A small piece of metal, usually flat and circular, authorized by a
government for use as money or created by a public or private entity for
commemorative, collectible or investment purposes.
   INVESTMENT GRADE METAL DEALER. Any person or business engaged in the
practice of purchasing, trading for or otherwise acquiring pre-owned coins or
bullion to resell, hold as collateral for a loan, or otherwise make a profit.
The person or business must not exclusively engage in the practice of buying
and/or selling coins or bullion to be an INVESTMENT GRADE METAL DEALER. A bank
is not an INVESTMENT GRADE METAL DEALER.
   JEWELRY. An object designed for the adornment of the body, usually made of
gold, silver, platinum or other metals, often with precious or semiprecious
stones or such organic substances as pearls, coral and amber. Examples of
JEWELRY would include, but not be limited to rings, necklaces, watches,
earrings and bracelets. If JEWELRY contains any amount of gold, silver or
platinum, it is also a precious metal as defined below. Coins and bullion are
not JEWELRY for the purpose of this chapter.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Any amount of gold, silver or platinum. This includes any
amount of gold, silver or platinum mixed with or attached to any other
substance(s). Coins and bullion are not PRECIOUS METALS for the purpose of this
chapter.
   SECONDARY JEWELRY OR PRECIOUS METAL DEALER. Any person or business engaged
in the practice of purchasing, trading for, or otherwise acquiring pre-owned
jewelry or precious metals to resell, hold as collateral for a loan, or
otherwise make a profit. The person or business must not exclusively engage in
any of these practices to be a secondary jewelry or precious metal dealer.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 3-24-2013)
§ 94.02 DUTIES OF SECONDARY JEWELRY OR PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS.
   Any person or business acting as a secondary jewelry or precious metal
dealer shall:
   (A)   Register as a secondary jewelry or precious metal dealer with the
County Finance Department located at the County Courthouse, 301 South Sixth
Street, Paducah, KY 42001. This registration process requires, but is not
limited to, the following requirements:
      (1)   Designate a physical address in the county for business operations.
This address is where secondary jewelry and/or precious metals are acquired. A
post office box may not be used;
      (2)   Designate a registered agent for service of process. This
registered agent must have a physical address in the commonwealth. A post
office box may not be used; and
      (3)   Register and obtain a county business license with the County
Finance Department.
   (B)   Require photo identification to verify the identity of any person
transferring secondary jewelry or precious metals to the dealer;
   (C)   Keep all acquired secondary jewelry or precious metals for a period of
ten days in the county, at the business operations address given to the County
Finance Department; and
   (D)   Register the following information for all acquisitions of pre-owned
jewelry or precious metals with the County Sheriff’s Department by using
LeadsOnline:
      (1)   The date of the acquisition;
      (2)   Name, address, date of birth, race, sex and operator’s license or
state photo identification number of the person transferring jewelry or
precious metals to the dealer;
      (3)   A detailed description of the property acquired, including any make
or model and serial number;
      (4)   Photographs of the acquired property. The photos shall include the
photo identification of the person transferring the items to the dealer; and
      (5)   Each transaction must be entered into LeadsOnline by midnight on
the day of the acquisition. The County Sheriff’s Department is available to
assist with the registration and use of LeadsOnline.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 3-24-2013)
§ 94.03 DUTIES OF INVESTMENT GRADE METAL DEALERS.
   Any person or business acting as an investment grade metal dealer shall:
   (A)   Register as an investment grade metal dealer with the County Finance
Department located at the County Courthouse, 301 South Sixth Street, Paducah,
KY 42001. This registration process requires, but is not limited to the
following requirements:
      (1)   Designate a physical address in the county for business operations.
This address is where bullion and/or coins are acquired. A post office box may
not be used;
      (2)   Designate a registered agent for service of process. This
registered agent must have a physical address in the commonwealth. A post
office box may not be used; and
      (3)   Register and obtain a county business license with the County
Finance Department.
   (B)   Require photo identification to verify the identity of any person
transferring coins or bullion to the dealer; and
   (C)   Keep electronic or paper records at the business operations address
given to the County Finance Department containing the following information
about the acquired bullion or coins:
      (1)   The date of the acquisition;
      (2)   Name, address, date of birth, race, sex and operator’s license or
state photo identification number of the person transferring coins or bullion
to the dealer;
      (3)   A detailed description of the property acquired;
      (4)   Photographs of the acquired coins or bullion. The photos shall
include the photo identification of the person transferring the items to the
dealer; and
      (5)   These records must be maintained for a period of six months and be
available for inspection by the County Sheriff’s Department upon request.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 3-24-2013)
§ 94.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Secondary jewelry or precious metal dealers are not required to comply
with §
94.02 if they are accepting a return or exchange of specific and identifiable
merchandise originally sold by the dealer to the same person returning or
exchanging this merchandise.
   (B)   Investment grade metal dealers are not required to comply with §
94.03 if they are accepting a return or exchange of specific and identifiable
merchandise originally sold by the dealer to the same person returning or
exchanging this merchandise.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 3-24-2013)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
94.02 or
94.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not
less than $25, nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, for each offense.
(Ord. 2013-1, passed 3-24-2013)
CHAPTER 95: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
95.01   Purpose and findings
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Licensing requirements for massage establishments
   
95.04   Issuance of massage establishment license
   
95.05   Revocation of license
   
95.06   Compliance with health regulations
   
95.07   Applicant and employees to be free from communicable disease
   
95.08   Cleanliness of employees and equipment
   
95.09   Use of massage establishment as place of sleep
   
95.10   Place, manner and times of massages
   
95.11   Prohibited activities
   
95.12   Inspections
   
95.13   Territory embraced
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate massage
establishments in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
the citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
relating to massage establishments.
   (B)   Findings.
      (1)   Since the operation of a massage establishment primarily involves
the physical manipulation of body parts, the actual business facility, the
manner, and the time frame in which the business is operated present important
public interest issues.
      (2)   The operation of a massage establishment requires compliance with
local and state health regulations.
      (3)   In the operation of massage establishments, equipment may be used
to perform certain manipulations on patrons. Therefore, the cleanliness and
safety of the equipment and its operation presents an important public interest
issue.
      (4)   The operation of a massage establishment requires physical contact
between the employee and patrons. Hence, it is desirable in order to prevent
the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information
regarding employees.
      (5)   The City of Paducah, located within the geographical boundaries of
the county, has in place a city ordinance dealing with the licensing and
regulation of massage establishments and their employees.
      (6)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism by
which to regulate massage establishments and their employees.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The McCracken County Director of Operations.
   EMPLOYEE or ATTENDANT. A person who works, renders or performs any services
in and/or for a massage establishment regardless of whether said person is paid
a salary, wage or other compensation by the licensee of the massage
establishment or is full-time, part-time, an independent contractor, or on a
contract or subcontract basis. This definition includes any person who provides
services on behalf of any massage establishment to the patrons of such
business, whether the individual receives any remuneration, gratuity or tips of
any kind, or pays the licensee for the right to work.
   ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business or operation of any kind, whether
existing or opening; the conversion of any existing business; or the relocation
of any existing business.
   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a massage
establishment has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant
on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a massage
establishment as required under this chapter.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs and/or the conduct of a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment, building, room or place other than
a regularly licensed hospital, medical clinic, nursing home or dispensary, the
offices of a physician, a surgeon, or an osteopath, or a chiropractor where
nonmedical, nonsurgical, nonosteopathic and nonchiropractic manipulative
exercises, massages or procedures are practiced upon the human body, or any
part thereof, for other than cosmetic or beautifying purposes, with or without
the use of mechanical or other devices (by anyone not a physician, surgeon,
osteopath or chiropractor or of a similarly registered status, and shall
include any place where baths, exercises or similar services are offered).
   MASSEUR (MALE) and MASSEUSE (FEMALE). A person who practices any one or more
of the arts of body massage, either by hand or mechanical apparatus, oil rubs,
corrective gymnastics or mechanotherapy, including color therapy, dietetics,
hot packs, cabinet, tub, shower, site, vapor, steam or any other special type
of bath.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT.
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal, deviant or perverted, actual or simulated,
including, but not limited to, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anilingus,
cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, sadism or sadomasochism;
      (3)   Erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices;
      (4)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (5)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence;
      (6)   Bestiality; or
      (7)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (6) above.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999)
§ 95.03 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, after 30 days from the effective date of this
chapter, for any person to operate a massage establishment without first having
acquired a business license issued by the county pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   An application for all licenses under this chapter must be made on a
form provided by the county.
   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as to enable the county to determine whether the applicant meets
the qualifications established in this chapter.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a massage establishment is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If
a person who wishes to operate a massage establishment is other than an
individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest in the business
must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be
qualified under §
95.04, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (E)   The completed application for a massage establishment license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of age;
         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or
         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is authorized to do business in the commonwealth, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of
the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the massage establishment under
a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:
         (a)   The massage establishment’s fictitious name; and
         (b)   Submit the required registration documents.
      (3)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter
or other similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the massage establishment for which
the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner
in a partnership or an officer, director, principal stockholder of a
corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has been
previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the massage establishment for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
      (4)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this chapter or other similar massage establishment
ordinances from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of
such other licensed businesses.
      (5)   The applicant’s Social Security number and/or his or her state or
federally issued tax identification number.
      (6)   Applicants for a license under this chapter shall have a continuing
duty to promptly supplement application information required in the event that
said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The
failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days from the date of
such change by supplementing the application on file with the county shall be
grounds for suspension of a license.
      (7)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, submit a floor plan drawn to scale identifying the use of each room,
and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with any
health, fire, zoning, plumbing and/or building codes of the county in effect at
the time of filing the application.
      (8)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of
obtaining a massage establishment license; provided, however, a massage
establishment duly licensed under the ordinances of the City of Paducah shall
not be required to obtain a license under this chapter.
      (9)   The application form for licenses issued under this chapter shall
contain a provision providing that under penalty of perjury the applicant
verifies that the information contained therein is true to the best of their
knowledge.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 99-6.1, passed 3-27-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 ISSUANCE OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the Director and
upon payment of the non-refundable application fee in the amount of $150, the
Director or his or her designee shall immediately stamp the application as
received and shall immediately thereafter initiate an investigation of the
application and the proposed massage establishment by all appropriate county
departments and agencies.
      (1)   The Director shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant within ten business days after receipt of a completed massage
establishment application.
      (2)   The Director shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless he or she determines that one or more of the following is
true:
         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
         (b)   An applicant is overdue on payment to the county of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed or imposed upon the applicant;
         (c)   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
chapter for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
         (d)   The premises to be used for the massage establishment is not in
compliance with applicable health and fire regulations required for buildings
and structures within the county;
         (e)   The premises to be used for the massage establishment is not in
compliance with applicable building and plumbing codes required for buildings
and structures within the county in effect at the time of filing and does not
have on display a certificate of occupancy issued by the county for the
specified use of the premises;
         (f)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; and/
or
         (g)   An applicant has failed to comply with any provision or
requirement of this chapter.
   (B)   If the Director fails to find one or more of the above enumerated
conditions present within ten days from the date of receipt of the application,
then he or she shall issue the license. The license, if granted, shall state on
its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date and the address of the massage establishment. All licenses
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the massage
establishment so that they may be easily read at any time.
      (1)   Licenses shall expire one year from date of issuance and may be
renewed on an annual basis thereafter with the payment of a renewal fee in the
amount of $75 and a reinspection as ordered by the Director.
      (2)   If the license application is denied, then the applicant shall be
notified of the denial in writing and be afforded a hearing before the Fiscal
Court.
      (3)   Written notice of any denial hereunder and any hearing thereon
before the Fiscal Court may be given to the licensee by delivering the notice
by hand to the licensee or, in his or her absence, to any adult person employed
by the licensee at licensed premises or the deposit of the notice postage
prepaid with the United States Postal Service and addressed to the licensee at
the licensed premises, not less than ten days prior to such hearing before the
Fiscal Court, and the licensee may present such evidence or witnesses as he or
she shall wish to the Fiscal Court. The Fiscal Court may uphold the denial or
remand the application back to the Director for further investigation. A simple
majority vote by the Fiscal Court shall control.
      (4)   The applicant may reapply for a license no sooner than six months
after the denial by the Director.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 99-6.1, passed 3-27-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license issued hereunder by the county may be revoked by the
county upon the violation of any section, requirement or provision of this
chapter by the licensee, or any agent, attendant or other employee of the
licensee, provided the licensee shall first be notified of the violation and be
afforded a hearing before the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Written notice of any violation hereunder and any hearing thereon
before the Fiscal Court may be given to the licensee by delivering the notice
by hand to the licensee, or in his or her absence to any adult person employed
by the licensee at the licensed premises, or the deposit of the notice postage
prepaid with the United States Postal Service and addressed to the licensee at
the licensed premises, not less than ten days prior to such hearing before the
Fiscal Court, and the licensee may present such evidence or witnesses as he or
she shall wish to the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   The Fiscal Court may uphold the revocation or remand the investigation
back to the Director for further, investigation. A simple majority vote by the
Fiscal Court shall control.
   (D)   In the event of any revocation of a license for the operation of a
massage establishment in accordance with this chapter, the licensee shall not
be entitled to the issuance of a subsequent license for the operation of a
massage establishment in the county within 12 months following the date of the
revocation.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 99-6.1, passed 3-27-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   Any massage establishment licensed by the county shall at all times comply
with all health regulations, rules and requirements as shall now or hereafter
be promulgated by the Paducah-McCracken County Health Department, and any
premises used for the purpose of a massage establishment shall, during all
hours of operation, be made open and available to inspection by the Paducah-
McCracken County Health Department for the purpose of assuring compliance with
said health rules, regulations and requirements.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 99-6.1, passed 3-27-2000)
§ 95.07 APPLICANT AND EMPLOYEES TO BE FREE FROM COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   (A)   No applicant for a license to conduct or operate a massage
establishment shall be granted such a license unless he or she shall first
present to the county a written verification by a licensed physician, bearing a
date not more than 90 days prior to the date of application, evidencing that
the applicant and all persons to be employed by the applicant in and about the
operation of the massage establishment are free of any contagious, infectious
or communicable disease.
   (B)   No masseur, masseuse or other employee or attendant applying or
administering massages shall be employed in any massage establishment,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter without having first obtained a
written verification from a licensed physician, bearing a date not more than 90
days prior thereto, that the person or employee is free of any contagious,
infectious or communicable disease, and the masseur, masseuse or other employee
or attendant of any massage establishment shall, at all times while on duty or
working in any massage establishment, have said written medical verification
readily available for inspection.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 CLEANLINESS OF EMPLOYEES AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No towels, wash cloths or other linen items shall come in contact with
the body, or any part thereof, of any customer or patron at a massage
establishment that has not been rendered sanitary and laundered since last
used.
   (B)   Every person applying or administering massages shall cleanse his or
her hands thoroughly by washing same with soap and hot water before attending
or massaging any customer or patron.
   (C)   Any person while applying or administering massages shall be clothed
from the shoulders to the knees by a robe, smock or other opaque apparel so
that the patron or customer shall be protected from bodily contact with the
person applying or administering the massage except for the hands and arms of
the person applying or administering the massage.
   (D)   Any massage establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be
equipped with running hot and cold water, and with all other appliances,
furnishings and materials as may be necessary to enable persons employed in and
about the massage establishment to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.09 USE OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AS PLACE OF SLEEP.
   No massage establishment shall be used as and for a dormitory or rooming
house or place of sleep for either employees or customers or patrons, nor shall
any licensee under this chapter permit any massage establishment to be so used.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 PLACE, MANNER AND TIMES OF MASSAGES.
   (A)   No massages shall be administered or applied by any licensee hereunder
or any employee, operator or attendant, except in or upon the premises or
regular place of business of the licensee where the license is regularly
displayed and at the place and location designated for the operation of the
massage establishment in the license.
   (B)   No masseur, masseuse or other employee or attendant in any massage
establishment shall apply or administer any massage or other treatment to any
person behind locked doors. All means of ingress and egress to individual
massage rooms within a massage establishment must be constructed and maintained
in such a manner that any person could, at all times, readily and without
obstructions enter into the room.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to render any service to the
public upon the premises of a massage establishment except during the time that
the establishment is open with free access thereto by all members of the
public, during which time all portions of such establishment shall be open to
the inspection of any inspector of the Paducah-McCracken County Health
Department, and to the County Sheriff Department.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for massage establishments to operate between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No owner or manager or employee or attendant of a massage
establishment shall authorize or tolerate in his or her establishment any
activity or behavior prohibited by the laws of the commonwealth, or the
ordinances of the county, including such laws proscribing acts of sexual
conduct or other obscene acts or performances as defined in §
95.02.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any masseur, masseuse, attendant or person
employed in a massage establishment to engage in sexual conduct in connection
with any massage or other service rendered by the establishment, or to
advertise or offer any sexual conduct in connection with such service, as
defined in §
95.02.
   (C)   No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages, nor the consumption
thereof, shall be allowed, permitted or suffered to be done in or upon any
premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter or during on-site
massage therapy.
   (D)   No licensee shall perform or permit any massage therapy to be provided
to a person under the age of 18, provided a person under the age of 18 may
utilize or receive massage therapy from a licensed massage therapist if
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian and a parent or legal guardian has
authorized such therapy in writing.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.12 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The County Sheriff’s Department or the county police or other county
departments or agencies may from time to time make an inspection of each
licensed establishment in the county for the purposes of determining that the
provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection
officer immediate access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any
manner; provided further, that any failure on the part of any licensee or
employee to grant immediate access to such inspector shall be grounds for the
revocation or suspension of any business or employee license.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.13 TERRITORY EMBRACED.
   All territory within the legal boundaries of the county shall be embraced by
the provisions of this chapter except for that territory that is regulated by
the City of Paducah, Kentucky.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
shall do any act made unlawful by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned
for not more than six months, or both, and in addition to such penalty, it may
be considered grounds for revocation of the license of the owner or manager of
the establishment
   (B)   Each incident or separate occurrence of an act that constitutes a
violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 99-6, passed 11-15-1999)
CHAPTER 96: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
96.01   Purpose and findings
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Classification
   
96.04   Restrictions, requirements and conditions
   
96.05   Exhibition of films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms
   
96.06   Inspection
   
96.07   Regulations pertaining to live performances
   
96.08   Record-keeping requirements
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations relating to sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in reports made available to the
Fiscal Court, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v.
Play Time Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young vs. American Mini Theaters,
426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and
on studies in other communities, including, but not limited to, Phoenix,
Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the report of
the Attorney General’s Working Group on the regulation of sexually oriented
businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Fiscal Court finds:
      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners
of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their
premises;
      (2)   Certain employees of sexually oriented business defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidents of certain
types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments;
      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur
at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semi-private booths or cubicals for viewing films, videos or live sex shows;
      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such activities which
creates unhealthy conditions;
      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses;
      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis B, non-A, non-13 amebiasis, salmonella infections and
shigella infections;
      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States. Through December 31, 1997,
there have been 619,690 reported cases of AIDS in the United States;
      (8)   As of December 31, 1997, there have been 2,583 reported cases of
AIDS in the commonwealth;
      (9)   The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of October
22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn;
      (10)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts;
      (11)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities
and maintain those facilities;
      (12)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found
in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult oriented
films;
      (13)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(12) above raise
substantial governmental concerns;
      (14)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns;
      (15)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters;
and
      (16)   The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
county will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin operated, slug operated or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disk players, or other image producing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. 
      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction
or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas;” or
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and still be characterized as ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or
ADULT VIDEO STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performance which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities;” or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right-
of-way which advertises the availability of this adult-type photographic
reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
dominant depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state
of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”
   COUNTY. The County of McCracken, Kentucky.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods on the premises.
   ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides sexually oriented entertainment in a
sexually oriented business whether or not an employee of the business and
whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any sexually oriented business, whether existing or opening
of such business; the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business to any sexually oriented business; the additions of
any sexually oriented businesses to any other sexually oriented business; or
the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of,
the affairs and/or the conduct of a sexually oriented business.
   NUDE, NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areolae at its highest point or
the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the
areolae is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Depiction of human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation, active human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, holding
or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or breasts.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult amusement arcade, adult book store,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult stage theater, escort agency or sexual encounter
center.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; or
      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breast;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000)
§ 96.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult amusement arcades;
   (B)   Adult book stores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (D)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult stage theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies; and
   (H)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. 2o00-4, passed 4-24-2000)
§ 96.04 RESTRICTIONS, REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   All sexually oriented businesses classified under §
96.03 shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   An establishment shall not exhibit any lettering, wording, pictorial
or representational matter which is distinguished or characterized by a
depiction of sexual activities on any sign subject to public view from outside
the establishment.
   (B)   An establishment shall not display its stock in trade, inventory or
merchandise which depicts, describes or relates to sexual activities in such a
manner as to be subject to public view from outside the establishment.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by laws which may be more restrictive, no
owner or operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit a person under 18
years of age to be employed by or enter the establishment.
   (D)   An establishment must have an employee on duty at all times in which
the business is open and must be positioned at a station in the premises which
is located in such a manner that the entrance can be monitored at all times.
Any person who reasonably appears to be under the age of 18 shall be requested
to verify his or her age. All persons under the age of 18 discovered in the
establishment shall be immediately escorted out of the premises.
   (E)   No establishment, except for an adult motel, shall remain open at any
time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (F)   (1)   No act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or sexual contact shall be permitted in or on the licensed
premises of any sexually oriented business, except an adult motel.
      (2)   No owner, operator, licensee or employee of a sexually oriented
business shall knowingly permit these activities to occur on the licensed
premises.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 EXHIBITION OF FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” shall comply
with the following requirements.
      (1)   Any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a viewing
area in which any amusement device or viewing screen is located shall be
constructed of not less than one hour fire-restrictive material and shall
contain no hole or other perforation.
      (2)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there shall be an unobstructed view from a manager’s or cashier’s station
of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding restrooms. The view required in this section must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s or cashier’s station.
      (3)   No viewing room or booth shall be obstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials. No
patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area to which patrons are not permitted.
      (4)   No viewing room or booth shall be occupied by more than one person
at any time. No owner, operator or employee shall knowingly permit any viewing
room or booth to be occupied by more than one person at any time.
      (5)   No restroom shall contain any video reproduction devices or
equipment.
      (6)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than ten footcandles as measured at floor
level.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or employee to ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron or customer is present in the premises.
      (8)   No owner, operator or employee shall allow openings of any kind to
exist between viewing rooms or booths.
      (9)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
      (10)   The owner, operator and/or employees shall, during each business
day, cause the walls between the viewing booths to be regularly inspected to
determine if any openings or holes exist.
      (11)   All floor coverings in viewing rooms or booths shall be non-
porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (12)   There must be at least one employee on duty and situated at the
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
   (B)   All sexually oriented businesses in operation in the county on the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with the configuration requirements
of divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above within 120 days after the effective date
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 INSPECTION.
   All sexually oriented businesses shall permit representatives of the county,
including representatives of the Sheriff’s Department, Fire Department or other
county departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000)
§ 96.07 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LIVE PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   All live performances in any sexually oriented business shall be on a
designated performance area consisting of a stage or platform at least 18
inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from any
area in which any patrons are permitted.
   (B)   No person shall appear nude or in a state of nudity while engaged in
any live performance on the premises of any sexually oriented business.
   (C)   No person shall appear semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition while
engaged in any live performance on the premises of any sexually oriented
business except on the stage or platform described in division (A) above.
   (D)   No entertainer or employee shall be permitted to have any physical
contact with any patron during any performance.
   (E)   No entertainer or employee shall be visible from any public place
outside the premises during any performance.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.08 RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
   Each sexually oriented business shall maintain and retain for a period of
two years beyond the last date of employment, the full name, date of birth,
last known address, date of termination and Social Security number of all
persons employed by the sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, or
be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 12 months or both.
(Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-24-2000)
CHAPTER 97: SOLID WASTE FACILITIES
Section
   
97.01   Title
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Application of this chapter
 
   
97.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Forms
§ 97.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “McCracken County Solid
Waste Management Facility Licensing and Permitting Ordinance.”
(Ord. 98-4, passed 1-11-1999)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
partnership, association, federal agency, state agency or any interstate body.
   PROCESSING. Incineration, composting, bailing, shredding, salvaging,
compacting and other processes whereby solid waste is modified or reduced.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Any solid waste by-product that has a marketable value
to any person, including, but not limited to, types of metal, plastics and
paper products.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, litter, refuse, sludge and other material,
including solid liquid semi- solid or contained gaseous material resulting from
industrial, commercial or residential activities.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. Any facility that accepts, stores, disposes
processes or transfers solid waste and or recyclable materials. This includes,
but is not limited to, transfer stations and recycling centers or any other
solid waste handling facility.
   TRANSFER STATION. Any transportation related facility, including loading
docks, compaction equipment and other similar facilities where shipments of
solid waste are held or transferred during the normal course of transportation.
(Ord. 98-4, passed 1-11-1999)
§ 97.03 APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a solid waste
management facility without a permit to conduct such business. Said permit will
be issued upon the approval and authority of the County Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Permits will be issued for a period of not more than one year, subject
to continued conformance with the regulations governing the collection,
processing and transportation of solid waste in the county and the state. A
county official, to determine if the permit will be renewed will conduct an
annual site inspection.
   (C)   All applications for a permit to operate a solid waste management
facility must be made on an official form which may be obtained at the office
of the County Judge/Executive. Failure to complete any portion of the
application form or the giving of false information in the application shall be
grounds for dental of the requested permit.
   (D)   The County Fiscal Court will continue to use the county solid waste
management facility siting evaluation matrix to determine eligibility for a
county permit. A facility, which scores less than 50 points will not be, issued
a county permit. The County Engineer and/or the County Solid Waste Coordinator
will complete this process and then present it to the County Fiscal Court for
action.
   (E)   An annual fee of $100 must accompany the application. This fee will be
refunded in the event that the permit is not granted.
   (F)   A performance bond of $10,000 must be obtained and filled with the
permit. This bond shall be an approved letter of credit or actual cashiers
check. Failure to produce this bond will immediately terminate the permit.
Failure to obtain a permit will result in immediate closure of the facility.
(Ord. 98-4, passed 1-11-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Possible fines up to $500 for each day the deficiency notice is issued or be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding one year, or be both
so fined and imprisoned.
(Ord. 98-4, passed 1-11-1999)
APPENDIX A: FORMS
NOTIFICATION FOR A PERMIT TO OPERATE
A SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY
REGISTRATION NUMBER ________________________ (For Agency Use Only)
FACILITY REGISTRATION
a. Name of Facility: __________________________________________
b. Name of Person or other legal entity which owns the facility:
______________________________
__________________________________________
c. Name of the operator of the facility: ___________________________________
d. Type of facility:
_________   Convenience Center
_________   Transfer Station
_________   Solid Waste Incinerator
_________   Less than one (1) acre Construction/Demolition Fill Commercial
Recycling Center
If the type of facility is a commercial recycling center, please designate the
following;
_________   Collection
_________   Processing
_________   Broker
e. Location of the Facility:
________________________   Longitude   ____________________   Latitude
Number of Acres ____________________
f. Street Address of the Facility. ______________________________________
City __________________   State ________   Zip Code ____________
g. Mailing Address (if different from above)_ ____________________________
City___________________   State________   Zip Code ______________
h. Contact Person at the facility: ____________________________________________
i. Phone Number at the facility: ________________________
j. Name, Address and Telephone number of person preparing application if
different from above:
Name: _______________________________________
Address: ________________________________________________________________
City: ____________________   State: _________   Zip Code________________
Phone Number:________________________________
k. Questions regarding this registration should be addressed to:
Name: _______________________________________
Address: ________________________________________________________________
City: ____________________   State: _________   Zip Code________________
Phone Number:________________________________
Describe the management, processing and/or disposal activities. Include a
description of the equipment, building(s) and personal used. If waste tires are
to be recycled or disposed, include a specific description of the method(s)
used to process the tires so as to prevent entrapment of air or water. If
additional pages necessary, provide as Attachment 1.
____________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Complete Attachment 2, including the source and types of waste to be managed at
the facility.
List the maximum amount of waste to be managed annually: _______ tons
Estimate the total quantity of all waste(s) to be managed annually: _________
tons
List the anticipated landfill(s) and the permit numbers to be used for disposal
of waste from the transfer, incineration or residuals from recycling:
Landfill Name         Permit Number
__________________   __________________
__________________   __________________
__________________   __________________
The owner or operator of a McCracken County Solid Waste management facility
permit shall keep records of the amount, source and types of municipal solid
waste and waste tires received, and other information as required by the KY
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet and shall submit a
quarterly summary of this information to the McCracken County Solid Waste
Coordinator.
Include as Attachments 3 and 4 a site plan drawing and a locational map showing
the layout of the facility and its relation to adjacent roads, streams, karst
features and other distinguishing landforms and structures.
Facility Registrant Certification:
“I certify that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision. The information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.”
Signature of Authorized Agent: ________________________   Date____________
Name of Authorized Agent (typed or printed)
________________________________________
Title ____________________________________________________________
Subscribed and sworn to before me by ___________________________
This the _________________ Day of _________________, 20_______
Notary Public Signature: _________________________________________
My Commission Expires: _________________________________
ATTACHMENT 2
NOTIFICATION FOR A McCRACKEN COUNTY SOLID WASTE
MANAGEMENT FACILITY PERMIT
TYPES OF WASTE, SOURCE AND WASTE MANAGEMENT METHODS
Enter information requested in the boxes below:
SOURCE TYPE OF MATERIALS OR MONTHLY OR ANNUAL MONTHLY OR ANNUAL QUANTITY
       WASTE DESCRIPTION    QUANTITY (Cu.Yds) (Tons)
SOURCE TYPE OF MATERIALS OR MONTHLY OR ANNUAL MONTHLY OR ANNUAL QUANTITY
       WASTE DESCRIPTION    QUANTITY (Cu.Yds) (Tons)
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
                                            
 
SITING PROCEDURES
   Given the lack of critical need for additional final disposal capacity in
McCracken County, it is unlikely that the need for detailed solid waste
facility siting criteria will be required for some time to come. However, the
need may well arise in the foreseeable future to consider the issues associated
with siting facilities such as a material recovery facility, refuse derived
fuel facility or a composting center at some location other than the CWI
Transfer Station. In any event, the McCracken County Fiscal Court and the
McCracken County Planning Commission should be prepared to consider facility
siting criteria in the event a municipal or private entity should choose to
develop a final disposal facility within McCracken County.
   The solid waste management facility siting evaluation matrix for McCracken
County was designed to be sufficiently general so that it could be used as a
siting evaluation with a wide range of waste management facility types. The
siting evaluation matrix includes numerous evaluation criteria which the
McCracken County Fiscal Court considers to be important considerations during
the siting of any solid waste management facility. However some of these
criteria might be more applicable to the siting of a landfill while others
would probably be of greater importance during the siting of less intensive
facilities such as a transfer station or a convenience center. It is for this
reason that this matrix includes the provision for weighting each criterion
based on the relative importance of that particular criterion in the opinion of
the reviewers.
   The use of this evaluation matrix is quite simple although it is not
perfectly objective. The reviewers must first make a decision as to the
relative significance of the various evaluations criteria based upon the type
of facility under consideration. The site(s) under consideration are then
evaluated using the described evaluation guidelines and a points score is
applied within each evaluation category for each site under consideration. The
final score within each evaluation criteria is determined by multiplying the
criterion weighting by the points assigned under the evaluation guidelines. All
evaluation criteria final scores are then summed to determine the total site
score. If more than one site is being evaluated, the relative scoring of each
site makes selection relatively straightforward. If a single site is being
evaluated then the reviewing group must determine the break point between what
constitutes an acceptable site versus an unacceptable site. Generally, however,
the reviewing group might wish to look very critically at a site which receives
less than one-half of the total points possible given the selected criteria
weighting schema.
(Ord. 98-4, passed 1-11-1999)
CHAPTER 98: PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PRECIOUS METALS AND
STONE DEALERS
Section
Pawnbrokers, Junk and Secondhand Dealers
   
98.01   Records and reports
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Bond of pawnbroker
   
98.04   Database register; entries to be made
   
98.05   Daily entries
   
98.06   Pawnbroker to give ticket and receipt for articles
   
98.07   Sale; notice before sale
   
98.08   Maximum interest; service charges
   
98.09   Receipts for payments
   
98.10   Pawnbroker may not receive article from minor or during night
Precious Metals, Stones Dealers and Antique Dealers
   
98.20   Register of purchases
   
98.21   Database register; entries to be made
   
98.22   Photograph of seller required
   
98.23   Daily entries
   
98.24   Dealer to give receipt for articles
   
98.25   Retention period; manner of storage of articles
   
98.26   Transactions with persons under 18 years of age
   
98.27   Bond requirements for transient dealers
   
98.28   Exceptions
 
   
98.99   Penalty
PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 98.01 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Every person buying or selling scrap material or secondhand articles on
property, such as rags, jewelry, gold, silver or other precious metals, scrap
iron, copper, zinc, bones, hides, feathers, furs,
wood, tin, paper, or anything having any salvage value, shall keep a record of
purchase, shall make a bill of sale for each purchase, and shall make a report
of anything purchased, when requested by the County Sheriff.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property, or
who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling the
property back again at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at his
or her place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote
their business, or who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on
personal property or deposit is a pawnbroker.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.03 BOND OF PAWNBROKER.
   Every person to whom a county license is granted to carry on the business of
a pawnbroker shall annually enter into bond to the county, with good and
sufficient surety, to be approved by the County Judge Executive, in the penal
sum of $1,000. The bond shall be conditioned that he or she will observe the
provisions of KRS 226.030 to 226.050, and this chapter.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.04 DATABASE REGISTER; ENTRIES TO BE MADE.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall maintain an account with Leads Online or a
similar database (hereinafter “database”) as directed by the County Sheriff and
enter a record of all loans and purchases of all property effected or made by
him or her.
   (B)   As to each loan, the pawnbroker shall legibly enter into the database
the following information:
      (1)   The date of each loan;
      (2)   The name, address, date of birth, race, sex, and operator’s license
or state photo identification number of each borrower;
      (3)   If the person providing the property is not the borrower, the name,
address, date of birth, race, sex, and operator’s license of state photo
identification number of such person;
      (4)   A detailed description of the property to be pawned, including any
make and model and serial number.
   (C)   As to the purchase of any property by the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker
shall enter into the database the following information:
      (1)   The date of purchase;
      (2)   The name, address, date of birth, race, sex, and operator’s license
or state photo identification number of the seller;
      (3)   A detailed description of the property purchased, including any
make or model and serial number.
   (D)   Prior to any loan or purchase, the pawnbroker shall require the
borrower and any other person providing property to be pawned or purchased,
sufficient identification identifying the borrower or such other person with a
photograph of the borrower or such other person on such identification.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.05 DAILY ENTRIES.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall by the end of the business day make entry into
the database a record of all items pawned or purchased by said business during
the previous 24 hours. Each entry shall reflect the information as contained in
§
98.04 above and must be legible.
   (B)   The database submission shall include electronic photographs of all
persons who have sold items to the pawnbroker during the preceding day in the
form of a copy of each person’s photo identification in the form of a
photograph of each person with identifiers (name and date of birth) on said
photograph.
   (C)   The database submissions shall also include photographs of items
purchased by the pawnbroker during the preceding day if said items are not
identifiable by a serial number. The photos shall include a display showing the
name and date of birth of the seller and the date of the transaction.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.06 PAWNBROKER TO GIVE TICKET AND RECEIPT FOR ARTICLES.
   Every pawnbroker shall give a legible written or printed ticket for the loan
to the person negotiating or selling, and a legible written or printed receipt
of the articles that have been purchased, or upon which money is loaned, having
on each a copy of the entries required to be kept in his or her register under
§
98.04 of this chapter. He or she shall not make any charge for the ticket or
receipt.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.07 SALE; NOTICE BEFORE SALE.
   A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration of 90 days
from the maturity of the loan, provided that, not less than ten days before
making the sale, the pawnbroker shall have given notice to the person by whom
the article was pawned, by mail addressed to the post office address of such
person as shown on the pawnbroker’s register, notifying such person that,
unless he or she redeems the article within ten days from the date of mailing
said notice, the article will be sold.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.08 MAXIMUM INTEREST; SERVICE CHARGES.
   Any pawnbroker may, in loaning money on deposit of personal property,
charge, contract for or receive interest at a rate not exceeding 2% per month
on the unpaid principal balance of the loan, and may charge, contract for and
receive a reasonable fee, not to exceed one-fifth of the value of the loan per
month, for investigating the title, storing and insuring the property, closing
the loan, making daily reports to local law enforcement officers and for other
expenses, losses, and incidental costs associated with serving such loans. It
is further provided that such fee when made and collected shall not be deemed
interest for any purpose of law. No pawnbroker shall directly or indirectly
charge, receive, or contract for any interest or consideration greater than
that allowed by this section.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.09 RECEIPTS FOR PAYMENTS.
   Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payments of money from a borrower,
shall give to such person a plain and complete receipt for such payment,
specifying separately the amount applied to principal and the amount applied to
interest. In a case where the pawnbroker has purchased personal property under
an agreement to sell it back at a stipulated price, the pawnbroker shall, on
receiving any payment of money from the person from whom the property was
purchased, give such person a receipt stating the original purchase price, the
stipulated resale price, and the amount received.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.10 PAWNBROKER MAY NOT RECEIVE ARTICLE FROM MINOR OR DURING NIGHT.
   No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of pledge or pawn, any article
whatsoever from a minor at any time, nor from any person between 8:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
PRECIOUS METALS, STONES DEALERS AND ANTIQUE DEALERS
§ 98.20 REGISTER OF PURCHASES.
   It shall be the duty of all persons engaged in the business of the purchase
or exchange of secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches, diamonds, or
other precious stones, cutlery, old gold, silver, platinum or other precious
metals (hereinafter referred in this subchapter as “dealer”) to maintain an
account with Leads Online or a similar database (hereinafter “database”) as
directed by the County Sheriff and enter a record of all purchases of all
property effected or made by him or her.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.21 DATABASE REGISTER; ENTRIES TO BE MADE.
   As to each purchase, the dealer shall enter into the database the following
information:
   (A)   The date of each purchase;
   (B)   The name, address, date of birth, race, sex and operator’s license or
state photo identification number of each seller;
   (C)   If the person providing the property is not the seller, the name,
address, date of birth, race, sex and operator’s license or state photo
identification number of such person;
   (D)   A detailed description of the property purchased, including, where
appropriate, the make, model, and serial number, the size, color as apparent to
the untrained eye, not applicable to diamonds, the precious metal type, content
and weight, if indicated, gemstone description, including the number of stones,
and any other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters;
   (E)   A dealer shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of this
section if he or she describes the items with broad descriptions, such as three
gold rings, two sets of diamond earrings, four silver bracelets, etc. and
documents the items purchased with a high-resolution digital photograph loaded
into the database clearly depicting the items in such detail to make a verbal
description redundant. In all cases, any serial numbered items must
specifically be entered into the database;
   (F)   Any information readily apparent through visual observation that would
assist law enforcement in identifying potential stolen merchandise through
comparison with stolen merchandise reports.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.22 PHOTOGRAPH OF SELLER REQUIRED.
   No person engaged in business as described in §
98.20 shall purchase or exchange secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches,
diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, or gold, silver, platinum, or other
precious metals, or other secondhand manufactured articles composed wholly or
in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals unless the person
first obtains an instant developing photograph of the seller or exchanger of
the above enumerated items or a photo copy of the seller’s or exchanger’s
current operator’s license or state-issued identification card. The photograph
is to be identified in such a way that the person or persons shown in the
photograph can be identified with each entry of the register identified in §
98.20. The photograph and register shall be maintained for a period of one year
after the date on which the transaction occurred.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.23 DAILY ENTRIES.
   (A)   Every dealer shall by the end of the business day make entry into the
database a record of all items purchased by said business during the previous
24 hours. Each entry shall reflect the information as contained in § 98.21.
   (B)   The database submission shall include electronic photographs of all
persons who have sold items to the dealer during the preceding day in the form
of a copy of each person’s photo identification of each person with identifiers
(name and date of birth) on said photograph.
   (C)   The database submissions shall also include photographs of items
purchased by the dealer during the preceding day if said items are not
identifiable by a serial number. The photos shall include a display showing the
name and date of birth of the seller and the date of the transaction.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.24 DEALER TO GIVE RECEIPT FOR ARTICLES.
   Every dealer shall give a legible written or printed receipt of the articles
that have been purchased, having on each a copy of the entries required to be
kept in his or her register under §
98.21. He or she shall not make any charge for the ticket or receipt.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.25 RETENTION PERIOD; MANNER OF STORAGE OF ARTICLES.
   All persons engaged in business as described in §
98.20 shall retain each and every article received by them (including jewelry)
in the same state or condition in which it was received, and all articles
received during any one day’s transaction shall be kept separately and shall
not be commingled with articles received during any other day’s transactions.
Furthermore, all articles shall be made available for examination to members of
the Police Department, the County Sheriff’s Department, the State Police or
other law enforcement officials in the county for a period of ten consecutive
days after their receipt, before such articles are resold or exchanged.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.26 TRANSACTIONS WITH PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.
   No person engaged in business as described in §
98.20 shall purchase or exchange secondhand or antique jewelry, coins, watches,
diamonds or other precious stones, cutlery, or old gold, silver, platinum or
other precious metals from any person less than 18 years of age.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.27 BOND REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSIENT DEALERS.
   (A)   In addition to obtaining a county business license, transient dealers
shall enter into a bond to the county, with good and sufficient surety, to be
approved by the County Judge Executive, or his or her designee, in the penal
sum of $5,000. The bond shall be conditioned that the dealer will observe the
provisions of §§
98.20 through
98.26.
   (B)   A transient dealer means all persons (including corporations,
partnerships, limited liability companies or other business entities) engaged
in business as described in §
98.20, whose permanent business address is located outside of the county, and
who sets up business in this county at a temporary location such as a hotel,
motel, flea market, outdoor bazaar, festival or fair.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.28 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing contained herein shall require compliance with this chapter by a
person engaging in business within the county who possesses a current business
license from the county and is:
   (A)   Accepting returns for cash, credit, or replacement of any item
originally purchased from the person; or
   (B)   Exchanging an item for another item of greater value.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of §§ 98.04 or 98.06
through 98.10 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than
$500, and their county license shall be subject to forfeiture.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 98.01 through 98.10 for which
another penalty is not already otherwise provided shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 98.20 through 98.28 for which
another penalty is not already otherwise provided shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense.
(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-19-2011)
TITLE XI: ENVIRONMENT
   Chapter
      
110.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
      
111.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 110: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
 
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Title
   
110.02   Scope
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   Purpose
   
110.05   Responsible party
   
110.06   Workmanship
Nuisances
   
110.10   Common law and statutory nuisances
   
110.11   Duty of maintenance of private property
   
110.12   Duty of maintenance of streets, sidewalks, drainage areas and public
ways
   
110.13   Certain conditions declared a nuisance
Abatement and Enforcement
   
110.20   Abatement; issuance of notice of violation or citation
   
110.21   Repeat offender
   
110.22   Enforcement
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "property maintenance
code."
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to proposed and existing buildings or structures or
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, vacant
lots, premises and other private and public property in the county as
identified herein. This property maintenance code shall not apply to properties
within the incorporated limits of the City of Paducah.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   ABANDONED. Any structure that is vacant, unoccupied or not in use which is
any of the following: neglected, dilapidated, unsanitary, vermin infested, not
serviced by public utilities, dangerous to the safety of person, unfit for its
intended use by reason of neglect or lack of maintenance, has become a place
for the accumulation of trash or debris or is the subject of a building permit
requirement and has not satisfactorily passed building inspection in the last
six months or more.
   ABATEMENT COSTS. The county's necessary and reasonable costs for and
associated with clearing, preventing unauthorized entry to, or demolishing all
or a portion of a structure or premises, removing discarded items, or taking
any other action with regard to a structure or premises necessary to remedy a
violation and to maintain and preserve the public health, safety and welfare in
accordance with any county ordinance.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. The administrative body created and acting under the
authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Board Act, KRS 65.8801 to
65.8840 and §§ 31.10 through 31.25.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The same meaning as a Code Enforcement Officer as set forth
in this code.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. As defined in the Controlled Substances Act published
annually in Title 21 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) §§ 1308.11 through
1308.15.
   DISCARDED ITEMS. Includes but is not limited to motor vehicles, boats, and
home appliances and furniture in a dilapidated or apparently inoperable
condition and/or left discarded on private property for more than seven
consecutive days. This definition shall not apply to a discarded item or parts
thereof which is enclosed within a building or a discarded item which is stored
or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the
business of a licensed dissembler, licensed vehicle dealer, junk yard or
salvage yard, however, this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined under provision of law other than this
chapter.
   FINAL ORDER. Any order:
      (1)   Issued by the Code Enforcement Board following a hearing in
accordance with the provisions of §§
31.10 through
31.25;
      (2)   Created because a violator neither paid nor contested the citation
within ten days as provided in §§
31.10 through
31.25; or
      (3)   Created because a violator failed to appear at a hearing the
violator requested to contest the citation as provided in §§
31.10 through
31.25.
   GRAFFITI. Any inscription, drawing or design that is scratched, painted,
sprayed or otherwise applied on any surface of any structure or object so as to
be seen by the public, placed there by a person other than the owner, manager
or person having lawful control of the property, and without the consent of the
owner, manager or other person having lawful control of the property.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life
threatening injury or death at any time or where the violation otherwise
presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, or if in
the absence of immediate action, the effects of the condition will be
irreparable or irreversible.
   IMPROVED PARKING SURFACE. Any existing gravel, contiguous area of pavers,
concrete or asphalt surface generally used for parking motor vehicles. Such
surfaces shall be maintained in good and safe condition, capable of performing
the intended use, and give the visual appearance of a location for parking
motor vehicles.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE. Any inoperable motor vehicle, whether repairable or not,
not displaying a current valid license plate, and/or which is wrecked,
partially or totally dismantled, or cannot otherwise be safely or legally
operated on a public roadway, and which has remained substantially in that
condition for a period of not less than 30 consecutive days.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Notification to a person violating a specified county
ordinance providing the violator with an opportunity to remedy a violation
without fines, fees or remedy charges being assessed as set forth in this
chapter and §§ 31.10 through 31.25.
   NUISANCE. Any nuisance as defined or described herein this property
maintenance code.
   OWNER. A person, association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity
having a legal or equitable title in real property.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, agency, establishment, business, company,
association, partnership, business trust, joint stock company, body politic or
corporation.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures upon it.
   PUBLIC ROAD or ROAD. Any municipal, county, state, federal or limited access
highway or turnpike, or platted street located within a subdivision which has
been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the County Court
Clerk's office. This term shall also include bridges and bridge approaches.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person violating the provisions of this chapter as set
out herein below who has been issued the third citation for any violations of
this chapter within any of the person's properties within a two year period.
Only those citations that are final orders shall be included in this calculus.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.04 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is designed to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
by establishing what constitutes a nuisance on residential and non-residential
properties, with and without structures, and prohibiting public nuisances that
substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the public, or unlawfully or
substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of private or public
property, and fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators, and occupants
of all residential and non-residential structures and premises. Further, to
permit the county to lawfully abate such nuisances.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.05 RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced against the property
owner and/or any tenant, invitee, licensee, or other guest of the property
owner on their premises. Under this chapter, the property owner is responsible
for, and enforcement action may be taken against them under this chapter, for
the actions of any tenant, invitee, licensee or guest on their premises. If the
property is owned by a business organization, enforcement action may be taken
against that organization.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by the owner, occupant or persons having
control or management of the property or premises, but merely that the nuisance
be created or contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests or other persons
for whose conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for whose
conduct the owner or operator is not responsible, but by the exercise of
reasonable care ought to have become aware. The owner of the property is
presumed to be aware of a nuisance existing on their property, and the burden
of proof that the property owner did not know is on the property owner.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.06 WORKMANSHIP.
   All repairs, maintenance, alterations, abatements, or installations that are
required for compliance with this chapter shall be executed and installed in a
workmanlike manner.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
NUISANCES
§ 110.10 COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.
   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public nuisance,
those offenses which are known to the common law and in the statutes of
Kentucky as public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded against as
is provided in this chapter or in accordance with any other provisions of law.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.11 DUTY OF MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to place, leave, deposit, or keep dilapidated and/or
discarded items or objects, trash, garbage, junk, junk motor vehicles, and/or
rubbish on any private property in the county. Such dilapidated and/or
discarded items or objects, trash, garbage, junk and/or rubbish are declared to
be a public nuisance. No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of
any property or premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall
any such person keep or maintain such property or premises in a manner which
could cause a substantial reduction in the value of the other property in the
area in which such property or premises are located.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.12 DUTY OF MAINTENANCE OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS, DRAINAGE AREAS AND PUBLIC
WAYS.
   (A)   No person shall place, throw, deposit or allow to accumulate or grow
or cause to be erected or placed on any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, or any
other public right-of-way, easement or public property, any building, column,
rubbish, garbage, construction or demolition debris, landscaping debris,
furniture, signs, large rocks or boulders, fences, posts, stakes, weeds,
inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle, junk or scrap metal as herein above
declared to be a public nuisance, abandoned property or any other obstruction
or encroachment of any nature and any other materials which may do injury to
any person, animal or property.
   (B)   Every person owning, occupying or having control or management of any
building or lot in the county shall also keep the sidewalk adjacent to such
building or lot open and free from all obstructions, barriers and impediments
of every description and shall not allow or permit any tree, brush, hedge or
other vegetation to grow in a manner which interferes with normal sidewalk
traffic or vehicular traffic within the public right-of-way.
   (C)   No person shall deposit snow on any county roads, sidewalks or public
ways or allow any drainage appurtenances to cause ice accumulation on any
county streets, sidewalks, or public ways.
   (D)   Any unauthorized or prohibited sign, or which is constructed, located
or situated on county rights-of-way may be removed by the county. The county,
within its discretion, may destroy such signs.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.13 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person having control or
management of any public or private land within the county to permit a public
nuisance to develop thereon. Public nuisances include, but are not limited to
the following conditions:
   (A)   Junk; scrap metal. The storage of junk motor vehicles, motor vehicle
parts, storage tanks, refuse/trash containers not being served by garbage
collection franchisees, junk machinery, machinery pafts, abandoned, discarded
or unused appliances, objects neglected and not being used for their intended
purpose, except on premises authorized by the county for such purposes;
   (B)   Accumulation of construction, demolition, landscaping debris or other
waste materials. All exterior property and premises shall be free from any
accumulation of combustible and noncombustible waste materials. Exterior
property and premises shall be free from landscaping debris or natural damage
of grounds;
   (C)   Exterior use or storage of indoor furniture. The use or storage of
furniture which is upholstered or not designed for outdoor use in an uncovered
or exposed area in which it is likely to decay, decompose or retain moisture
causing a health hazard;
   (D)   Noxious substances or odors. The permitting of any manure, rubbish or
filth, animal carcass, decaying animal or vegetable matter, excessive animal
excrement or any foul or noxious substance, or nauseous or offensive odor to be
emitted or to be discharged out of or flow from the premises;
   (E)   Unsightly grass or weeds. The permitting of the excessive growth of
grass or weeds on any property or premise. Weeds and grasses in excess of ten
inches tall must be properly cut, and all noxious (harmful) weeds shall be
prohibited. Agricultural and gardening practices will be exempt from this
section.
   (F)   Dangerous trees or objects adjoining streets. The permitting of any
tree, shrubbery, hedge or other object adjoining public rights-of-way to grow
or stand in such a condition that it interferes with the use, construction or
maintenance of streets or sidewalks, that could cause damage to streets or
sidewalks, or that causes an obstruction to drainage or poses a danger to life,
limb or property of persons using the sidewalks or rights-of-way. No person
shall allow any dead tree adjoining public sidewalks or rights-of-way;
   (G)   Visual obstructions of streets. The permitting of any hedge,
shrubbery, fence, structure, object or other visual obstruction on any lot to
prohibit proper sight distance to such an extent it presents a hazard to
persons or property using the sidewalks, streets, or public ways adjacent to
such property;
   (H)   Dilapidated structures.
      (1)   All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged
by fire, decay, or otherwise and which are in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration, or decay so as not to provide shelter, sufficient sewer,
plumbing, electrical, or heating facilities or which are unsound or in danger
of collapse or failure and which are a danger to the safety of the public or
which are vacant or abandoned and open or accessible to vagrants or passersby
or which are otherwise built, erected or maintained in violation of any
ordinance; and
      (2)   All fences and walls shall be structurally sound and maintained in
good repair.
   (I)   Accumulation of refuse/trash and placement of trash/recycle
containers. The storing or permitting the accumulation of refuse/trash, unless
such refuse/trash is kept separately in standard refuse/trash containers or
dumpsters which are covered by solid, tight-fitting lids and which have no
uncovered holes, and the storing or permitting the accumulation of refuse and
trash for which removal of refuse and trash is not provided;
   (J)   Scattered garbage. The storage or the allowing of any scattered
garbage or other rubbish remaining on a property. No refuse/trash shall be
stored or accumulated in a manner that allows for blowing or scattering onto
adjacent properties;
   (K)   Attractive nuisances. The allowing of any physical condition, use or
occupancy of any property or premises to be an attractive nuisance to children,
or for illicit purposes, crime, drugs and/or vagrancy. Refrigerators, freezers,
ice chests, or ice boxes in use at an outdoor location shall be equipped with
an exterior locking device to prevent unintended access;
   (L)   Graffiti. The allowing of any graffiti to remain on a property or
premises;
   (M)   Hoarding of materials. The accumulation of materials, trash, food,
newspapers, magazines, old clothes and other items that create a fire or health
hazard that can cause disease, contribute to vermin and/or insect infestations,
affect the occupants of the building, neighbors, public safety personnel and
the general public, or contribute to an unsanitary environment unfit for human
habitation;
   (N)   Junk mobile or manufactured homes. The allowing of one or more mobile
or manufactured home or recreational vehicle as defined in KRS 227.550 that is
junked, wrecked or inoperable and which are abandoned or not inhabited;
   (O)   Tires. The outdoor storage of unused, scrap or waste tires in any
amount is deemed a hazard to public health and safety and a fire hazard, and is
prohibited within the county limits, except on premises authorized by the
county for such purposes;
   (P)   Abandoned structures. It shall be unlawful to allow any building or
structure to become abandoned; and
   (Q)   Discarded items. The keeping of discarded items on any property within
the limits of the county is unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
ABATEMENT AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 110.20 ABATEMENT; ISSUANCE OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION OR CITATION.
   Enforcement proceedings for this chapter shall be initiated by the issuance
of a notice of violation or a citation by a Code Enforcement Officer as set out
in §§ 31.10 through 31.25. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the county is
authorized to abate any violations of this chapter upon a final order.
Conditions presenting an immediate danger may be abated immediately following
the issuance of a citation. Abatement may be performed by county personnel or
by a contractor selected by the county.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.21 REPEAT OFFENDER.
   (A)   Designation. A person shall be classified as a repeat offender only by
the recommendation of a Code Enforcement Officer and action by the Code
Enforcement Board. A Code Enforcement Office shall recommend that a person be
classified as a repeat offender with no less than ten days’ notice to that
person prior to the next Code Enforcement Board meeting. That person may appear
at the Board meeting to contest the recommendation. The repeat offender
designation shall be determined at the sole discretion of the Code Enforcement
Board, and the Code Enforcement Board will establish a period that a person
will remain in repeat offender status of no less than 12 months, but no longer
than 24 months.
   (B)   Enforcement. In addition to all the procedures set forth above,
enforcement action shall be enhanced against designated repeat offenders. No
personal contact or notices of violation shall be required of the code
enforcement staff, and the staff may cite designated repeat offenders
immediately upon confirmation of a code violation. Code enforcement staff may
also institute a program of regular inspections involving properties of repeat
offenders without the necessity of complaints.
   (C)   Penalties. If a designated repeat offender is cited for a violation of
the provisions of this chapter and the citation is not contested, a maximum
fine of $2,000 shall apply. If the designated repeat offender contests the
citation and hearing before the Board is required, the Board may impose a
maximum fine of $2,500 at the discretion of the Board. The Code Enforcement
Board may also classify all such civil fines as daily fines until the violation
is remedied.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by any County Code Enforcement Officer or
Citation Officer designated by the County Judge Executive.
   (A)   Code Enforcement Officer. The position of Code Enforcement Officer is
created for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. By county order, the Judge Executive, with the Fiscal Court approval,
shall appoint one or more officers or employees of the county to serve as the
county’s Code Enforcement Officer(s). The Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall
report directly to and be subject to the supervision of the Judge Executive or
the Judge Executive’s designee.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. Code Enforcement Officers shall have jurisdiction to
enforce and shall enforce the property maintenance code contained in this
chapter and any other county ordinances that provide for Code Enforcement
Officer enforcement or participation.
   (C)   Authority. Enforcement officers shall have the authority to enforce
this chapter, which authority shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Enter upon real estate for the purpose of inspection and
enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   Apply for and obtain a search warrant, if necessary;
      (3)   Declare real estate and conditions thereon a nuisance according to
this chapter;
      (4)   Issue notices of violations;
      (5)   Monitor real estate and declare conditions thereon a nuisance;
      (6)   Enter upon the real estate and to cause others to enter on the real
estate for the purpose of correcting a violation or otherwise to abate the
violation;
      (7)   Present violations, cases, and matters to the Code Enforcement
Board;
      (8)   File a notice of lien against the real estate;
      (9)   Cause the lien to be enforced;
      (10)   Take all other actions reasonably necessary to carry out the
provisions of this code that require Code Enforcement Officer participation.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by a Code Enforcement Officer or
the Code Enforcement Board shall be subject to the schedule of fines indicated
in each ordinance. If no penalty is indicated, the fine schedule shall be a
maximum penalty as follows:
   (A)   Violation. Any violation with penalty unlisted:
      (1)   First offense: $500.
      (2)   Second offense: $1,000.
      (3)   All others: $2,000.
   (B)   When a third citation for a violation of this chapter has been issued
as part of the same case, and the property remains in violation, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall bring the property before the Code Enforcement Board
to request authorization to issue a per-day fine citation. The fine shall not
exceed $100 dollars per day, and the time frame shall not exceed 60 days.
(Ord. 2024-12, passed 9-9-2024)
CHAPTER 111: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Public nuisances
   
111.03   Savings clause
Collection of Solid Waste
   
111.15   Universal outsourced private collection
   
111.16   Independent contractor status
   
111.17   Collection points
   
111.18   Authority for collectors to enter private property
   
111.19   Collection frequency
   
111.20   Collector’s responsibility defined
   
111.21   Yard waste
   
111.22   Prohibitions
Storage of Solid Waste
   
111.35   Storage containers required
   
111.36   Solid waste to be stored in manner prescribed by ordinance
   
111.37   Standards for residential storage containers
   
111.38   Standards for bulk storage containers
   
111.39   Airtight containers
   
111.40   Storage containers not in compliance
Transportation, Disposal, Rules and Prohibitions
   
111.55   Transportation vehicle standards
   
111.56   Disposal of solid waste
   
111.57   Rules and regulations
   
111.58   Prohibited practices
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste facilities, see
Chapter 97
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL USE. Operations for the production of agricultural or
horticultural crops, including, but not limited to: livestock, livestock
products, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco,
timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers, or ornamental plants, including
provision for dwellings for persons and their families who are engaged in the
above agricultural use on their tract.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any non-hazardous waste resulting from the production
and processing of on-the-farm agricultural products, including manures,
prunings, and crop residues.
   APPROVED INCINERATOR. An incinerator which complies with all current
regulations of the responsible local, state, and federal air pollution control
agencies.
   BULKY WASTE. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and/or
non-combustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial, or
agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be
safely and conveniently loaded into solid waste transportation vehicles.
   CABINET. The Energy and Environment Cabinet.
   COLLECTION. Removal of household solid waste from the designated pick-up
location to the transfer vehicle. Acceptable collection practices shall consist
of door-to-door household collection from the collection points designated and
approved by this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. All types of solid waste generated by stores,
offices, restaurants, warehouse and other service and non-manufacturing
activities, excluding households and industrial solid waste.
   COMPOST. Solid waste which has undergone biological decomposition of organic
matter, been disinfected using composting or similar technologies, been
stabilized to a degree which is potentially beneficial to plant growth and
which is approved for use or sale as a soil amendment, artificial topsoil,
growing medium amendment or similar uses.
   COMPOSTING. The process by which biological decomposition of organic solid
waste is carried out under controlled aerobic conditions and which stabilizes
the organic fraction into a material which can easily and safely be stored,
handled, and used in an environmentally acceptable manner.
      (1)   Composting may include a process which creates an anaerobic zone
within the composting material.
      (2)   Composting does not include exposure of solid waste under
uncontrolled conditions resulting in natural decay.
   COUNTY. McCracken County, Kentucky.
   DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Materials resulting from the construction
or destruction of residential, industrial, or commercial structures.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the solid waste management program of the county
shall be the Deputy County Judge/Executive.
   DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so
that such solid waste or hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter
the environment, be emitted into the air or be discharged into any water,
including groundwater.
   DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. Disposable plastic or paper sacks with a
capacity of ten to 35 gallons specifically designed for storage of solid waste.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a structure and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or are intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   GENERATOR. Any person, by site, whose act or process produces waste.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste or combination of wastes which are determined by
the Cabinet because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase
in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE. Solid waste, including garbage and trash generated by
single and multiple-family residences, hotels, motels, bunkhouses, ranger
stations, crew quarters, and recreational areas such as picnic areas, parks,
and campgrounds.
   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial
process that is not a hazardous waste or a special waste as designed by KRS
224.868, including, but not limited to, waste resulting from the following
manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer or agricultural
chemicals; food and related products or by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron
and steel manufacturing; leather and leather products; nonferrous metals
manufacturing/foundries; organic
chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper industry; rubber
and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products;
textile manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment.
   MANDATORY COLLECTION. A municipal solid waste collection system which is
established by ordinance and approved by the Cabinet and requires participation
by each household or solid waste generator in a county.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A housing facility containing more than one
dwelling unit under one roof.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE REDUCTION. Source reduction, waste minimization,
reuse, recycling, composting, and materials recovery.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who, along, or jointly or severally with others, shall
be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or any other improved real
property, either as an owner or as a tenant.
   OPEN BURNING. Burning of any matter in such manner that the combustion
resulting from burning are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere without
passing through a stack or chimney.
   OPEN DUMP. Any facility on site for the disposal of solid waste which does
not have a valid permit issued by the Cabinet or does not meet the
environmental performance standards established under regulation promulgated by
the Cabinet.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation
(including a government corporation), partnership, association, federal agency,
state agency, city, commission, political subdivision of the commonwealth, or
any interstate body.
   PROCESSING. Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting, and other process whereby solid waste characteristics are modified
or solid waste quantity is reduced.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Illegal waste disposal practices that include but are not
limited to open burning, open dumps, or littering which are deemed to be a
nuisance under applicable law.
   RECYCLING. Any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid
waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in
the for of raw materials or products, including refuse-derived fuel when
processed in accordance with administrative regulations established by the
Cabinet, but does not include the incineration or combustion of materials for
the recovery of energy.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof, providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one person or one family.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A permitted facility for the disposal of solid was which
complies with the “environmental performance standards” specified in 401 KAR
47:030.
   SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal,
commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment
plant, or air pollution control facility exclusive of the treated effluent from
a wastewater treatment plant or any other such waste having similar
characteristics and effects.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting
from industrial, commercial, mining (excluding coal mining wastes, coal mining
by-products, refuse, and overburden), agricultural operations, and from
community activities, but does not include those materials including, but not
limited to, sand, soil, rock, gravel, or bridge debris extracted as part of a
public road construction project funded wholly or in part with state funds,
recovered material, special wastes as designated by KRS 224.868, solid or
dissolved material in domestic sewage, manure crops, crop residue, or a
combination thereof which are placed on the solid for return to the soil as
fertilizers or soil conditioners, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation
return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to
permits under Section 401 of the Federal Waste Pollution Control Act, as
amended, or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY (AUTHORIZED).  
      (1)   The facility authorized expressly by this chapter to be the
facility at which generators of solid waste may properly dispose of such waste
in the following circumstances:
         (a)   The generator is disposing of household solid waste and does not
have a contractual agreement with an independent solid waste collection
contractor; or
         (b)   The generator has a contractual agreement with an independent
solid waste collection contractor but is disposing of solid waste that does not
qualify as household solid waste under the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The county authorized solid waste disposal facility is the
following:
Jones Sanitation Holdings, LLC.
Freedom Waste Services
400 State Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42003
270-557-7342
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY (ADDITIONAL). In addition to the authorized
solid waste disposal facility referenced above, generators may also properly
dispose of such waste at the following facility and under the same
circumstances as those referenced above:
Republic Services, Inc.
829 Burnett Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42001
270-575-3805
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. The administration of solid waste activities such
as: collection, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment and
disposal, which shall be in accordance with a Cabinet approved county solid
waste management plan.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. Any facility for collection, storage,
transportation, transfer, processing, treatment, or disposal of solid waste,
whether such facility is associated with facilities generating such wastes or
otherwise, but does not include a container located on property where solid
waste is generated and which is used solely for the purpose of collection and
temporary storage of that solid waste prior to off-site disposal, or a
recovered material processing facility which is subject to regulation pursuant
to Senate Bill 2 for control of environmental impacts and to prevent any public
nuisance.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN.  The document submitted by waste management
districts, counties, or any combination thereof and approved by the Cabinet.
   SOLID WASTE SITE OR FACILITY. Any place at which solid waste is managed,
stored, treated, processed, or disposed.
   SOLID WASTE STORAGE/CONTAINER. Receptacle used by any person to store solid
waste during the interval between solid waste generation and collection. A
solid waste container is made out of plastic, vinyl, or metal, ranging in size
from ten gallons to 42 cubic yards in size.
   STORAGE. The containment of wastes, either on a temporary basis or for a
period of years, in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such wastes.
   TRANSFER. The placement of solid waste from smaller collection vehicles into
larger vehicles for transportation to intermediate or final disposal
facilities.
   TRANSFER FACILITY. Any transportation related facility including loading
docks, parking areas, and other similar areas where shipments of solid waste
are held or transferred during the normal course of transportation.
   TRANSPORTATION. Any off-site movement of waste by any mode, any loading,
unloading, or storage incidental thereto.
   TREATMENT. Any method, technique, or process including neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or
composition of any waste so as to neutralize such waste or so as to render such
waste nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for
storage, or reduced in volume. Such term includes any activity or processing
designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous waste
so as to render it nonhazardous.
   UNIVERSAL COLLECTION. A municipal solid waste collection system which is
established by ordinance and approved by the Cabinet and requires access for
each household or solid waste generator in a county.
   WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT. Any county or group of counties electing to form
under the provisions of KRS Chapter 109 and operate in conformance with the
provisions of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended.
   WASTE SITE OR FACILITY. Any place where waste is managed, processed, or
disposed of by incineration, landfilling, or any other method, but does not
include a container located on property where solid waste is generated and
which is used solely for the purpose of collection and temporary storage of
that solid waste prior to off-site disposal, or a recovered material processing
facility or the combustion of processed waste in a utility boiler.
   YARD WASTE.  Grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs less than four inches in
diameter, tree and vegetation trimmings.
   YARD WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. All yard waste, as defined herein, shall be
disposed of at the following facility and pursuant to the rules, policies, and
procedures applicable thereto:
City of Paducah, Kentucky
Compost Facility
1560 North 8th Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42001
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The county currently has in place a property maintenance code set forth in
its entirety in county Ordinance No. 2000-14, codified as
Chapter 110 herein. Said ordinance regulates the area of public nuisance
abatement procedures regarding public nuisances created by all means of failure
to maintain property, both public and private. Any and all public nuisances
resulting from the violation of any term(s) of this chapter shall be addressed
in accordance with the regulations and provisions set forth in Ordinance No.
2000-14.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.03 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect, modify, amend, or repeal
any provision of any ordinance administered by the County Health Department or
any other board, commission, agency, or special district of the county.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
§ 111.15 UNIVERSAL OUTSOURCED PRIVATE COLLECTION.
   (A)   In order to provide access to household solid waste collection to each
household solid waste generator within the non-incorporated area of the county
in a manner that promotes fiscal responsibility while ensuring quality service,
the county has elected to allow private solid waste collection independent
contractors to compete on the open market for providing their services to
individual household solid waste generators.
   (B)   These independent contractors are required to strictly comply with all
federal and state regulations pertaining to their business activities as well
as the provisions of this chapter. Through the requirement of strict compliance
with the aforesaid authorities, the county maintains program oversight while
outsourcing program implementation to the private sector to ensure competition
between independent contractors in order for individual household solid waste
generators to obtain services on the most favorable terms.
   (C)   Upon initially obtaining or maintaining a previously existing county
business license, the following solid waste collection independent contractors
shall be permitted to compete on the open market for the contractual right to
provide household solid waste collection to individual county household solid
waste generators:
      (1)   Jones Sanitation Holdings, LLC.
         Freedom Waste
         3426 State Route 45 South
         Mayfield, KY 42066
         502-895-5600
      (2)   Republic Service
         P.O. Box 7003
         Mayfield, KY 42006
      (3)   Waste Path
         1637 Shar-Cal Road
         Calvert City, Kentucky 42029
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.16 INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR STATUS.
   The aforesaid solid waste collection contractors shall at all times act and
perform as independent contractors and not as employees of their respective
clients or the county. Neither their respective clients, nor the county, shall
have nor exercise any control or direction over the discretionary methods by
which contractors perform their duties. Contractors shall have sole authority
to exercise independent judgment in all discretionary matters pertaining to
such duties. Contractors shall not have any claim against clients or the county
for vacation pay, sick leave, retirement benefits, health insurance, Social
Security, worker’s compensation, disability, unemployment benefits, or any
other benefits provided to employees.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.17 COLLECTION POINTS.
   Points of collection of solid waste shall be from the roadside or curbside
within public rights-of-way or other locations near buildings, parking lots,
etc., on private property. In general, solid waste generated by residential or
agricultural uses shall be placed along the roadside or curbside fronting the
subject property not more than 12 hours before collection. All reusable storage
containers shall be removed from the roadside or curbside by the generator
within 12 hours after collection. Residential, agricultural, commercial,
institutional, and industrial uses to provide bulk storage containers shall be
located on private property in areas accessible to collection vehicles.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.18 AUTHORITY FOR COLLECTORS TO ENTER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Solid waste collectors operating under a contract with the individual
household solid waste generator are hereby authorized to enter upon private
property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by
this chapter. Solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other
residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.19 COLLECTION FREQUENCY.
   All household solid waste shall be collected once weekly. Specifics
pertaining to the weekly collection of household solid waste shall be set forth
by the terms of the contract between the individual household solid waste
generator and the independent household solid waste collection contractor.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.20 COLLECTOR’S RESPONSIBILITY DEFINED.
   (A)   Solid waste collectors operating within the county shall be
responsible only for the collection of household solid waste from collection
points to a transportation vehicle, provided solid waste is stored in
compliance with provisions set forth in this ordinance. Spillage or blowing
litter, caused as a result of the duties of the solid waste collector, shall be
collected and placed in the transportation vehicle by the collector.
   (B)   Solid waste collectors operating within the county shall not be
responsible for the collection of any solid waste that does not consist of
household solid waste as defined herein. The disposal of any and all waste that
is not household solid waste, as defined herein, shall be the duty of the
individual generator. Such solid waste, other than yard waste as addressed in §
111.21 below, must be disposed of at one of the following locations:
      (1)   The county authorized solid waste disposal facility:
Jones Sanitation Holdings, LLC.
Freedom Waste Services
400 State Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42003
270-557-7342
      (2)   The additional solid waste disposal facility:
Republic Services, Inc.
829 Burnett Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42001
270-575-3805
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.21 YARD WASTE.
   Solid waste collectors operating within the county shall not be responsible
for the collection of solid waste that meets the definition of yard waste, as
defined herein. The disposal of yard waste, as defined herein, shall be the
duty of the individual generator and shall be disposed of at the following
location:
City of Paducah, Kentucky
Compost Facility
1560 North 8th Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42001
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.22 PROHIBITIONS.
   The following wastes may not be deposited in household solid waste
containers or receptacles:
   (A)   Animal waste;
   (B   Chemicals;
   (C)   Concrete, cement, lumber, bricks, blocks, or other construction/
demolition materials;
   (D)   Dead animals;
   (E)   Explosives or other volatile substances;
   (F)   Fire, embers, ashes, and other such fire causing materials;
   (G)   Gasoline, oils, or other liquid hydrocarbons;
   (H)   Herbicides;
   (I)   Industrial or commercial wastes of any type;
   (J)   Liquids other than those contained in customary household solid waste;
   (K)   Metal wire in large amounts;
   (L)   Motor vehicles;
   (M)   Nuclear or radioactive waste;
   (N)   Pathological wastes;
   (O)   Pesticides;
   (P)   Poisons;
   (Q)   Road construction material including but not limited to asphalt,
gravel, etc.;
   (R)   Sludges of semi-solid fluids;
   (S)   Stumps, logs, tree limbs, and other yard waste as defined herein;
   (T)   Toxic wastes; or
   (U)   All other hazardous wastes.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE
§ 111.35 STORAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   All generators of household solid waste shall provide or contract for the
provision of sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of all
household solid waste to serve each dwelling unit and/or establishment; and to
maintain such solid waste containers in good repair at all times.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.36 SOLID WASTE TO BE STORED IN MANNER PRESCRIBED BY ORDINANCE.
   All generators of household solid waste shall place all household solid
waste to be collected in proper solid waste containers, and shall maintain such
solid waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat, and
sanitary condition at all times. Solid waste shall be stored in a manner that
will be kept free from insect and rodent infestation and will not create a fire
hazard.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.37 STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   Household solid waste shall be stored in storage containers of not less than
ten gallons nor more than 35 gallons in nominal capacity. Storage containers
shall be leak proof, waterproof, and fitted with a fly-tight lid and shall be
properly covered at all times, except when depositing waste therein or removing
the contents thereof. The containers shall have handles, bails, or other
suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type originally
manufactured for residential solid waste, with tapered sides for easy emptying.
They shall be of light weight and sturdy construction. The weight of any
individual storage containers and contents shall not exceed 75 pounds.
Galvanized metal containers, or rubber, fiberglass, plastic, or vinyl
containers, which do not become brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposable
solid waste containers within suitable frames, wire bag holders, or other
storage containers may also be used for storage of residential solid waste,
subject to approval of the Director.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 111.38 STANDARDS FOR BULK STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   All uses which generate more than a volume of two cubic yards (i.e.,
approximately equivalent to 400 pounds or one-half ton or 400 gallons of solid
waste per week shall be required to provide bulk containers for storage as
approved by the Director. These containers shall be waterproof, leak proof, and
shall be covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing
the contents thereof.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.39 AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   No owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of any building or dwelling may leave
outside the dwelling or building, in a place accessible particularly to
children, any abandoned or unattended white goods (i.e., icebox, refrigerator,
or other receptacle that has an airtight door) without first removing the door.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.40 STORAGE CONTAINERS NOT IN COMPLIANCE.
   Solid waste containers that do not meet the specifications as outlined in
this subchapter shall be considered waste and will be collected together with
their contents and disposed of.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017)
TRANSPORTATION, DISPOSAL, RULES AND PROHIBITIONS
§ 111.55 TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE STANDARDS.
   All transportation vehicles shall be maintained in a safe, clean, and
sanitary condition, and shall be so constructed, maintained, and operated as to
prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. All vehicles to be used for
transportation of solid waste shall be constructed with watertight bodies and
with covers which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or shall be a
separate cover to the vehicle and shall be secured whenever the vehicle is
transporting solid waste, or, as an alternate, the entire bodies thereof shall
be enclosed with only loading hoppers exposed. No solid waste shall be
transported in the loading hoppers. They shall be cleaned as often as necessary
to prevent a nuisance and insect breeding and shall be maintained in good
repair.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.56 DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   Open burning. Open burning of solid waste, hazardous waste, or bulky
waste is prohibited.
   (B)   Open dumping. Open dumping of solid waste, including bulky waste, on
all lands (i.e., roadsides, hollows, rivers, streams, lakes, etc.) by any
person is prohibited statutory law and this chapter.
   (C)   Disposal sites. All waste not subject to being collected by an
independent household solid waste collection contractor, other than yard waste
as addressed in §
111.21 of this chapter, must be disposed of at one of the following locations:
      (1)   The county authorized solid waste disposal facility:
Jones Sanitation Holdings, LLC.
Freedom Waste Services
400 State Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42003
270-557-7342
      (2)   The additional solid waste disposal facility:
Republic Services, Inc.
829 Burnett Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42001
270-575-3805
   (D)   Hazardous waste. As defined within this chapter, hazardous waste will
require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner authorized
by state and /or federal regulations.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.57 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Director shall make, amend, revoke, and enforce reasonable rules
and regulations, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Preparation, drainage, and wrapping of garbage deposited in solid
waste containers;
      (2)   Specifications for solid waste containers, including the type,
composition, equipment, size, and shape thereof;
      (3)   Identification of solid waste containers and of the covers thereof,
and of equipment thereto appertaining;
      (4)   Weight limitations on the combined weight of solid waste containers
and the content thereof and weight and size limitations on bundles of solid
waste too large for solid waste containers;
      (5)   Storage of solid waste in solid waste containers;
      (6)   Sanitation, maintenance, and replacement of solid waste containers;
      (7)   Collection points of solid waste containers;
      (8)   Collection, transportation, processing, and disposal of solid
waste;
      (9)   Disposal and processing facilities;
      (10)   Records of quantity and type of wastes at processing and/or
disposal facilities; and
      (11)   Handling of special wastes such as sludges, ashes, agriculture,
construction, bulky items, tires, automobiles, oils, greases, etc.;
   (B)   Reporting requirements of private haulers shall include the following:
Reports produced semi-annually (due July 15 and January 15) to the governing
body a list of households and businesses participating in the designated
collection service.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.58 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Dispose of garbage, refuse, rubbish, or debris by dumping the same on
any premises in the county with or without the consent of the owner of the
premises;
   (B)   Dump or permit the dumping of garbage, refuse, rubbish, and debris on
any property within the county;
   (C)   Deposit solid waste in any solid waste container other than his or her
own, without the written consent of the owner of such container and/or with the
intent of avoiding payment of the service charge required for solid waste
collection and disposal;
   (D)   Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation
equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their
duties;
   (E)   Burn solid waste unless an approved incinerator is provided or unless
a variance has been obtained from the appropriate air pollution control agency;
   (F)   Dispose of dead animals in any container to be collected by solid
waste collection contractors;
   (G)   Own or operate an open dump;
   (H)   Engage in the feeding of food waste to animals for commercial
purposes;
   (I)   Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not
approved by the county and permitted by the Kentucky Department for
Environmental Protection. Such facilities are the following:
      (1)   The county authorized solid waste disposal facility:
Jones Sanitation Holdings, LLC.
Freedom Waste Services
400 State Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42003
270-557-7342
      (2)   The additional solid waste disposal facility:
Republic Services, Inc.
829 Burnett Street
Paducah, Kentucky 42001
270-575-3805
   (J)   Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing or
disposing of household solid waste within the geographic boundaries of the
county without a valid contract presently in full force with the individual
household/generator;
   (K)   Engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing, or
disposing of household solid waste within the geographic boundaries of the
county pursuant to a valid contract presently in full force with the individual
household/generator without having obtained or maintained a county business
license; and/or
   (L)   Engage in any conduct or commit any omission that would constitute a
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-06, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: HUMAN RELATIONS
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW
      
131.   FAIR HOUSING
      
132.   CANNABINOIDS
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW
Section
   
130.01   Unlawful actions
   
130.02   Questioning; violation
   
130.03   Defense
   
130.04   Definitions
   
130.05   Offense
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 UNLAWFUL ACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon any
public place in the county during the curfew hours.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having legal custody
of a minor to allow that minor to be or remain in or upon a public assembly,
building, place, street or highway in the county under circumstances except as
enumerated in §
130.03 during curfew hours.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or employee of any
establishment to allow a minor to be or remain in or upon their premises under
circumstances except as enumerated in §
130.03 during curfew hours.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 4-28-1997) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 QUESTIONING; VIOLATION.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer upon finding or being notified of any minor
in or upon a public place whose parent or guardian is believed to be in
violation of this chapter may stop and question that minor and request such
information as his or her name and age and the name and address of his or her
parent, guardian or person having legal custody.
   (B)   If the peace officer determines or has reasonable cause to believe
that a curfew violation has occurred, the law enforcement officer may obtain
from the minor the information necessary to issue a citation to the minor’s
parent, guardian or person having legal custody and then either take the minor
to his or her home or direct the minor to proceed immediately to his or her
home; or take the minor to a facility designated by the County Sheriff’s
Department and approved by the County Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Under the authority of KRS 630.030, the minor may be taken into
custody by the law enforcement officer:
      (1)   Pursuant to an order of the court for failure to appear before the
court for a previous status offense; or
      (2)   If there are reasonable grounds to believe that the child has been
an habitual runaway from his or her parent or person exercising custodial
control or supervision of the child.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 4-28-1997) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 DEFENSE.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   In case of reasonable necessity but only if such minor’s parent or
guardian communicated in advance to the County Sheriff’s Department or other
law enforcement agency the facts establishing such reasonable necessity;
      (3)   In the motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an actual employment activity, or going to or returning
home from an actual employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s actual residence or abutting
the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement agency about the minor’s
presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and recognized or sponsored by the county,
McCracken County School System, Paducah Independent School System, licensed
private or parochial school, a civic organization, a church, synagogue or other
not-for-profit public service organization that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and recognized or sponsored by the county, McCracken County School System,
Paducah Independent School System, licensed private or parochial school, a
civic organization, a church, synagogue or other not-for-profit organization
that takes responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of assembly, provided that written notice signed by the minor and
countersigned by a parent is in the possession of such minor specifying when,
where, and in what manner said minor will be exercising such First Amendment
rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
      (9)   A married person.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.01(C) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment immediately
notified the County Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement agency that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and
refused to leave.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 4-28-1997)
§ 130.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOW. 
      (1)   Either permit or neglect to prevent.
      (2)   It requires actual or constructive knowledge on the part of the
parent or guardians, or actually know about the minor violating this chapter,
or the circumstances must be such that a reasonably prudent parent or guardian,
or establishment operator should have known the minor was violating the
ordinance.
   CURFEW.
      (1)   1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Saturday;
      (2)   1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Sunday;
      (3)   11:00 p.m. Sunday to 5:00 a.m. Monday;
      (4)   11:00 p.m. Monday to 5:00 a.m. Tuesday;
      (5)   11:00 p.m. Tuesday to 5:00 a.m. Wednesday;
      (6)   11:00 p.m. Wednesday to 5:00 a.m. Thursday; and
      (7)   11:00 p.m. Thursday to 5:00 a.m. Friday.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term indicates, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability
company or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The
term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers and employees of a partnership, limited liability company or
corporation.
   PARENT. A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of the minor; or
      (2)   At least 16 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, buildings,
transportation facilities and shops.
   REMAIN. To:
      (1)   Linger, stay, congregate, move about, wander or stroll; or
      (2)   Fail to immediately leave premises when requested to do so by a
police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 4-28-1997)
§ 130.05 OFFENSE.
   Any minor that violates the ordinance more than three times may be reported
by the Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement agency to the local
juvenile officers as being without parental control.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 4-28-1997)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense.
Violators shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day
during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense,
upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 97-3, passed 4-28-1997)
CHAPTER 131: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
131.01   Policy
   
131.02   Definitions
   
131.03   Unlawful practice
   
131.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
131.05   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
131.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
131.07   Exemption
   
131.08   Administration
   
131.09   Education and conciliation
   
131.10   Enforcement
   
131.11   Investigation, subpoenas, giving of evidence
   
131.12   Enforcement by private persons
   
131.13   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
131.14   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the county to provide fair housing without
constitutional limitations throughout the county.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
131.04,
131.05 or
131.06.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or
designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below and §
131.07, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of
housing set forth in §
131.03 shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below;
   (B)   Nothing in §
131.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further that in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (B) shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24- month period; provided
further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest
in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale, or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any
one time, provided further that the sale or rental of any such single-family
house shall be excepted from the application of this title only if such house
is sold or rented: without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker,
agent, salesperson or person; and without the publication, posting or mailing,
after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of §
131.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or
      (2)   Room or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupied one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
131.03 and except as exempted by §
131.03(B) and §
131.07, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion or national
origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion or national
origin;
   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination; or
   (D)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion
or national origin.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.05 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for
the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other
financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion or national origin
of such person or of any person associated with him or her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other
financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants
or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or
other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided that nothing
contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the
exception contained in §
131.03(B).
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization
or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race,
color, religion or national origin.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.07 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin, nor shall
anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this Act shall be
in the Judge/Executive of the county.
   (B)   The Judge/Executive may delegate any of these functions, duties and
powers to employees of the county or to boards of such employees, including
functions, duties and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating,
hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to
any work, business or matter under this chapter. The Judge/Executive shall by
rule prescribe such rights to appeal from the decisions of his or her hearing
examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the county, to
boards of officers or to himself or herself, as shall be appropriate and in
accordance with law.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the Judge/Executive to further such purposes.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.09 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the Judge/Executive shall
commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the
housing industry and other interest parties to acquaint them with the
provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it,
and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Judge/Executive. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the Judge/
Executive requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the Judge/Executive shall
furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or
is about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days
after receiving a complaint, or with 30 days after the expiration of any period
of reference under division (C) below, the Judge/Executive shall investigate
the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or
she intends to resolve it. If the Judge/Executive decides to resolve the
complaints, he or she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged
discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation
and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors
may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceedings under this
chapter without the written consent of the persons concerned.
   (B)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegation of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and with the leave of the Judge/Executive, which shall be
granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his or her
answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   (C)   If within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the Judge/Executive,
the Judge/Executive has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this
chapter, the person aggrieved may, with 30 days thereafter, file a complaint
with the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The
Judge/Executive will assist in this filing.
   (D)   If the Judge/Executive has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance
within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days
hereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the
respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected
by this chapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint.
If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is
about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such
practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Whenever an action field by an individual shall come to trial, the
Judge/Executive shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary
compliance.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.11 INVESTIGATION, SUBPOENAS, GIVING OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In conducting an investigation the Judge/Executive shall have access
at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and other
evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such
materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such person as are
reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided,
however, that the Judge/Executive first complies with the provisions of the
Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The Judge/
Executive may issue subpoenas to compel his or her access to or the production
of such materials, or the appearance of such person, and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same
limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or
served in aid of a civil action in the United States District Court for the
district in which the investigation is taking place. The Judge/Executive may
administer oaths.
   (B)   Upon written application to the Judge/Executive, a respondent shall be
entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name
of the Judge/Executive to the same extent and subject to the same limitations
as subpoenas issued by the Judge/Executive himself or herself. Subpoenas issued
at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of
such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his or her request.
   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the Judge/Executive shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her.
   (D)   Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such
person may petition the Judge/Executive to revoke or modify the subpoena. The
Judge/Executive shall grant the petition if he or she finds that the subpoena
required appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it
requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under
investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the
evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other
good reason.
   (E)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Judge/
Executive or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its
enforcement in the Municipal or State Court for the district in which the
person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts
business.
   (F)   The County Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the Judge/
Executive participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.12 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   The rights grants in §§
131.03,
131.04,
131.05 and
131.06 may be enforced by civil actions in state and local courts of general
jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the
court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or §
131.10(D) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes
that the conciliation efforts of the Judge/Executive are likely to result in
satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice complained of in
the complaint made to the Judge/Executive and which practice forms the basis
for the action in court, and provided, however, that any sale encumbrance, or
rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the
authority of this chapter, and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or
tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or
civil action under the provision of this chapter shall not be affected.
   (B)   The Court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may
award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000 punitive
damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees in the case of
a prevailing plaintiff, provided that the said plaintiff in the opinion of the
court is not financially able to assume said attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
§ 131.13 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
131.03,
131.04,
131.05 or
131.06. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.14 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion or national
origin and because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting,
financing, occupying, contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase,
rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or
participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business
of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations
or facilities described in division (A) above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence,
if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
of the Judge/Executive, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or
statement of fact in any report, account, record or other document submitted to
the Judge/Executive pursuant to his or her subpoena or other order, or shall
willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct
entries in such reports, accounts, records or other documents, or shall
willfully mutilate, alter and by any other means falsify any documentary
evidence, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one
year, or both.
   (B)   Any citizens because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities in §
131.14(A), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing
any denial of the opportunity to so participate, shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and if bodily injury
results shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten
years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any
term of years or for life.
(Ord. 91-6, passed 11-25-1991)
CHAPTER 132: CANNABINOIDS
Section
AM Cannabinoids
   
132.01   Purpose
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Prohibition of possession or sale of AM, CP, JWH or HU cannabinoids
Synthetic Cannabinoids and Cannabimimetic Agents
   
132.15   Purpose
   
132.16   Definitions
   
132.17   Prohibition of possession or sale of synthetic cannabinoids or
cannabimimetic agents
 
   
132.99   Penalty
AM CANNABINOIDS
§ 132.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to stop the possession or sale of AM
cannabinoids, CP cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids and HU cannabinoids.
   (B)   These substances are harmful if consumed and present a significant
public health danger that can result in hospitalization or death.
(Ord. 2011-14, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AM CANNABINOIDS. Any synthetic cannabinoids created by Alexandres
Makriyannis or his or her research group, including, but not limited to, AM-
087; AM-251; AM-281; AM-356; AM-374; AM-381; AM-404; AM-411; AM-630; AM-661;
AM-678; AM-679; AM-694; AM-S55; AM-881; AM-883; AM-905; AM-90S; AM-919; AM-926;
AM-938; AM-1116; AM-1172; AM-1220; AM-1221; AM-1235; AM-1241; AM-1248; AM-2201;
AM-2212; AM-2213; AM-2232; AM-2233; AM-2102; AM-4030. The term shall not
include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration, and are dispensed in accordance
with state and federal law.
   CP CANNABINOIDS. CP-47,497; (C6)-CP-47,497; (C7)-CP-47,497; (C8)-CP-47,497;
(C9)-CP-47,497; CP-50,556-1; CP-55,244; CP-55,940; CP-945,598. The term shall
not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration, and are dispensed in accordance
with state and federal law.
   HU CANNABINOIDS. Any synthetic cannabinoids synthesized at the Hebrew
University including but not limited to HU-210; HU-211; HU-243; HU-308; HU-320;
HU-331; HU-336; HU-345. The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that
require a prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration, and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
   JWH CANNABINOIDS. 
      (1)   Any synthetic cannabinoids created by John W. Huffman or his
research group, including, but not limited to, JWH-007; JWH-015; JWH-018; JWH-
019; JWH-030; JWH-047; JWH-048; JWH-051; JWH-057; JWH-073; JWH-081; JWH-098;
JWH-116; JWH-120; JWH-122; JWH-133; JWH-139; JWH-147; JWH-148; JWH-149; JWH-
161; JWH-164; JWH-166; JWH-167; JWH-171; JWH-175; JWH-176; JWH-181; JWH-182;
JWH-184; JWH-185; JWH-192; JWH-193; JWH-194; JWH-195; JWH-196; JWH-197; JWH-
198; JWH-199; JWH-200; JWH-203; JWH-205; JWH-210; JWH-213; JWH-229; JWH-234;
JWH-249; JWH-250; JWH-251; JWH-253; JWH-258; JWH-300; JWH-302; JWH-307; JWH-
336; JWH-350; JWH-359; JWH-387; JWH-398; JWH-424.
      (2)   The term shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a
prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration,
and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
   PERSON. Individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other
legal entity.
   POSSESSION. To have actual physical possession or otherwise to exercise
actual dominion or control over a tangible object.
   TRAFFIC. To manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, transfer or possess
with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense or sell a controlled
substance.
   TRANSFER. To dispose of a controlled substance to another person without
consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution.
(Ord. 2011-14, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 132.03 PROHIBITION OF POSSESSION OR SALE OF AM, CP, JWH OR HU CANNABINOIDS.
   (A)   Trafficking in AM cannabinoids, CP cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids or
HU cannabinoids. A person is guilty of trafficking in AM cannabinoids, CP
cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids or HU cannabinoids when he or she knowingly and
unlawfully traffics in AM cannabinoids, CP cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids or HU
cannabinoids.
   (B)   Possession of AM cannabinoids, CP cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids or HU
cannabinoids. A person is guilty of possession of AM cannabinoids, CP
cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids or HU cannabinoids when he or she knowingly and
unlawfully possesses AM cannabinoids, CP cannabinoids, JWH cannabinoids or HU
cannabinoids.
(Ord. 2011-14, passed 11-28-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS AND CANNABIMIMETIC AGENTS
§ 132.15 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to stop the possession or sale of
synthetic cannabinoids and cannabimmetic agents.
   (B)   These substances are harmful if consumed and present a significant
public health danger that can result in hospitalization or death.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 132.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIMIMETIC AGENTS.  
      (1)   Any substance that is a cannabinoid receptortypel (CBl receptor)
agonist as demonstrated by binding studies and functional assays within the
following structural classes:
         (a)   2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl) phenol with substitution at the S-
position of the phenolic ring by alkyl or alkenyl, whether or not substituted
on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent;
         (b)   3-(1-naphthoyl) indole or 3-(1-naphthyl) indole by substitution
at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted on
the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl or
naphthyl ring to any extent;
         (c)   3-(1-naphthoyl) pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of
the pyrrole ring, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl ring to any extent;
         (d)   1-(1-naphthylmethyl) indene by substitution of the 3-position of
the indene ring, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any
extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent; and
         (e)   3-phenylacetylindole or 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the
nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted in the
indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any
extent; including, but not limited to, 5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)- 2-[(1R,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (CP-47,497); 5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)- 2-[(1R,3S)- 3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol [cannabicyclohexanol or CP-47,497 CS-homolog); 1-
pentyl-3- (1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-018 and AM678); 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)
indole (JWH-073); l-hexyl-3- (1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-019); 1-[2-(4-
morpholinyl) ethyil-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-200); 1-pentyl-3- (2-
methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (JWH-250); 1-pentyl-3-[1- (4-methoxynaphthoyl)3
indole (JWH-081); 1-pentyl- 3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-122); 1-
pentyl-3- (4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-398); 1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(1-
naphthoyl) indole (AM-2201); 1- (5-fluoropentyl)- 3-(2-iodobenzoyl) indole (AM-
694); 1-pentyl-3- [(4-methoxy)-benzoyl) indole (SR-19 and RCS-4); 1-
cyclohexylethyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (SR-18 and RCS-8); 1-pentyl-3-
(2-chlorophenylacetyl) indole (JWH-203).
      (2)   The term shall not include cannabimimetic agents that require a
prescription, are approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration,
and are dispensed in accordance with state and federal law.
   PERSON. Individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other
legal entity.
   POSSESSION. To have actual physical possession or otherwise to exercise
actual dominion or control over a tangible object.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS. Any substance that contains 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)
indole (JWH-018); 1-pentyl-3- (4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-122); 1-
pentyl-3-(4-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (JWH-201); 1-pentyl-3- (2-
chlorophenylacetyl) indole (JWH-203); 1-pentyl-3- (4-methoxy-1-naphthoyl)
indole (JWH-081); 1-pentyl-3-(4-ethyl-1-naphthoyl) indole (JWH-210); 1-pentyl-
3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole (JWH-250); 1-pentyl-3- (3-methoxyphenylacetyl)
indole (JWH-302); 1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3- (1-naphthoyl) indole (AM-2201); 1-
pentyl-3-(4-methoxybenzoly) indole (RCS-4); pravadoline (WIN 48,098);
desoxypipradrol; 4-methyl-N-ethylcathinone (4-MEC); 9-nor-9B-
Hydroxyhexahydrocannabinol (HHC); any synthetic cannabinoids outlawed by state
and federal laws, including, but not limited to, KRS 218A.010(51). The term
shall not include synthetic cannabinoids that require a prescription, are
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, and are dispensed
in accordance with state and federal law.
   TRAFFIC. To manufacture, distribute, dispense, sell, transfer or possess
with intent to manufacture, distribute, dispense or sell a controlled
substance.
   TRANSFER. To dispose of a controlled substance to another person without
consideration and not in furtherance of commercial distribution.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-28-2011)
§ 132.17 PROHIBITION OF POSSESSION OR SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS AND
CANNABIMIMETIC AGENTS.
   (A)   Trafficking in synthetic cannabinoids or cannabimimetic agents. A
person is guilty of trafficking in synthetic cannabinoids or cannabimimetic
agents when he or she knowingly and unlawfully traffics in synthetic
cannabinoids or cannabimimetic agents.
   (B)   Possession of synthetic cannabinoids or cannabimimetic agents. A
person is guilty of possession of synthetic cannabinoids or cannabimimetic
agents when he or she knowingly and unlawfully possesses synthetic cannabinoids
or cannabimimetic agents.
(Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-28-2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
132.03(A) or (B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment for not more than
12 months, or both, for each offense. If current or future state law(s) (KRS
and the like) prohibits any substance(s) contained in §§
132.01 through
132.03, the state law(s) (KRS and the like) shall be applied instead of §§
132.01 through
132.03 for both prosecution and penalty.
   (C)   Any person violating §
132.17(A) or (B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or imprisonment for not more than
12 months, or both, for each offense, if current or future state law(s) (KRS
and the like) prohibits any substance(s) contained in §§
132.15 through
132.17, the state law(s) (KRS and the like) shall be applied instead of §§
132.15 through
132.17 for both prosecution and penalty.
(Ord. 2011-14, passed 11-28-2011; Ord. 2011-15, passed 11-28-2011)
TITLE XV: ZONING
   Chapter
      
150.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: ZONING CODE
Section
Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction
   
150.001   Purpose
   
150.002   Authority
   
150.003   Area jurisdiction
Definitions and Interpretations
   
150.015   Purpose
   
150.016   Definitions
   
150.017   Subdivision coordination required
   
150.018   Zone classification and boundaries
   
150.019   Interpretation of zone boundaries
General Regulations
   
150.030   Applicability of subchapter
   
150.031   Access control
   
150.032   Nonconforming uses
   
150.033   Lots
   
150.034   Conditional uses
   
150.035   Mobile home parks
   
150.036   Planned unit development
   
150.037   Adult entertainment use and activities
   
150.038   Cellular antenna tower regulations
   
150.039   Signs
   
150.040   Solar energy systems
   
150.041   Mobile food vehicles
   
150.042   Recreational vehicle communities
District Regulations
   
150.050   Purpose
   
150.051   Agricultural District (AG)
   
150.052   Rural Residential District (RR)
   
150.053   Urbanizing Residential District (UR)
   
150.054   Mobile Home Park (MHP)
   
150.055   Commercial (C)
   
150.056   Light Industry Zone (ML)
   
150.057   Heavy Industry Zone (MH)
   
150.058   Parking
Permits and Applications
   
150.070   Building permit
   
150.071   Site plan required
   
150.072   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.073   Application required
Storm Water Conveyance and Management
   
150.085   Purpose
   
150.086   Definitions
   
150.087   Storm water conveyance and management facilities required
   
150.088   Storm water conveyance facilities design
   
150.089   Erosion control
   
150.090   Storm water management facilities design criteria
   
150.091   Storm Water Management Plan
   
150.092   Exemptions
   
150.093   Design certification
   
150.094   Construction certification
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.105   Intent and scope of subchapter
   
150.106   Enforcement and administrative personnel
   
150.107   Board of Adjustment
   
150.108   Administrative jurisdiction
   
150.109   Amendments and development plans
   
150.110   Remedies
   
150.111   Fee schedules
 
   
150.999   Penalty
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, AND JURISDICTION
§ 150.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   An ordinance of the county which hereby establishes comprehensive
zoning regulations and provides for the administration, enforcement, and
amendment thereof, in accordance with the provisions of KRS Chapter 100,
enacted by the Legislature of Kentucky, and for the repeal of all laws in
conflict herewith.
   (B)   The county does hereby ordain and enact into law the following zoning
regulations in pursuance of authority conferred by KRS Chapter 100, as amended,
and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, general welfare, morals,
convenience, order, prosperity of the county, and in accordance with a
comprehensive plan, with the goal of ensuring that development takes place in a
manner compatible with adjacent land uses, to provide for adequate light and
air, is consistent with and appropriate to existing or proposed infrastructure
and is adequately served by necessary and essential services, including water
sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements, and for ensuring
proper drainage and reducing flood damage potentials, being made with
reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district
and its suitability for particular uses; and with the goal of providing
suitable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods,
protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in
governmental expenditures, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging
the most appropriate use of land.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.002 AUTHORITY.
   These zoning regulations were prepared and adopted by the County Planning
Commission and adopted by ordinance of the County Fiscal Court, pursuant to the
authority of KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.003 AREA JURISDICTION.
   The County Planning Commission through these zoning regulations shall have
jurisdiction over all land within the county, excluding the City of Paducah.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
§ 150.015 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to define certain words and phrases
commonly used in zoning regulations.
   (B)   The words and terms expressed in the present tense include the future
tense.
   (C)   Singular words and phrases include the plural.
   (D)   The word “may” is permissive, while “shall” and “will” are mandatory.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES. A subordinate building located on the same lot
with the principal building, or a subordinate use of land, either of which is
customarily incidental to the principal building or to the principal use of the
land. Where part of the wall of an ACCESSORY BUILDING is part of the wall of
the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such ACCESSORY
BUILDING shall be counted as part of the principal building.
   ACCESSORY LIVING QUARTERS. Living quarters within an accessory building, and
not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. An administrative official, or officials, shall be
designated by the County Judge/Executive to administer the zoning regulation,
and if delegated, housing and building regulations. The ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
may be designated to issue building permits or certificates of occupancy, or
both, in accordance with the literal terms of the regulation, but may not have
the power to permit any construction, or to permit any use or any change of use
which does not conform to the literal terms of the zoning regulation.
   AGRICULTURE. An area for the income producing, production, and wholesaling
of agriculture or horticultural crops, including but not limited to livestock,
livestock products, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans,
tobacco, orchards, fruits, vegetables, flowers, or ornamental plants including
provision for dwellings for persons and their families who are engaged in the
above agricultural use on the tract, but not including residential building
development for sale or lease to the public. AGRICULTURE uses including
production and wholesaling agriculture or horticultural crops, including but
not limited to, livestock, livestock products, poultry, poultry products,
grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, orchards, fruits, vegetables, flowers,
ornamental plants, small wineries licensed under KRS 243.155, or small, craft
distilleries holding a Class B distiller's license under KRS 243.120; provided
each of the aforesaid craft distilleries are located on a tract/lot that is a
minimum of 15 acres and the location of the actual distillery facility
(including without limitation mash tuns, fermenters, stills, or bottling
facilities) shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from every tract/lot line,
including provision for dwellings for persons and their families who are
engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but not including
residential building development for sale or lease to the public.
   AGRICULTURAL FARM BUILDING. Buildings other than dwellings, to be located on
agricultural lands that are:
      (1)   Incidental to the operation of a farm;
      (2)   The building is not used for business of a retail trade;
      (3)   The building is not used as a regular place of work for ten or more
people; and
      (4)   Not used for the storage of timber, or the processing of timber
products.
   ALLEY. A permanent public service way providing a secondary means of access
to abutting lands.
   ASSISTED CARE HOME. A residential dwelling that offers services that is a
combination of housing, personalized supportive services and health care
designed to meet the individual needs of persons who need help with the
activities of daily living, but do not need the skilled medical care provided
in a nursing home. This definition includes congregant living.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. An establishment with the primary business
function of the retail sale of gasoline for passenger car use, and the minor
service and repair work incidental to the operation of passenger automobiles.
   BLOCK FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street between
intersecting streets, or between a street, and a right-of-way of a dead-end
street or county boundary, measured along the street line.
   BOARD. The McCracken County Board of Adjustment.
   BUILDING. Any structure having an enclosed space and a roof for the housing
or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. The word BUILDING includes the
word STRUCTURE.
   BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal and
accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed porches not
exceeding one story in height or architectural appurtenances projecting not
more than two feet.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no party wall in common or structural
connection with another building.
   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF. The line of the face of the building nearest the
front lot line.
   BUILDING, GOVERNMENT. A building owned, occupied, or leased by any unit of
federal, state, or local government which is used for the purpose of conducting
any useful or necessary governmental function.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the average contact ground
level at the front wall of a building to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridges for gable and hip or gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front and across a lot establishing the
minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a building or
structure and the front line.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. A legally existing building, which fails to comply
with the county zoning regulations, that are applicable to the zone in which
this building is located.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building which has conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which the said building is situated. Where a substantial part
of an accessory building is attached to the principal building in a substantial
manner, as by a roof, such accessory building will be counted as a part of the
principal building.
   BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED. A building having one party wall in common with an
adjacent building.
   CAMPGROUND. Any area or tract of land used to temporarily accommodate two or
more camping parties, including cabins, tents, house trailers, or other camping
outfits.
   CARPORT. A structure consisting of a roof and either walls or columns for
the purpose of housing automotive vehicles and other chattels; said structure
shall be considered a building.
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbarium, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
   CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER. An establishment where patients are
admitted for special study and treatment by one or more licensed physicians
and/or dentists and their professional associates, as distinguished from a
professional office for general consultation purposes.
   COMMERCIAL. The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise, or service, the maintenance or operation of offices,
recreational and amusement enterprises.
   COMMISSION. The McCracken County Planning Commission.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use which would not impair the public health, safety, or
welfare in one or more zones, but which would impair the integrity and
character of the zone in which it is located or in adjoining zones, unless
restrictions on location, size, extent and character of performance are imposed
in addition to those imposed in the zoning regulations.
   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. Legal authorization to undertake a conditional use,
issued by the Administrative Official pursuant to authorization by the Board of
Adjustment consisting of two parts:
      (1)   A statement of the factual determination by the Board of
Adjustment, which justifies the issuance of the permit; and
      (2)   A statement of the specific conditions, which must be met in order
for the use to be permitted.
   CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME. Establishments, which provide full-time
convalescent or chronic care, or both, for four or more individuals who are not
related by blood or marriage to the operator, and who, by reason of chronic
illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. Neither care for the
acutely ill nor surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such a
home. A hospital or sanitarium shall not be construed to be included in this
definition.
   COUNTY. The County of McCracken, Kentucky, and its designated officials,
administrators, and enforcement personnel.
   CREMATORY. A machine or device used to reduce a body to ashes. A CREMATORY
is a customary accessory structure for a funeral home or cemetery.
   DENSITY. Number of dwelling units divided by the number of acres on a lot,
PUD, subdivision, or development the dwelling units of which are attributable.
   DEVELOPMENTAL PLAN. Written and graphic material for the provision of a
developmental plan, including any or all of the following: location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development,
street ways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, access
points, a plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing manmade and
natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to be the applicant.
   DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, used primarily for residential
occupancy, including
one-family and multiple dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, or tourist
homes.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building, or portion thereof, used for occupancy by
three or more families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof, used for occupancy by
two families living independently of each other. Also known as a duplex.
   DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling, or portion of a dwelling, used by one family for
cooking, living, and sleeping purposes.
   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A preprimary, primary, or grammar, public,
parochial, or private school; a high school, preparatory school or academy,
public, parochial, or private school; a high school, preparatory school or
academy, public or founded or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of
a religious or charitable organization; a private preparatory school or academy
furnishing courses of instruction substantially equivalent to the courses
offered by public high schools for preparation of admission to colleges or
universities which award BA or BS degrees; a junior college or university,
public or founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or
charitable organization; or a private school when not conducted as a commercial
enterprise for the profit of individual owners or stockholders. This definition
shall not be deemed to include trade or business schools as defined in this
section.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The County Judge/Executive shall designate an official
(s), to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Judge/Executive may
authorize the issuance of citations for violations of the chapter, which the
officer has observed, but they shall not have power of peace officers to make
arrest or carry deadly weapons. The defendant of citations shall appear within
a designated time pursuant to the citation.
   FAMILY. One or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit, as
distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority
house. A FAMILY shall be deemed to include servants.
   FENCE. A man-made structure consisting of wood, metal, wire, mesh, masonry,
or other man-made material. FENCES shall include any type of fence, wall
trellis, or similar structure.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The floor area of the building divided by the area of the
lot.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building, used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles and chattel of the
family to which the garage is accessory, and not more than one-half of the
total number of vehicles stored in such garage shall be rented for vehicles and
chattel of other than occupants of the building to which garage is accessory.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building or premises, except those defined herein as a
private garage, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles, or where such
vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire,
or sale.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The square foot area of a residential building within its
largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the ground floor
level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, exterior
stairways, and secondary stairways.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS. In a dwelling house for one family, or one housekeeping
unit only, on one lot; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the use of a minor part of the dwelling house, or accessory building,
for an office or studio by person or persons residing in the dwelling house,
and where there are no more than one non-resident employee, and where customers
or clients do not regularly visit the site, and there is no outside storage of
equipment or materials.
   HOME OCCUPATION.
      (1)   Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on solely
by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof; minimal
stock in trade, or outside storage of equipment or materials, and not more than
two persons other than the residents are to engage in such occupation.
      (2)   The use shall not generate noise, vibrations, smoke, odors, or
electrical interference beyond the property line. A minimum of two off-street
parking spaces shall be provided on the premises.
      (3)   The following are included as HOME OCCUPATIONS:
         (1)   Artist
         (2)   Computer programming;
         (3)   Child care;
         (4)   Professional consultants;
         (5)   Insurance agents;
         (6)   Minister and pastoral care;
         (7)   Personal care;
         (8)   Real estate broker;
         (9)   Sales representatives (no trade stock on site);
         (10)   Telecommuters; and
         (11)   Similar uses as approved by the Planning Commission.
   HOSPITAL. Includes sanitarium, preventorium, and clinic, provided such
institution is operated by or treatment given under the direct supervision of a
physician licensed to practice by the State of Kentucky.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building, or portion thereof, or group of buildings in
which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which
is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a lodging house.
   INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY. Those industries whose processing of products result in
the emission of any atmospheric pollutant, light flashes or glare, odor, noise,
or vibration which may be heard and/or felt off the premises, and those
industries which constitute a fire or explosion hazard.
   INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT. Those industries whose processing of products results in
none of the conditions described for heavy industry.
   JUNKYARD. Any place at which personal property is or may be salvaged for
reuse, resale, or reduction or similar disposition and is owned, possessed,
collected, accumulated, dismantled, or sorted, including, but not limited to,
use of salvaged vehicles, base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations, used or salvaged vehicles, appliances, rope, bags, paper, rags,
glass, rubber, lumber, millwork, brick and similar property which are used,
owned, or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which dogs or small animals are
kept for commercial boarding, breeding, or sale purposes.
   KENNEL, PRIVATE. Any lot or premises on which dogs or small animals are in
or adjoining a private residence where hunting or other dogs are kept for the
hobby of the householder (i.e., hunting, tracking, or exhibiting), or guarding/
protecting the householder’s property and is permitted in all zones as an
accessory use provided that such dogs or small animals do not constitute a
nuisance to the neighborhood.
   LOT. A piece, parcel, plot, tract, or area of land occupied or capable of
being occupied by one principal building and the accessory buildings or uses
customarily incidental to it, and including the open spaces required under this
chapter; having its principal frontage on a street. The word LOT includes the
“plot” or “parcel.”
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at a junction of, and fronting on, two or more
intersecting streets.
   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or through lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot
from the street or place, and in the case of a corner lot, the line designated
in deed or subdivision requirements, or if no such requirements are provided,
the line designated by the property owner at the time he or she seeks a
building permit on the lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten
feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary lines not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
   LOT WIDTH. The dimension of a lot, measured between side lot lines at the
building setback line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in accordance
with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, as amended, and manufactured after June 15, 1976, which is designed to be
transported across streets and highways to a point of use, is equipped with the
necessary service connections, and included the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; made so as to be
readily movable as a unit or units. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
MANUFACTURED HOME is synonymous with
   MODULAR HOME, MOBILE HOME, and HOUSE TRAILER, but not “campers.”
   MINIMUM BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The minimum required distance between a lot
line and a building line.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under the control of any person,
available to the public, in which three or more mobile home lots are occupied
or intended for occupancy by mobile homes, and includes any service building,
structure, enclosure, or other facility, used as part of the park.
   OCCUPIED. As applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include
the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”
   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area, other than a street or alley designed
for use or used for the temporary parking of four or more motor vehicles when
available for visitor or employee use.
   PARKING AREA, VEHICLE DISPLAY. An open area for display of the lease,
rental, or sale of motor vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An off-street space accessible from a street or
road with a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet.
   PERIMETER SCREENS. A six-foot high fence that is 90% visually solid or four
feet tall shrubs and/or evergreen trees that will attain six feet in height
within three years and also be 90% visually solid year round. Other plans for
screening may be submitted for approval to the Zoning Administrator. PERIMETER
SCREENS as used in this chapter do not require 100% blocked view from adjacent
properties of structure.
   PERSON. Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation as well as an individual.
   PERSONAL AND CONVENIENCE SERVICES. Businesses offering services such as
barber shops, beauty shops, laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning pickup/
delivery stations (but excluding actual laundry operations), and similar uses.
   PLACE. An open, unoccupied, officially designated space (other than a street
or alley), permanently reserved for use as the principal means of access to
abutting property.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A self-contained development, which may be
developed under single ownership or control, often with a mixture of housing
types and densities, in which the subdivision and zoning controls are applied
to the project as a whole rather than to individual lots, as in most
subdivisions. Therefore, densities are calculated for the entire development,
usually permitting a trade-off between clustering of housing and provision of
common open space.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Offices of members of recognized professions such as
physicians, surgeons, lawyers, engineers, dentists, and architects.
   PUBLIC FACILITY. Any use of land, whether publicly or privately owned, for
transportation, utilities, communications, or any use which is necessary for
the health and safety of the general public, including but not limited to,
libraries, streets, schools, fire or police stations, ambulance services,
county buildings, municipal buildings, recreational centers (including parks),
and cemeteries.
   RECREATION VEHICLE COMMUNITY. A parcel of land under the control of any
person, available to the public, in which two or more recreational vehicle (RV)
spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by campers or recreational
vehicles, and includes any service building, structure, enclosure, or other
facility, used as part of the park.
   SIGN. Any board, device, or structure, or part thereof, used for
advertising, display, or publicity purposes. Signs placed or erected by
governmental agencies for the purpose of showing street names or traffic
directions or regulations for other governmental purposes shall not be included
therein.
   STREET. A right-of-way (other than an alley), dedicated or otherwise legally
established to the public use, usually affording the principal means of access
to abutting property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or made, the use of which requires permanent
location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location in or on the ground, including buildings and signs.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the exterior walls of the roof.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose, whether immediate or future sale, lease of building or land
development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land,
providing that a division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new
street shall not be deemed to be a subdivision. The term SUBDIVISION includes
re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process
of subdivision or to the land subdivided; any division or re-division of land
into parcels less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a division
of the same land shall be deemed a subdivision.
   TOURIST HOME. A building in which more than one, but not more than five,
guest rooms are used to provide or offer overnight accommodations for transient
guests for compensation. A bed and breakfast inn is included in this
definition.
   TOWN HOME. A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a series of
dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent building and/or
buildings by party walls or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no
visible separation between walls or roofs; all of which dwellings may be
located on individual and separate lots if individually owned, or upon a single
lot if under common ownership. Each town house unit shall be capable of
separate ownership. The construction of a town house structure across an
existing lot line shall not be deemed to abrogate that line.
   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. A secretarial school or college, business school
or college, when not public and not owned or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization; or a school conducted as
a commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering,
martial arts, or hairdressing, or for teaching industrial skills in which
machinery is employed as a means of instruction. This definition shall not be
deemed to include an educational institution as defined in this section.
   USE. The employment or occupation of a building, structure, or land for a
person’s service, benefit, or enjoyment.
   USE, NONCONFORMING. An existing use of land or building which was legal
prior to the effective date hereof, but which fails to comply with the
requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to the zone in which such use
is located.
   USED. As applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the
words “intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.”
   VARIANCE, DIMENSIONAL. Departure from the terms of the zoning regulations
pertaining only to height or width and location of structures, size of yards
and open spaces, and other dimensional features of this chapter, where such
departure will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property because of its size, shape or topography,
and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, the literal enforcement of
the zoning regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
   WALL, RETAINING. A physical barrier necessary to prevent the erosion and/or
deterioration of an established elevation.
   YARD. A space on the same lot with principal and accessory buildings, open
and unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and
similar structures, and unobstructed by structures, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, between two
side lot lines, the depth of which is the least distance between the street
right-of way and the building line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
two side lot lines and between the rear line and a parallel line tangent to the
rear of the principal building, the depth of which is the least distance
between the rear lot line and the parallel line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard bounded by the rear yard, the front yard, the side lot
line and the principal and accessory building.
   ZONING MAP or MAP. The zoning map of the county.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.017 SUBDIVISION COORDINATION REQUIRED.
   In all cases where the ownership of land is divided for the purpose of
development of lots, the county subdivision regulations, as well as these
zoning regulations, shall apply.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.018 ZONE CLASSIFICATION AND BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The county is divided into zones classified as follows:
      (1)   AG - Agricultural Zone;
      (2)   UR - Urbanizing Residential Zone;
      (3)   RR - Rural Residential Zone;
      (4)   MHP - Mobile Home Park Zone;
      (5)   C - Commercial Zone;
      (6)   ML - Light Industry Zone; and
      (7)   MH - Heavy Industry Zone.
   (B)   The boundaries of the above zones are hereby established as shown on
the zoning map entitled, “Zone Map of McCracken County, Kentucky,” which has
been recommended and certified by the Planning Commission and the Fiscal Court
and is hereby made a part of these zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.019 INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES.
   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerline of streets, roads, highways, railroad right-of-way, river and
streambeds, boundaries of the county, city limits and property lines, such
lines shall be construed to be the same zone boundaries. In certain instances,
the zone boundary shall be set at a fixed distance from the road centerline. In
other limited instances, zone boundaries may follow neither geographic features
nor property lines. In those cases, the Zoning Administrator will scale the
zone boundaries from the county zone map.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.030 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Except as herein specified, the following provisions shall be applied within
all zoning districts.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.031 ACCESS CONTROL.
   No point of access shall be allowed within 25 feet of the intersection in
the right-of-way of two streets, highways, or roads. The Board of Adjustment
may grant variances. No curb or right-of-way shall be cut or altered without
acquiring a permit from the office of the County Road Department. Requirements
of the permit, including but not limited to the application, design
requirements, and improvement bonds shall be done in a manner specified by the
Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.032 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Continuation generally. The lawful use of a building or land existing
at the time of the adoption of these zoning regulations and amendments hereto
may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of the
adopted zoning regulations, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Specific standards.
      (1)   A nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of the
adoption of these zoning regulations, which was conforming at the time of its
erection, may be continued in use, although such use does not conform to the
provisions of such regulations.
      (2)   With the formal authorization of the Board of Adjustment, granted
after a duly advertised public hearing and after its determination that the
properties in the general vicinity will not be adversely affected by the
change, an existing nonconforming use may be changed to a new nonconforming use
in the same or a more restrictive zone classification.
      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall not allow the enlargement or
extension of a nonconforming use beyond the scope and area of its operation at
the time the regulation, which makes its use nonconforming, was adopted. Any
proposal for an enlargement or extension of a structure or building which does
not enlarge the scope or the operation shall appear before the Board of
Adjustment, which may be granted after a public hearing.
      (4)   A building or structure, which is the subject of a nonconforming
use, may be maintained and repaired.
      (5)   A building or structure which does not comply with the dimensional
requirements of the zoning regulations may be maintained, repaired, altered, or
moved, provided that every portion so enlarged or moved shall be made to
conform to all the regulations of the zone in which the structure is located.
      (6)   A building or structure which is nonconforming, either with respect
to its use or with respect to dimensional requirements on the lot where it is
situated, which is damaged or destroyed by any cause to the extent of more than
75% of its value or area, shall not be repaired nor rebuilt, except in
conformance with the provisions of the zoning regulations.
      (7)   On any lot where there is an existing principal structure which was
conforming at the time it was constructed, but which had become nonconforming
with respect to front, rear, or side yard requirements, and which otherwise
complies with the use and dimensional requirements of the zoning regulations,
an addition to that structure may be constructed which similarly does not
conform to the front, rear or side yard requirements; provided the newly
created nonconform is no nearer to the front, side, or rear lot line than the
previously nonconforming existing structure.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.033 LOTS.
   (A)   Multiple principal buildings. In a UR zone, only one principal
structure and its customary accessory structures may hereafter be erected on
any one lot. Agriculture uses, regardless of zone, are exempt from this
requirement. In a UR zone, the Planning Commission, with an approved
development plan, may authorize multiple principal buildings but one
residential dwelling unit may be added without a development plan if there is
at least 12,000 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. In AG, RR, C, ML,
and MH zones, multiple principal buildings are allowed.
   (B)   Front yard setback lines. Front yard setback lines may be varied where
the average depth of principal buildings of adjoining properties is less than
the depth as prescribed by the zoning regulations. In such case, the front yard
in question shall not be less than the average depth of existing front yards on
the two lots immediately adjoining. If the adjoining lots are vacant, then
nearest structures in the district may be considered.
   (C)   Zero lot lines. The purpose of this zero lot line regulation is to
allow multiple single-family attached residential structures to be built across
one or more side lot lines. Structures shall be constructed on the interior
side lot lines, having a separate unit on each of the lots, and a side yard
setback shall be provided on each end of the structure. Setback lines apply to
the structure as a whole, not individual units, allowing individual units in a
single building to each be an individual parcel. The structure as a whole is
required to meet front, rear, and side yard setbacks and total area
requirements.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.034 CONDITIONAL USES.
   Conditional uses are allowed only by specific approval of the Board of
Adjustment and only in the zone in which they are listed.
   (A)   Application and review procedure. The Board shall grant the
conditional use following a public hearing and upon an affirmative finding by
the Board that:
      (1)   The proposed conditional use is to be located in a zone wherein
such use may be permitted; and
      (2)   The conditional use is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the zoning regulations, will not substantially and permanently injure
the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will serve the public
convenience and welfare.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment may approve or deny any applications for a
conditional use permit. If it approves the issuance of a conditional use
permit, it may attach conditions to the approval such as time limitations,
requirements that one or more things be done before construction can be
initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such condition shall be
recorded in the Board’s minutes and on the conditional use permit, along with a
reference to the specific section of the zoning regulations, or any other
applicable ordinance of the county listing the conditional use under
consideration.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to revoke conditional use
permits for noncompliance with the conditions thereof. Furthermore, the Board
shall have the right of action to compel offending structures or uses to be
removed at the cost of the violator and may have judgment against that person
for such cost.
   (D)   The conditional use permits approved by the Board of Adjustment shall
be recorded at the expense of the applicant in the office of the County Clerk.
   (E)   Approval of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant
from complying with all requirements of building, housing, and other codes and
regulations of the county.
   (F)   In any case in which a conditional use permit has not been exercised
within one year from its date of issuance, such conditional use many revert to
its original zoning designation following a public hearing held by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with KRS Chapter 424. “Exercised,” as set forth in
this division, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the
main building or other improvements have been let or, in the absence of
contracts, that the principal building or other improvements are under
construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions involving
substantial investment are under contract, in development, or complete. When
construction is not a part of the use, “exercised” shall mean that the user is
operating in compliance with the conditions as designated in the permit.
   (G)   The Administrative Official shall review all conditional use permits,
except those for which all conditions have been permanently satisfied, at least
once each year. The enforcement office shall have the power to inspect the land
or structure where the special use is located in order to determine if the
landowner is complying with all of the conditions, which are listed on the
conditional use permit.
   (H)   If the landowner is not complying with all of the conditions listed on
the conditional use permit, the enforcement officer shall report this fact in
writing to the chairperson of the Board of Adjustment. The report of the
enforcement officer shall state specifically the manner in which the landowner
or occupant is not complying with the conditions on the conditional use permit.
A copy of this report shall be furnished to the landowner at the same time (as
nearly as is possible) it is furnished to the chairperson of the Board. The
Board shall hold a hearing on the report within a reasonable time, and notice
of the time and place of the hearing shall be furnished to the landowner and/or
occupant at least one week prior to the hearing.
   (I)   If the Board of Adjustment finds that the facts alleged in the report
of the enforcement officer are true, and that the landowner and/or occupant has
taken no action to comply with the conditions (as originally placed on the
permit) between the date of the report and the date of the hearing, the Board
may authorize the Administrative Official to revoke the conditional use permit
and take the necessary legal action to cause the termination of the activity on
the land which the conditional use permit authorizes.
   (J)   Once the Board of Adjustment has completed a conditional use permit
and all the conditions required are of such type that they can be completely
and permanently satisfied, the Administrative Official, upon request by the
applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a determination that the conditions
have been satisfied and enter the facts which indicate that the conditions have
been satisfied and the conclusions in the margin of the copy of the conditional
use permit which is on file with the County Clerk; thereafter the use in
question, if it continues to meet the other requirements of the zoning
regulations, will be considered a permitted use.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.035 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   Defined. All proposed mobile home parks shall comply with all
applicable state, federal, and county subdivision regulations and zoning
regulations. MOBILE HOME PARKS are wherever:
      (1)   Three or more mobile homes occupy, or are intended for occupancy,
on a single lot in the MHP zone; or
      (2)   On a lot where there is a principal building and one or more rental
or lease spaces on one lot, with less than 12,000 square feet of lot area per
structure.
   (B)   Mobile home park requirements.
      (1)   Minimum area requirements. No mobile home park shall be permitted
on an area of less than five acres. However, the park may develop in stages as
long as it complies with an overall approved development plan.
      (2)   Lot requirements. Individual lots within a mobile home park shall
not be less than 5,000 square feet in an area with only one mobile home per
lot. Minimum lot width shall be 40 feet.
   (C)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage by mobile home and accessory structures
shall not exceed 66% of the lot area.
   (D)   Setback. No mobile home or accessory structure shall be closer than 30
feet to any public street right-of-way. No mobile home or accessory structure
shall be closer than 15 feet to any privately maintained street right-of-way
within the mobile home park. No mobile home or accessory structure shall be
closer than seven and one-half feet to a rear lot line or less than ten feet to
side lot line. No mobile home or accessory structure shall be closer than 25
feet to any property boundary line of the park. No mobile home or accessory
structure shall be closer than 25 feet to any property boundary line within the
park. No mobile home shall be located within 20 feet to another mobile home
except that a minimum end-to-end clearance of not more than 15 feet shall be
permitted.
   (E)   Common open space and facilities. At least one substantial area of
usable open space shall be provided. Such area shall:
      (1)   Total at least 2.5% of total park area;
      (2)   Be developed for active and passive recreation, including new
children's equipment and a fenced tot lot; and
      (3)   This area shall be landscaped, improved, and maintained.
   (F)   Perimeter. All mobile home park boundary lines excluding public road
rights-of-way shall have either a six-foot high fence that is 90% visually
solid or four feet tall shrubs and/or evergreen trees that will attain six feet
in height within three years and also be 90% visually solid year round.
   (G)   Street and sidewalks. All mobile home lots shall abut upon a street of
not less than 30 feet in right-of-way width. All streets shall have a pavement
width of not less than 20 feet. All streets within a mobile home park shall be
paved, surfaced, and well lighted. All mobile home parks shall have a three
feet wide sidewalk on one side of all park streets. They shall be smooth
surfaced, and free from mud, dust, and standing water at all time.
   (H)   School bus stops. There shall be a sheltered school bus stop provided.
The location shall be designated by the local school board and shown on the
preliminary plat. The shelter shall be a minimum of an open-sided, roofed
structure with a hard surfaced, well-drained floor. The shelter square footage
shall be a minimum of six square feet for every dwelling unit.
   (I)   Drainage. Mobile home park street and ditch drainage shall meet or
exceed §
190.46(G) of the subdivision regulations, or §§
150.085 through
150.094 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.036 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   All proposed planned unit development shall comply with all applicable
county subdivision regulations and zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.037 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE AND ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Intent and purpose. In order to prevent crime, protect the county's
retail trade, maintain property values, and generally to protect and preserve
the quality of its neighborhoods, commercial districts, and the quality of
life, this chapter regulates the location of adult entertainment establishments
by dispersing them throughout the county. In the development and execution of
this section, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their
very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under
certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the use and
enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to
insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are
itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose
of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area. Wherever there are
other county regulations, the stricter of the regulation applies. Uses subject
to these controls are as follows in this section.
   (B)   Specified use list.
      (1)   Adult amusement arcade;
      (2)   Adult book store;
      (3)   Adult internet service center;
      (4)   Adult motion picture theater;
      (5)   Adult stage show theater;
      (6)   Adult video cassette rental center;
      (7)   Cabaret; and
      (8)   Commercial sexual entertainment center.
   (C)   Definitions.
      (1)   ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. An establishment having as one of its
principal uses one or more of the following: customer-operated motion picture
devices, peep shows, viewing area, and/or similar devices, for display of
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction of sexual
activities, as hereinafter defined, or which offer persons who expose to view
of the customers the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola, human genital, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially or
completely covered by translucent material, or human or simulated male genitals
in a discernible turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
      (2)   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having as one of its principal
uses the sale, rent, or display of pictures, books, periodicals, magazines,
appliances, and similar materials which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on depiction of sexual activities as hereinafter defined or an
establishment with a substantial segment or section devoted to the sale, rental
or display of such material.
      (3)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any use or building or portion thereof,
which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron
directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or
to allow personal contact by employees, devices, or equipment or by personnel
provided by the establishment or view of a series of dance routines, strip
performances or other choreography provided by the establishment which appeals
to the prurient interest of the patron, to include, but not be limited to bath
houses, massage parlor, and related or similar activities. Any permitted,
conditionally permitted, or accessory uses allowed within any zone shall not be
interpreted to include ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER.
      (4)   ADULT INTERNET SERVICE CENTER. An establishment having or
advertising as having as one of its principal uses, the presentation or
production of video clips, live pictures, still pictures, conversations, and
similar material having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual
activities, as hereinafter defined, or which offer persons who expose to view
of the customers the bare female breast below a point immediately above the
tope of the areola, human genital, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially
or completely covered by translucent material, or human or simulated male
genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered,
for presentation to persons, services appealing to adult sexual interests,
through the use of the world wide web, internet transmissions, or other similar
telecommunications services.
      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment having or
advertising as having as one of its principal uses the production, or
presentation of motion pictures, slide projections, and other similar material
having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities, as hereinafter
defined, for observation by persons therein.
      (6)   ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. An establishment having or advertising as
having as one of its principal uses the presentation of live performances of
humans or animals having as a dominant theme or characterized or distinguished
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual
activities, as hereinafter defined, or which offer persons who expose to view
of the customers the bare female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola, human genital, pubic region, or buttocks, even if partially or
completely covered by translucent material, or human or simulated male genitals
in a discernible turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered, for
observation by persons therein.
      (7)   ADULT VIDEO CASSETTE RENTAL CENTER. A commercial establishment
characterized or distinguished by an establishment which has as one of its
principal uses the rental or sale of video cassettes which depict material
emphasis on matter depicting describing or relating to sexual activities, as
hereinafter defined and which does not provide an on premises showing such
material.
      (8)   CABARET. An establishment which features as a principal use of its
business, entertainers, and/or waiters and/or bartenders, male or female
impersonators and/or other persons, either male or female, who expose to public
view of the patron of said establishment at any time the bare female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human genitals, pubic
region or buttocks, even if partially or completely covered by translucent
material, and/or human or simulated male genitals in a discernible turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
      (9)   COMMERCIAL SEXUAL ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. Any other commercial
establishment not otherwise described herein which make available material,
services, or entertainment appealing to adult sexual interests including but
not limited to “bath houses”, “swingers club” or similar establishments
services or goods that are advertised by or on behalf of the establishment in a
manner patently designed to appeal to such adult sexual interests.
      (10)   MEASUREMENT. Measurement shall be made by measuring the shortest
distance between boundaries. Measurements shall be made on a horizontal plane.
      (11)   SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Depiction of human genitals in a state of
arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, bestiality,
holding or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region, buttocks, or
breasts.
   (D)   Location requirements.
      (1)   The above specified uses list shall exclusively and only be
permitted in the C zone (Commercial). The provisions of §
150.056(A)(1) do not apply to adult entertainment uses.
      (2)   New establishments may not locate within 1,000 feet of any other
lawfully operating adult entertainment establishment. Measurements shall be
made as described herein.
      (3)   The above specified uses list shall not be operated or maintained
within 1,000 feet of a UR or RR district, and/or within 1,000 feet of a house
of worship, a state licensed day care facility, a school, or a public park.
Measurements shall be made as described herein.
      (4)   New establishments may not locate to a site if 75% or more of the
tracts within a circular area, as described herein, are residential in
character. The radius of such circular area shall be 400 feet. The center of
such circular area shall correspond to the midpoint of a line joining the two
most distant points on the boundary of the tract on which the enterprise is
located.
   (E)   Nonconforming uses. Section
150.032 of this chapter shall govern nonconforming uses.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Adult entertainment establishments as listed
in this section shall screen all adjacent property owners. The street side
shall not be exempted. The screening height shall be a minimum of six feet, and
shall be at least 90% opaque.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.038 CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of these regulations are: to provide for the
safest and most efficient integration of cellular antenna towers for cellular
telecommunications services or personal communications services within the
community; to provide for such facilities in coordination with the
recommendations of the comprehensive plan; and to allow for such facilities
with the intention of furthering the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   Pre-application conference. Applicants are encourage to notify the
Planning Commission to discuss proposals, to allow for early coordination, and
to identify those items that are in conformance/nonconformance with the
comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and the provisions of these regulations.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purposes of these regulations, the following
definitions shall apply:
      (1)   ALTERNATIVE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that accommodate, camouflage, minimize or conceal the presence of
cellular antennas or cellular antenna towers that are constructed primarily for
the purpose of accommodating cellular antennas or cellular antenna towers or
are reconstructed for the purpose of accommodating cellular antennas or
cellular antenna towers. This does not include existing structures erected for
another primary purpose, but which subsequently have cellular antennas attached
to or located within them, without any reconstruction of the original
structure. For the provisions of these regulations, an alternative cellular
antenna tower is considered a cellular antenna tower.
      (2)   ANTENNAS OR RELATED EQUIPMENT. Transmitting, receiving, or other
equipment used to support cellular telecommunications service or personal
communications service. This definition does not include towers.
      (3)   CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A tower constructed for, or an existing
facility that has been adapted for, the locations of transmission or related
equipment to be used in the provision of cellular telecommunications services
or personal communications services.
      (4)   CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. A retail telecommunications
service that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and mobile
switching stations.
      (5)   CO-LOCATION. Locating two or more transmission antennas or related
equipment on the same cellular antenna tower.
      (6)   GUYED CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A type of wireless transmission tower
that is supported by thin guy wires.
      (7)   LATTICE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A self-supporting tower with
multiple legs and cross bracing of structural steel.
      (8)   MONOPOLE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A slender self-supporting tower on
which wireless antennas can be placed.
      (9)   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICE. Has the meaning as defined in 47
U.S.C. sec. 332(c).
      (10)   PLANNING COMMISSION. The County Planning Commission.
      (11)   UNIFORM APPLICATION. An application to construct a cellular
antenna tower submitted to a planning commission in conformity with KRS 100.985
through KRS 100.987.
      (12)   UTILITY. Has the meaning as defined in KRS 278.010(3).
   (D)   General. Cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications
services or personal communications services may be allowed in any zone after a
Planning Commission review in accordance with the following procedures to
ascertain agreement with the adopted comprehensive plan and the regulations
contained within the zoning ordinance.
      (1)   Applicability. Every utility, or a company that is engaged in the
business of providing the required infrastructure to a utility, that proposes
to construct a cellular antenna tower shall submit a completed uniform
application to the Planning Commission. Where the Planning Commission finds
that circumstances or conditions relating to the application of an alternative
cellular antenna tower are such that one or more of the requirements of the
uniform application listed below are not necessary or desirable for the
protection of surrounding property or the public health, safety, and general
welfare, and that such special conditions or circumstances make one or more
said requirements unreasonable, the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized
representative, may modify or waive such requirement of the uniform
application, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such modification
or waiver shall be requested by the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a
written justification for each requested modification or waiver. The Planning
Commission shall not regulate the placement of antennas or related equipment on
an existing structure.
      (2)   Application requirements. Applications for the construction of
cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall include the following:
         (a)   The full name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The applicant’s articles of incorporation, if applicable;
         (c)   A geotechnical investigation report signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in Kentucky that includes boring logs and
foundation design recommendations;
         (d)   A written report, prepared by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, of findings as to the proximity of the proposed site to flood hazard
areas.
         (e)   Clear directions to the proposed site, including highway numbers
and street names, if applicable, with the telephone number of the person who
prepared the directions.
         (f)   The lease or sale agreement for the property on which the tower
is proposed to be located, except that, if the agreement has been filed in
abbreviated form with the County Clerk, an applicant may file a copy of the
agreement as recorded by the County Clerk and, if applicable, the portion of
the agreement that specifies, in the case of abandonment, a method that the
utility will follow in dismantling and removing the proposed cellular antenna
tower including a timetable for removal.
         (g)   The identity and qualifications of each person directly
responsible for the design and construction of the proposed tower.
         (h)   A site development plan, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer or surveyor licensed in Kentucky, that shows the proposed location of
the tower and all easements and existing structures within 500 feet of the
proposed site on the property on which the tower will be located, and all
easements and existing structures within 200 feet of the access drive,
including the intersection with the public street system.
         (i)   A survey, prepared by a surveyor licensed in Kentucky. The
survey shall be in accordance with all of the requirements of the county
subdivision ordinance and KRS Chapter 100, that shows lease lines or property
line, which upon approval, shall be recorded.
         (j)   A vertical profile sketch of the tower, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in Kentucky, indicating the height of the
tower and the placement of all antennas.
         (k)   The tower and foundation design plans and a description of the
standard according to which the tower was designed, signed, and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in Kentucky.
         (l)   A map, drawn to a scale no less than one inch equals 200 feet,
that identifies every structure and every owner of real estate within 500 feet
of the proposed tower.
         (m)   A statement that every person who, according to the records of
the property valuation administrator, owns property within 500 feet of the
proposed tower or property contiguous to the site upon which the tower is
proposed to be constructed, has been:
            1.   Notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
proposed construction which notice shall include a map of the location of the
proposed construction;
            2.   Given the telephone number and address of the local Planning
Commission; and
            3.   Informed of his or her right to participate in the Planning
Commission's proceedings on the application.
         (n)   A list of the property owners who received the notice, together
with copies of the certified letters sent to the listed property owners.
         (o)   A statement that the Judge/Executive of the county has been
notified, in writing, of the proposed construction and a copy of the
notification.
         (p)   A statement that the Paducah-McCracken County Barkley Regional
Airport has been notified, in writing, of the proposed construction and a copy
of the notification.
         (q)   A statement that:
               1.   A written notice, of durable material at least two feet by
four feet in size, stating that “[Name of applicant] proposes to construct a
telecommunications tower on this site” and including the addresses and
telephone numbers of the applicant and the Planning Commission, has been posted
in a visible location on the proposed site; and
               2.   A written notice, at least two feet by four feet in size,
stating that “[Name of applicant] proposes to construct a telecommunications
tower near this site” and including the addresses and telephone numbers of the
applicant and the Planning Commission, has been posted on the public road
nearest the site.
         (r)   A statement that notice of the location of the proposed
construction has been published in the Paducah Sun newspaper.
         (s)   A brief description of the character of the general area in
which the tower is proposed to be constructed, which includes the existing land
use for the specific property involved.
         (t)   A statement that the applicant has considered the likely effects
of the installation on nearby land uses and values and has concluded that there
is no more suitable location reasonably available from which adequate service
to the area can be provided, and that there is no reasonably available
opportunity to locate its antennas and related facilities on an existing
structure, including documentation of attempts to locate its antennas and
related facilities on an existing structure, if any, with supporting radio
frequency analysis, where applicable, and a statement indicating that the
applicant attempted to locate its antennas and related facilities on a tower
designed to host multiple wireless service providers' facilities or on an
existing structure, such as a telecommunications tower or other suitable
structure capable of supporting the applicant's antennas and related
facilities.
         (u)   A map of the area in which the tower is proposed to be located,
that is drawn to scale, and that clearly depicts the necessary search area
within which an antenna tower should, pursuant to radio frequency requirements,
be located.
         (v)   A grid map that shows the location of all existing cellular
antenna towers and that indicates the general position of proposed construction
sites for new cellular antenna towers within an area that includes:
            1.   All of the county; and
            2.   A one-half mile area outside the boundaries of the county, if
that area contains either existing or proposed construction sites for cellular
antenna towers.
   (E)   Confidentiality of application. All information contained in the
application and any updates, except for any map or other information that
specifically identifies the proposed location of the cellular tower then being
reviewed, shall be deemed confidential and proprietary within the meaning of
KRS 61.878. The Planning Commission shall deny any public request for the
inspection of this information, whether submitted under Kentucky’s Open Records
Act or otherwise, except when ordered to release the information by a court of
competent jurisdiction. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of
official misconduct in the second degree as provided under KRS 522.030. The
confidentiality of the applications and any updates of the application can be
waived by the written authorization of the applicant.
   (F)   Application fee. An applicant for the construction of cellular antenna
towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal communications
services shall pay an application fee in the amount set by the Planning
Commission upon submission of a uniform application.
   (G)   Processing of application. Applications for the construction of
cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall be processed as follows:
      (1)   At least one public hearing on the proposal shall be held, at which
hearing interested parties and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once,
in the Paducah Sun newspaper, provided that one publication occurs not less
than seven calendar days nor more than 21 calendar days before the occurrence
of such hearing.
      (2)   Notice of the proposed shall be posted on the site at least 14 days
in advance of the hearing. The notice shall consist of a written notice, of
durable material at least two feet by four feet in size, stating that “[Name of
applicant]” proposes to construct a telecommunications tower on this site and
including the addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and the planning
commission. Notice of the proposal shall also be posted on the public road
nearest the site. This notice shall consist of a written notice, of durable
material at least two feet by four feet in size, stating that "[Name of
applicant] proposes to construct a telecommunications tower near this site" and
including the addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and the Planning
Commission.
      (3)   Notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days in advance of
the hearing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of every
parcel of property within 500 feet of the proposed tower or property contiguous
to the site upon which the tower is proposed to be constructed. The notice
shall include a map of the location of the proposed construction, the telephone
number and address of the Planning Commission and shall inform the addressee of
his or her right to participate in the Planning Commissioner's proceedings on
the application. Records maintained by the Property Valuation Administrator may
be relied upon conclusively to determine the identity and address of said
owner. In the event a property is in condominium or cooperative forms of
ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or
chairperson of the owner group that administers property commonly owned by the
condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be mailed to two or more
co-owners of an adjoining property who are listed in the Property Valuation
Administrator’s records as having the same address.
      (4)   Upon holding the hearing, the Planning Commission shall, within 60
days commencing from the date that the application is received by the Planning
Commission, or within a date specified in a written agreement between the
Planning Commission and the applicant, make its final decision to approve or
disapprove the uniform application. If the Planning Commission fails to issue a
final decision within 60 days, and if there is no written agreement between the
Planning Commission and the utility to a specific date of the Planning
Commission to issue a decision, it shall be presumed that the Planning
Commission has approved the utility’s uniform application.
   (H)   Design standards. The applicant shall provide information
demonstrating compliance with the requirements contained herein. Potential
sites that should be considered (in order from most-preferred to least-
preferred) include existing utility towers, industrial zones, commercial zones,
and government buildings and properties. Where the Planning Commission finds
that circumstances or conditions relating to the particular application are
such that one or more of the requirements listed below are not necessary or
desirable for the protection of the surrounding property or the public health,
safety, and general welfare, and that such special conditions or circumstances
make one or more said requirements unreasonable, the Planning Commission, or
its duly authorized representative, may modify or waive such requirement,
either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such modification or waiver
shall be requested by the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a written
justification for each requested modification or waiver.
      (1)   Monopoles. Monopole cellular antenna towers shall be permitted in
any zone. Lattice and guyed cellular antenna towers shall be permitted in any
zone except for Urbanizing Residential zones.
      (2)   Minimum lot size. Regardless of the minimum lot sizes listed in the
specific zoning districts, or the county subdivision ordinance, the lot size
may be the minimum necessary to comply with the objectives and standards of
this section.
      (3)   Agricultural zone setback. Lattice and guyed cellular antenna
towers constructed in an agricultural zone shall be located a minimum distance
of not less than 250 feet from all existing residential structures. Distance
shall be measured from the base of the tower to the nearest wall of the
residential structure.
      (4)   Setbacks. Setbacks for all structures constructed in connection
with guyed or lattice cellular antenna towers, except fences and/or guy wires,
shall be a minimum distance from the property line or lease line equal to at
least one-half the height of the tower, but not less than 50 feet. All
structures constructed in connection with monopole or alternative cellular
antenna tower shall comply with the applicable setback requirements established
for other structures within the applicable zoning district. Alternative
cellular antenna towers that are to be located as part of a utility service
facility (e.g. power pole or telephone pole) shall comply with setback
requirements applicable to such utility service facilities, if any.
      (5)   Height. A cellular antenna tower, or alternative antenna tower
structure, may be constructed to a maximum height of 200 feet regardless of the
maximum height requirements listed in the specific zoning district. This also
applies to any tower taller than 15 feet constructed on the top of another
building or structure, with the height being the overall height of building/
structure and tower together, measured from the grade to the highest point. The
Planning Commission may allow antennas greater than 200 feet in height upon
review of the applicant's justification that the additional height meets the
criteria identified in division (H)(6) below.
      (6)   Construction standards. The cellular antenna tower shall be
constructed in compliance with the most current American National Standards
Institute/Electronic Industries Alliance/ Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA) standard and other applicable state standards. Prior
to any applicable building permits being issued for any work on an existing
cellular antenna tower, a site visit report will be provided attesting to the
structural integrity and compliance with ANI/EIA/TIA standard and other
applicable standards. Cellular antenna towers shall not be illuminated, except
in accordance with other state or federal regulations.
      (7)   Staffing. The site shall be un-staffed. Personnel may periodically
visit the site for maintenance, equipment modification, or repairs. To
accommodate such visits, ingress/egress shall be only from approved access
points.
      (8)   Fencing. Woven wire or chain link (80% open) or solid fences made
from wood or other materials (less than 50% open) shall be used to enclose the
site. Such fences shall not be more than eight feet in height, and may be
located within the front, side, or rear yard.
      (9)   Screening. Screening shall be provided by evergreen trees, with a
minimum height of six feet, planted in a staggered pattern at a maximum
distance of 15 feet on center. The screening shall be placed in an area between
the property line, or lease line, and a ten-foot setback.
      (10)   Surfacing. All driveways and off-street parking areas shall be
paved with a durable surface such as asphalt or concrete.
      (11)   Signs. There shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying
emergency information, owner contact information, warning or safety
instructions, or signs that are required by a federal, state, or local agency.
Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area.
      (12)   Number of service providers. All new cellular antenna towers shall
be designed and constructed to accommodate a minimum of three service
providers.
      (13)   Lease agreements. All option and site lease agreements shall not
prohibit the possibility of co-location, and in the case of abandonment, shall
include a method that the utility will follow in dismantling and removing the
proposed cellular antenna tower including a timetable for removal.
      (14)   Other approvals required. Approval of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and the Kentucky Airport Zoning Commission (KAZC) or
documentation where approval is not required shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the construction of the cellular antenna
tower.
   (I)   Criteria.
      (1)   Approval or disapproval of the proposal shall be based upon an
evaluation of the proposal’s agreement with the comprehensive plan and zoning
regulations.
         (a)   The Planning Commission may require the applicant to make a
reasonable attempt to co-locate additional transmitting or related equipment.
The Planning Commission may provide the location of existing cellular antenna
towers on which the Commission deems the applicant can successfully co-locate
its transmitting and related equipment.
         (b)   If the Planning Commission requires the applicant to attempt co-
location, the applicant shall provide the Planning Commission with a statement
indicating that the applicant has:
            1.   Successfully attempted to co-locate on towers designed to host
multiple wireless service providers’ facilities or existing structures such as
a telecommunications tower or another suitable structure capable of supporting
the applicant's facilities, and that identifies the location of the tower or
suitable structure on which the applicant will co-locate its transmission and
related facilities; or
            2.   Unsuccessfully attempted to co-locate on towers designed to
host multiple wireless service provider's facilities or existing structure such
as a telecommunications tower or another suitable structure capable of
supporting the applicant’s facilities and that:
               a.   Identifies the location of the towers or other structures
on which the applicant attempted to co-located; and
               b.   Lists the reasons why the co-location was unsuccessful in
each instance.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may deny a uniform application to construct
a cellular antenna tower based on an applicant’s unwillingness to attempt to
co-locate additional transmitting or related equipment on any new or existing
towers or other structures.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall not regulate the placement of a
cellular antenna tower on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that the proposed facility complies with the
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission concerning radio frequency
emissions.
   (J)   Amendments. Any amendments to plans, except for minor adjustments as
determined by the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized representative,
shall be made in accordance with the procedure required by division (D) above,
subject to the same limitations and requirements as those under which such
plans were originally approved.
   (K)   Tower upgrades. Upgrades to any tower will require a structural
analysis to be presented and if the tower is located within 300 feet of another
structure or weight is being added, an on-site tower inspection report that has
been performed within six months of the application.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2025-03, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 150.039 SIGNS.
   The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the control of
signs. The regulations further seek to ensure the safety of the motorists in
the community by reducing the distracting influence of uncontrolled signage.
Further, it is not the intent of this chapter to regulate any sign based upon
content.
   (A)   Definitions for this section. The following words and terms shall have
the meaning as hereinafter defined unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      (1)   SIGN. Any name, identification, description, display, illustration,
or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or land, in view of the general public, and which directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business or
otherwise provides information to the public.
      (2)   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, or advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, or other light material,
intended or customarily expected to be displayed for a limited period of time
only, not to exceed 30 days. Temporary signs may be as large as 16 square feet.
There shall be no more than one temporary sign for every 40 feet of road
frontage.
      (3)   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. Any sign advertising a business, person,
activity, goods, products, or services not located on the site where the sign
is installed.
   (B)   General regulations.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where, by
reason of its position, working, illumination, size, shape, or color, it may
obstruct, impair or otherwise interfere with the view of, or be confused with
any authorized traffic-control sign, signal, or device.
      (2)   No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way, except
governmental regulatory signs for public good and use that direct and control
traffic.
      (3)   No sign shall be placed in such a manner as to reduce visibility at
driveways, access points, and intersections.
      (4)   Signs shall be adequately maintained.
      (5)   Changeable and electronic signs shall display each message for at
least eight seconds and changeovers cannot take more than two seconds.
      (6)   Changeable and electronic signs must possess and utilize a light-
sensing device, with automatic dimming capabilities to adjust the brightness of
the sign, so that the maximum luminescence level is not more than three-tenths
foot candles over ambient light, measured at a distance of:
 
Sign Face Size                                            Distance Measurement
300 square feet or smaller                                150 feet
Larger than 300 square feet, but equal or less than 378   200 feet
square feet
Larger than 378 square feet, but equal or less than 672   250 feet
square feet
Larger than 672 square feet (up to maximum sign face size 350 feet
of 1,000 square feet)
 
   (C)   Off-premise signs. Off-premise signs are permitted in AG, C, ML, and
MH zones.
      (1)   Off-premise signs must be 500 feet apart in all zones except C
zones.
      (2)   Off-premise signs may be double-faced (front and back or v-shaped),
but may not be stacked (top and bottom) unless specifically permitted in a
particular zone.
   (D)   Regulations by district without receiving a variance from the Board of
Adjustment.
                     Maximum Height Number of Signs   Stacked or V-
Zone Maximum Size    Above Average  Allowed Per       Shaped        Digital
                     Grade          Parcel*
AG   400 square feet 40 feet        1                 No            No
RR   6 square feet   6 feet         1                 No            No
UR   6 square feet   6 feet         1                 No            No
C    700 square feet 60 feet        1 per 300 feet of Yes           Yes
     per sign                       road frontage
ML   700 square feet 40 feet        1                 No            Yes
MH   400 square feet 40 feet        1                 No            Yes
* Nothing in this section shall prevent or limit the number of temporary
signs one can post.
 
   (E)   Signs permitted in all zones.
      (1)   Signs located wholly within a building or structure.
      (2)   Signs affixed to a properly-licensed motor vehicle operating upon
public thoroughfares.
      (3)   Any sign erected by a governmental agency.
   (F)   Signs prohibited in all zones.
      (1)   Flashing or blinking signs and devices. This does not apply to
scrolling LED boards or electronic signs whose display changes on a regular
schedule.
      (2)   Signs attached to stationary vehicles.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.040 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS (SES). The components and subsystems required to
convert solar energy into electric energy.
   (B)   Levels of SES.
      (1)   Level 1. Systems designed to provide power to the structures on a
parcel. Level 1 systems include roof mounted systems (such as, but not limited
to panels, solar shingles, and the like) and ground mounted systems larger than
60 square feet but covering less than one-half acre. Level 1 systems are
considered accessory structures; and
      (2)   Level 2. Ground mounted systems greater than one-half acre or
greater in size for the commercial production of electricity and transmission
to a public utility.
   (C)   Conditional use.
      (1)   Level 2 SES are a conditional use in the AG Zone. Level 2 SES are
not permitted in RR, UR, C, ML, or MH Zones. Any Level 2 SES proposal must also
agree with the county’s adopted future land use plan for areas designated as
Agricultural. Any application that does not agree with the future land use plan
shall be rejected by the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   Level 1 SES are permitted in all zones.
   (D)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Level 1 SES which are ground mounted are not permitted in front or
side yards. In rear yards, ground mounted systems shall be a minimum of 50 feet
from any principal structure on an adjoining property.
      (2)   Level 2 SES are required to be setback 150 feet from all exterior
property lines, and shall not be placed closer than 500 feet to any existing or
permitted residential structure intended for human occupancy. SES that extends
across multiple parcels do not have to follow setback requirements (zero lot
lines) for interior property lines located within the security fencing.
   (E)   Screening.
      (1)   All previously existing perimeter tree lines shall be left in place
to serve as a visual buffer. Where tree lines do not exist or are removed, a
natural screen of a double row of staggered evergreens (minimum eight-foot
height at planting and maturing to a minimum of 15 feet tall) planted 15 feet
on center from any public right-of-way or adjacent residential use shall be
used. Screening shall remain 90% visually solid year-round. Screenings shall be
located a minimum of 50 feet from property lines. Visual buffers shall be
placed on the exterior of the security fence.
      (2)   Level 1 SES are exempt from screening requirements excluding ground
mounted systems which shall be screened from adjacent residential uses located
within 200 feet of the ground mounted system. Screening shall be a six-foot
high fence that is 90% visually solid or six-foot tall shrubs and/or evergreen
trees that remain 90% visually solid year-round.
   (F)   Security fencing. A security fence shall surround all Level 2 SES and
be at least seven feet tall or six feet tall with three strands of barbed wire.
Level 1 SES are exempt from security fencing requirements.
   (G)   Signage. There shall be no signs permitted except those displaying
emergency information, owner contact information, warning or safety
instructions or signs that are required by a federal, state or local agency.
Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area.
   (H)   Ground maintenance. Topsoil shall not be removed. Grasses shall be
maintained or established. Herbicides and ground sterilant and gravel shall not
be used as a method of vegetative control, except around fences. Grasses inside
and outside the security fence shall not exceed ten inches tall. The Board of
Adjustment may waive this requirement if the developer can show this
requirement will create an undue burden and an acceptable ground maintenance
plan is submitted with the conditional use permit application.
   (I)   Stormwater management. For Level 2 SES stormwater and erosion control
plans per §
150.085 must be submitted with the site plan and approved prior to construction
or clearing.
   (J)   Decommissioning.
      (1)   A decommissioning plan shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and
updated every five years. The decommissioning plan must be subnmitted and
approved with the site plan. The plan shall establish the party responsible for
decommissioning, the anticipated life of the project, the estimated
decommissioning cost including removal of all structures, facilities,
equipment, fencing, conduit, driveways and the estimated salvage value of such.
Decommissioning must begin no later than 12 months after a solar farm has
substantially ceased to generate electricity for a period of three months. All
structures, facilities, and equipment must then be removed from the property
within six months and any disturbed areas for the property reclaimed,
revegetated, and otherwise restored in a manner consistent with its prior
state. A copy of all leases containing language regarding decommissioning must
also be approved by the county.
      (2)   A performance bond, or other approvable financial surety, payable
to McCracken County Fiscal Court sufficient to cover 110% of the net cost of
decommissioning of the site by a third party in the event the assigned party
defaults on this obligation. The amount shall be evaluated every five years in
conjunction with the revision to the decommissioning plan by a third-party
engineer at the expense of the developer, or SES owner, and requires final
approval by the Fiscal Court.
   (K)   Fees. Site plan review fees are $10 per acre in addition to the
conditional use application fee for any application and due at the time of
application.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 3-8-2021; Ord. 2021-18, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 150.041 MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. In order to promote a new dynamic for the citizens
of McCracken County, create new jobs, increase quality of life and diversify
dining options, this section has been adopted to allow mobile food vehicles to
operate under specific guidelines.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOBILE FOOD ADMINISTRATOR. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or
designee. The ADMINISTRATOR shall be responsible for the administration,
oversight and enforcement of the provisions under this section.
      MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A vehicle-mounted, vehicle-towed or vehicle-carried
food service establishment that engages in the sale and preparation of food or
beverages in individual portions to the general public.
      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person who prepares or serves food or beverages to
the general public from a mobile food vehicle.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to ice-cream trucks that move
from place-to-place and are stationary in the same location for no more than
ten minutes at a time. This section also does not apply to food vending push
carts or stands. Mobile food vehicles located on private property and not
serving the general public may locate in any zone for up to 72 hours at one
location.
   (D)   Zoning locations. Mobile food vehicles may operate in the following
zones: Commercial, Light Industry, and Heavy Industry Zones. All other zones
are expressly prohibited, except in public parks as described.
   (E)   Location. Mobile food vehicles are expressly prohibited from locating
on state or county rights-of-way. Mobile food vehicles may not locate within
100 feet of the principal entrance of any restaurant where more than 50% of
sales are derived from food.
      (1)   A mobile food vehicle shall not operate for more than 14
consecutive days at one location. After 14 consecutive days has expired, a
mobile food vehicle shall not operate at the same location until a period of 30
days has elapsed. The Mobile Food Administrator must receive written notice
(letter or email) 48 hours prior to any mobile food truck setting up operation
in McCracken County. Failure to provide 48 hours’ notice will be grounds to
revoke a mobile food vehicle’s permit. This notice must include all of the
following:
         (a)   Mobile food vehicle business name;
         (b)   Contact name and phone number and mailing address;
         (c)   Location the mobile food vehicle will be operating and the dates
it will be operating at that location;
         (d)   Written permission to locate upon site if required by division
(E)(2) below;
         (f)   Proof of mobile food permit currently valid, and continuously
valid during the time of operation specified in the notice.
      (2)   The mobile food vendor must obtain written permission from the
property owner to locate on private property and said permission must be made
available to the Mobile Food Administrator. Mobile food vehicles in private
parking lots may be asked to be moved in the event sufficient parking is not
available. Written permission must be granted from the McCracken County Judge
Executive or designee (depending on ownership) if the mobile food vendor
proposes to operate in a public park.
      (3)   In no case shall a mobile food vehicle obstruct traffic or
pedestrian flow. No stop sign, yield sign, school crossing sign or any other
traffic-control sign or signal shall be obstructed. No ingress/egress of any
driveway or alley shall be obstructed. No fire hydrant or fire lane shall be
obstructed.
   (F)   Parking requirements. There are no parking requirements if a mobile
food vehicle locates in the parking lot of an existing business as described in
division (D) above. If a mobile food vehicle locates on a stand-alone parking
lot, there must be a minimum of eight parking spots per mobile food vehicle.
   (G)   Self-contained units and appurtenances. All mobile food vehicles shall
have self-contained water and wastewater. No gray water or grease shall be
dumped upon any street, sidewalk or down a stormwater drain. No power cable,
extension cord or other equipment shall be extended across any street, alley or
sidewalk. If a power cable, extension cord or other electrical equipment is
extended across a parking lot, said equipment must be protected from vehicle
movements in accordance with the National Electrical Code requirements.
      (1)   No tables, chairs, umbrellas or other appurtenances shall be
allowed on public property.
      (2)   All mobile food vehicles shall be in compliance with regulations
established by the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, Department for
Public Health, Division of Public Health Protection and Safety and/or the
Purchase District Health Department.
      (3)   All mobile food vehicles are responsible for the litter created by
their unit.
   (H)   Serving articles and alcoholic beverages. Patrons shall be provided
with single-serve articles, such as plastic utensils, plastic or Styrofoam cups
and paper or Styrofoam plates. Mobile food vehicles shall not serve any
alcoholic beverage unless permitted as part of a special event.
   (I)   Noise. No mobile food vehicle may emit bells, music, horns or other
audible sounds used to attract customers. Strobe lights, flashing lights or
other repetitious lighting are prohibited.
   (J)   Application and permitting.
      (1)   Application. Every mobile food vendor desiring to operate a mobile
food vehicle shall submit an application for a mobile food permit to the Mobile
Food Administrator. All mobile food vendors shall first obtain necessary
inspections and permits otherwise required by the county, the Purchase District
Health Department, and any other local, state or federal agencies or
departments, including without limitation a current county business license, in
order to vend in McCracken County. All applicants must pass a fire inspection
performed by the Paducah Fire Prevention Division. Cost of the fire inspection
is set by the City of Paducah. In addition to the information required by the
application, the Mobile Food Administrator may request other information
reasonably required. The mobile food permit application shall not be considered
complete until the Mobile Food Administrator has all information as required by
the application or otherwise.
      (2)   Issuance of mobile food permit. Once the application is considered
complete by the Mobile Food Administrator, the Mobile Food Administrator shall
issue or deny the mobile food permit within 14 business days. The mobile food
permit shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issuance, unless
the mobile food permit is revoked pursuant to this section.
      (3)   Permit renewal. Every mobile food permit in good standing can be
renewed annually prior to expiration with the Mobile Food Administrator. Upon
the mobile food permit’s expiration, the holder of the mobile food permit
forfeits the right to renew and the mobile food vendor must reapply for a new
mobile food permit.
      (4)   Fees. Application fee is $50. Permit renewals are $25.
      (5)   Inspections after permitting. Permitted operations will be
inspected periodically and without notice by representatives of various
government service providers referenced herein to ensure compliance with this
section.
      (6)   Operation without permit. Any mobile food vehicle operating without
a valid mobile food permit may be deemed a zoning violation and subject to the
penalties listed in §
150.999.
      (7)   Revocation of permit. The Mobile Food Administrator may revoke a
mobile food permit if it is discovered that:
         (a)   An applicant obtained the mobile food permit by knowingly
providing false information on the application;
         (b)   The continuation of the mobile food vendor’s use of the mobile
food permit is a threat to public health or safety, or if the mobile food
vendor otherwise presents a threat to public health or safety; or
         (c)   The mobile food vendor or mobile food vehicle violates
regulations of this section or any other county ordinance.
      (8)   Appeal of revocation. Decisions of the Mobile Food Administrator
may be appealed to the McCracken County Board of Adjustment pursuant to §
150.107 of this code. The decision resulting therefrom shall be final.
Following the revocation of a mobile food permit, a vendor must wait one year
before reapplying for a new mobile food permit.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-9-2021)
§ 150.042 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COMMUNITIES.
   (A)   Defined. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COMMUNITIES are found whenever:
      (1)   Two or more campers or recreational vehicles occupy, or intend to
occupy, a single lot in an appropriate zone; or
      (2)   There is a principal building and one or more rental or lease
spaces on one lot, with less than 1,500 square feet per recreation vehicle.
   (B)   Recreational vehicle community requirements.
      (1)   Minimum area requirements. No recreational vehicle community shall
be permitted on an area of less than one acre. However, the community may
develop in stages as long as it complies with an overall approved development
plan.
      (2)   Space requirements. Each space shall be a minimum of 1,500 square
feet, with a minimum of 15 feet provided between each recreational vehicle.
      (3)   Setbacks. No recreational vehicle or accessory structure shall be
closer than 30 feet to any public street right-of-way. No recreational vehicle
or accessory structure shall be closer than 15 feet to any privately-maintained
street right-of-way within the recreational vehicle community. No recreational
vehicle or accessory structure shall be closer than 25 feet to any property
boundary line of the park.
      (4)   Perimeter. All recreational vehicle community boundary lines,
excluding public road right-of-ways, shall have either a six feet high fence
that is 90% visually solid, or four-feet-tall shrubs and/or evergreen trees
that will attain six feet in height within three years and also be 90% visually
solid year-round, if the recreational vehicle community abuts an existing
residential property. Chain-link fences are not allowed to be used for
screening purposes.
      (5)   Drainage. Recreational vehicle community street and ditch drainage
shall meet or exceed §
190.46(G) of the subdivision regulations or §§
150.085 through
150.094 of this chapter.
      (6)   Prohibited uses. Recreational vehicles cannot be made into
permanent structures; nor can they have decks or skirting. Wheels cannot be
removed from recreational vehicles; they must remain transient. Recreational
vehicles cannot be permanently connected to utilities.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 150.050 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the use, provisions, and
dimensional requirements for each zone.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.051 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AG).
   (A)   Permitted uses. In the AG District, the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses as may be normally incidental to the
permitted principle use but not the parking of unoccupied manufactured or
mobile homes;
      (2)   Agricultural product production facility;
      (3)   Agricultural uses as defined herein;
      (4)   Automotive services;
      (5)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (6)   Cabinetmaker;
      (7)   Cemeteries and customary accessory buildings;
      (8)   Churches and customary accessory buildings;
      (9)   Commercial establishments dealing exclusively with the
transportation of agricultural products;
      (10)   Commercial kennels;
      (11)   Commercial recreational uses;
      (12)   Commercial storage centers;
      (13)   Community center, owned or sponsored by the county;
      (14)   Contractor;
      (15)   Convenience markets;
      (16)   Crematory services and vault production;
      (17)   Farm fertilizer sales and bulk distribution;
      (18)   Farm implement sales and service;
      (19)   Farm service centers;
      (20)   Feed mills and fertilizer sales, mixing and storage, excluding
fertilizer manufacturing;
      (21)   Golf courses and accessory buildings for the maintenance and
operation of the course;
      (22)   Home-based business;
      (23)   Home occupations, as defined;
      (24)   Livestock auction barns and yards;
      (25)   Livestock collection and distribution centers;
      (26)   Mineral extraction;
      (27)   Nurseries and greenhouses and their accessory commercial
buildings;
      (28)   Nursery schools and day care centers;
      (29)   Planned unit residential developments, on tracts of land of five
acres or more in accordance with county ordinances;
      (30)   Produce market stands and building, selling agricultural produce,
provided 60% of the produce sold are produced on the premises;
      (31)   Public and parochial schools;
      (32)   Public facility;
      (33)   Public utility uses;
      (34)   Riding stables and academies;
      (35)   Sawmills;
      (36)   Single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and
duplexes;
      (37)   Veterinary facilities and kennels;
      (38)   Welding and machine shop establishments;
      (39)   Other similar uses as approved by the Planning Commission
following a public hearing; and
      (40)   Conditional uses permitted on review.
   (B)   Conditional uses. Conditional uses for the AG Agricultural District
that may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment are shown as follows.
The Board shall follow the provisions of §
150.034 of this chapter when considering applications for conditional uses.
      (1)   Private aircraft landing strips;
      (2)   Private, religious, or charitable clubs and institutions;
      (3)   Landfills;
      (4)   Skeet, trap, or target shooting when located 1,320 feet or more
from a residential, RR or UR district boundary line;
      (5)   Solar energy systems in compliance with the provisions of §
150.040; and
      (6)   Recreational vehicle communities.
   (C)   Minimum yard requirements.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses:
         (a)   Front yard: 75 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: 25 feet; and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Front yard: 30 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; four feet (accessory buildings).
      (3)   Rear yard: 25 feet; eight feet (accessory buildings).
      (4)   Minimum area requirements:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: one acre;
         (b)   Public facilities, utilities, and similar uses, but not signs
that require structures of buildings not intended for regular human occupation,
may be less than one acre
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-16-2019; Ord. 2021-03,
passed 3-8-2021; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.052 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR).
   (A)   Permitted uses. In the RR district, the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Accessory uses as may be normally incidental to the permitted
principal use but not the parking of unoccupied manufactured or mobile homes;
      (2)   Agriculture uses, as defined herein;
      (3)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (4)   Cemeteries and their customary accessory buildings;
      (5)   Churches and their customary accessory buildings;
      (6)   Community centers owned or sponsored by the county;
      (7)   Convenience markets;
      (8)   Crematory services and vault production;
      (9)   Golf courses and accessory buildings for the maintenance and
operation of the course;
      (10)    Home-based business as defined;
      (11)   Home occupations as defined;
      (12)   Nursery schools and day care centers;
      (13)   Planned unit developments, residential, on tracts of land of five
acres or more in area in accordance with county ordinances;
      (14)   Public and parochial schools;
      (15)   Public parks and recreation areas;
      (16)   Public facility;
      (17)   Public and private utilities;
      (18)   Single-family dwellings;
      (19)   Two-family dwellings duplexes and town homes;
      (20)   Veterinary facilities and kennels;
      (21)   Nurseries and greenhouses and their accessory commercial
buildings;
      (22)   Produce market stands and buildings, selling agricultural produce,
provided 60% of the produce sold are produced on the premises; and
      (23)   Other similar uses as approved by the Planning Commission
following a public hearing.
   (B)   Conditional uses permitted on review. Conditional uses for the RR
Rural Residential District that may be permitted by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment are as shown as follows. The Board shall follow the provisions of §
150.034 when considering applications for conditional uses.
      (1)   Private, religious, or charitable clubs and institutions;
      (2)   Commercial storage facilities;
      (3)   Nursing homes and similar facilities;
      (4)   Hospitals and medical clinics;
      (5)   Commercial kennels; and
      (6)   Recreational vehicle communities.
   (C)   Minimum yard requirements.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses:
         (a)   Front yard: 75 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: 25 feet; and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet.
      (2)   Residential uses:
         (a)   Front yard: 30 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; four feet (accessory buildings); and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet; eight feet (accessory buildings).
   (D)   Minimum area requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet, if served by an approved
sanitary sewer.
      (2)   Townhouse lots with at least two attached units shall be not less
than 7,500 square feet each.
      (3)   All other lots in this zone shall be at least one acre in area.
   (E)   Minimum lot width. Seventy-five feet.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Nonresidential uses shall screen adjacent
properties in a manner approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-16-2019; Ord. 2022-11,
passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.053 URBANIZING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (UR).
   (A)   Permitted uses. In the UR District, the following uses are permitted:
The UR District is distinguished from, and is not intended to conflict with the
provisions of KRS 100.201(3):
      (1)   Accessory uses as may be normally incidental to the permitted
principle use, but not including the use of manufactured homes, mobile homes or
semi-trailers as accessory structures, nor the parking of unoccupied
manufactured or mobile homes;
      (2)   Agricultural uses as defined herein, except small, craft
distilleries holding a class B distiller's license under KRS 243.120 are not
permitted;
      (3)   Assisted care homes;
      (4)   Cemeteries and their customary accessory buildings;
      (5)   Churches and their customary accessory buildings;
      (6)   Community centers;
      (7)   Golf courses and accessory buildings for the maintenance and
operation of the course;
      (8)   Home-based business as defined;
      (9)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (10)   Planned unit developments, on tracts of land of five acres or more
in area in accordance with county ordinances;
      (11)   Public and private utility uses;
      (12)   Public and parochial schools;
      (13)   Public facility;
      (14)   Public parks and recreation areas;
      (15)   Single-family dwellings; and
      (16)   Two-family dwellings, duplexes and town homes.
   (B)   Conditional uses permitted on review. Conditional uses for the UR
Rural Residential District that may be permitted by the Board of Zoning
Adjustment are shown as follows. The Board shall follow the provisions of §
150.034 when considering applications for conditional uses:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (2)   Commercial storage;
      (3)   Home occupations as defined;
      (4)   Hospitals and medical clinics;
      (5)   Nursing homes;
      (6)   Nursery schools and day care centers;
      (7)   Parking lots; and
      (8)   Private, religious, or charitable clubs.
   (C)   Minimum yard requirements.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses. 
         (a)   Front yard: 75 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: 25 feet; and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet.
      (2)   Residential uses. 
         (a)   Front yard: 30 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; four feet (accessory buildings); and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet; eight feet (accessory buildings).
   (D)   Minimum area requirements. Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
   (E)   Minimum lot width requirements. Seventy-five feet. Townhouse lots may
be reduced to 37.5 feet.
   (F)   Minimum area requirements for multi-family dwellings. Minimum lot area
per unit: 4,000 square feet.
   (G)   Screening requirement. Nonresidential uses shall screen adjacent
properties as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.054 MOBILE HOME PARK (MHP).
   The following uses are permitted in an MHP Zone:
   (A)   Mobile home parks. Accessory uses as may be normally incidental to the
permitted principle use, but not including semi-trailers as accessory
structures, nor the parking of unoccupied manufactured or mobile homes not
intended for occupancy; and
   (B)   All mobile home parks shall comply with all applicable state, federal,
and county subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.055 COMMERCIAL (C).
    The purpose of this zone is to provide an area for commercial activity.
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use allowed in the AG, RR, or UR zone, excluding residential
subdivisions;
      (2)   Automobile sales and service;
      (3)   Banking and financial services;
      (4)   Boat sales and service;
      (5)   Commercial storage;
      (6)   Eating establishments;
      (7)   Funeral home;
      (8)   Hotels and bed and breakfast inns;
      (9)   Mobile and manufactured home sales;
      (10)   Personal services;
      (11)   Places of assembly;
      (13)   Recreational vehicle communities;
      (14)   Retail establishments;
      (15)   Theater;
      (16)   Trade, business, or art schools;
      (17)   Multi-family dwellings with a maximum density of 2,000 square feet
per unit; and
      (18)   Other similar uses as approved by the Planning Commission
following a public hearing.
   (B)   Minimum yard requirements.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses.
         (a)   Front yard: 50 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet.
      (2)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Front yard: 30 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; four feet (accessory buildings); and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet; eight feet (accessory buildings).
   (C)   Minimum area requirements and lot widths.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses: Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet;
      (2)   Two-family and multi-family dwellings: Minimum lot area: 2,000
square feet per unit.;
      (3)   All lots shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet at the front
building set back line.
   (D)   Where a Commercial Zone abuts an UR or RR zones or residential
property perimeter screening, as approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be
required.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-16-2019; Ord. 2022-11,
passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.056 LIGHT INDUSTRY ZONE (ML).
   The following provisions shall apply in an ML Light Industry Zone, unless
otherwise provided herein.
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in a C zone (except adult entertainment uses);
      (2)   Airports;
      (3)   Any industrial, manufacturing, fabrication, or processing use,
which does not emit objectionable noise, smoke, odor or dust beyond the
confines of its property;
      (4)   Warehouses; and
      (5)   Any other use which, in the Commission’s opinion following a public
hearing, would be compatible in the ML Zone.
   (B)   Minimum yard requirements.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses.
         (a)   Front yard: 50 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: ten feet; and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet.
      (2)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Front yard: 30 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; four feet (accessory buildings);
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet; eight feet (accessory buildings).
   (C)   Minimum area requirements. Minimum lot area: one acre.
   (D)   Where an ML zone abuts an UR or RR, screening as defined by the zoning
regulations shall be required.
      (1)   Minimum lot width requirements: Seventy-five feet.
      (2)   Conditional uses: Conditional uses for ML District that may be
permitted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment are shown as follows. The Board
shall follow the provisions of §
150.034 when considering applications for conditional uses: junk or salvage
yards.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.057 HEAVY INDUSTRY ZONE (MH).
   The following provisions shall apply in an MH, Heavy Industry Zone, unless
otherwise provided herein.
   (A)   Principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in an ML Zone;
      (2)   Power production and distribution;
      (3)   Heavy manufacturing, processing and storage. Including but not
limited to the production, process, storage and handling of uranium and other
radioactive materials, compounds, and all of the related constituent parts; and
      (4)   Any industrial use that is determined by the Commission to be non-
detrimental to the properties immediately adjacent.
   (B)   Minimum yard requirements.
      (1)   Nonresidential uses.
         (a)   When abutting an AG, RR, or UR zone:
            1.   Front yard: 100 feet;
            2.   Side yard: 100 feet; and
            3.   Rear yard: 100 feet.
         (b)   When not abutting an AG, RR, or UR zone: None.
      (2)   Residential uses.
         (a)   Front yard: 30 feet;
         (b)   Side yard: eight feet; four feet (accessory buildings); and
         (c)   Rear yard: 25 feet; eight feet (accessory buildings).
   (C)   Minimum lot area. One acre.
   (D)   Screening required. When a Heavy Industry Zone abuts an UR or RR zone,
a perimeter screen, as approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.058 PARKING.
   In all zoning districts, off-street parking spaces for the storage and
parking of motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of
the buildings hereafter erected, or enlarged after the effective date of these
regulations, shall be provided as herein prescribed.
   (A)   General. The following parking requirements represent minimum
standards.
      (1)   Variances. When it can be clearly shown that an intended use shall
require less parking than that which is required by this section because of
significant variation in operation or activity, the Planning Commission may
grant a reduction in the parking requirements.
      (2)   Multiple uses on site. For sites with more than one use, the
parking requirement shall be the sum of spaces required for each use, except as
adjusted pursuant to division (F) of this section.
      (3)   Exemptions. Any off-street parking facility constructed after the
effective date of this section must comply with the design standards set forth
in this section.
      (4)   Surface. All parking lots containing at least four spaces shall be
constructed of a durable, dust-free material, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Design approval. All lots or portions of lots being developed for
vehicular parking which contain at least four spaces shall have the design
approval of the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the County Road Engineer
prior to issuance of a building permit. Those administrative officials shall
ensure that the intent and specific provisions of this section are observed.
   (C)   Off-street parking requirements for residential land uses.
Housing Type and Requirement Parking
Housing Type and Requirement              Parking
Single-family:
   3 bedrooms or less                  2 per unit
   4 bedrooms or more                  3 per unit
Duplexes, triplexes, apartment buildings:
   2 bedrooms or less                  2 per unit
   3 bedrooms or more                  3 per unit
Mobile homes                              2 per unit, plus 1 per 5 units guest
                                          parking
 
   (D)   Off-street parking requirements for nonresidential land uses. GFA:
Gross floor area measured in square feet; GLA: Gross leasable area measured in
square feet.
 
Use                   Parking Requirement
Assembly operations   1 per 800 GFA
Auto sales:            
Outdoor display       1 per 3,000 sq. ft.
Indoor display/office 1 per 750 GFA
Repair facilities     1 per 300 GFA
 
Use Parking Requirement
Use                     Parking Requirement
Bars and lounges        1 per 300 GFA
Bowling alley           1 per alley
Car wash                10 per tunnel (parking and stacking)
                        1 per 400 GFA; and a paved, unobstructed pick-up space
                        with adequate stacking areas (as determined by the
                        Planning and Zoning Administrator) shall be provided in
                        addition to the standard parking requirements; and a
Day care facilities     safe pedestrian walkway system (as approved by the
                        Planning and Zoning Administrator) through the parking
                        areas to the building entrance, with a minimum 15-foot
                        safety zone between the parking spaces and the front
                        building entrance.
Financial institutions  1 per 300 GFA
Finishing operations    1 per 800 GFA
Golf courses            50 per 9 holes
Group homes             1 per 600 GFA
Hotel/motel             1 per room, plus 1 per additional 100 GFA of ballrooms/
                        banquet rooms/meeting rooms and similar spaces
Hospitals               As determined by the Planning Commission
Industrial              1 per 800 GFA
Library                 1 per 300 GFA
Manufacturing           1 per 800 GFA
Medical centers/offices 1 per 200 GFA
Offices:                 
Under 50,000 GFA        4.5 per 1,000 GFA
50,000 to 100,000       4 per 1,000 GFA
GFA
100,000 + GFA           3.5 per 1,000 GFA
Places of worship       1 per 3 seats
Receiving               1 per 5,000 GFA
Research                1 per 1,000 GFA
 
Use Parking Requirement
Use                      Parking Requirement
Restaurant:               
Quick style              1 per 30 GFA (of the public dining area)
Drive-through            8 stacked spaces (per window)
Sit-down style           1 per 3 seats
Food truck               8 per truck if parked in a vacant lot
Retail stores            1 per 300 GFA
Schools:                  
Elementary               2 per classroom
Intermediate             1.5 per classroom
Secondary                1 per 1,000 GFA
                         10 per classroom, plus:
                         (a) 1 per campus vehicle
Higher or vocational     (b) Additional visitor parking to be 25% of total
                         parking
                         (c) Parking must be in reasonable proximity to
                         destination points
Service stations         4 per bay or work area
Shipping facilities      1 per 5,000 GFA
Shopping centers:         
Under 400,000 GLA        3.5 per 1,000 GLA
400,000 + GLA            4 per 1,000 GLA
Storage areas/facilities 1 per 5,000 GLA
Theater:                  
Freestanding             1 per 3 seats
In shopping center       1 per 4 seats
Warehouse                1 per 5,000 GFA
When computing number of seats and GFA or GLA for parking, where no individual
seating (such as and like sports facilities and places of worship) is
provided, every 24 inches will be considered a seat.
When calculating the required parking for a specific intended use that does
not appear in this section, the Zoning Administrator shall make a
determination of a similar use that does appear in this section.
 
   (E)   General design and handicap parking.
      (1)   Traffic visibility sight triangle required. All points of ingress
and egress shall maintain seven-foot sight triangles. Landscaping shall not
exceed 24 inches in height above grade.
      (2)   Parking lots shall provide handicap parking as may be required by
Kentucky Building Code or the American Disabilities Act, whichever is more
stringent.
   (F)   Adjustment for mixed use developments. The Planning Commission may
authorize an adjustment in the total parking requirement for separate uses
located on the same site or for separate uses located on adjoining sites and
served by a common parking facility. An application for such an adjustment must
include a site plan, showing the location of parking and extent of various
uses, the requested reduction in the parking requirement, and supporting data
addressing why such a reduction should be permitted.
   (G)   Landscaping. 
      (1)   General requirements. All landscaping materials shall be installed
in a sound manner and according to accepted good construction and planting
procedures. Any landscape material, which fails to meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter at the time of installation, shall be removed and
replaced with acceptable materials. The person in charge of, or in control of,
the property, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise, shall be
responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials,
and shall keep them in a proper, neat and orderly appearance, free from refuse,
debris, noxious weeds and unwanted grass at all times. All unhealthy or dead
plant material shall be replaced within four months or by the next fall or
spring planting season, whichever comes first. Other defective landscape
material shall be replaced or repaired within two months. Plant material shall
not be severely pruned such that the natural growth pattern or characteristic
form is significantly altered. Topping or heading back trees, as defined by the
International Society of Arboriculture, is prohibited. The severe cutting of
limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter is prohibited. Utility
companies are exempt from this requirement.
      (2)   Regulations for the overlay district along commercial corridors.
         (a)   These regulations apply only to the overlay district along the
commercial corridors of US Highways 45, 60 and 62 from the Paducah city limits
to:
            1.   The US Highway 45 and Old US Highway 45 intersection on the
south side of Lone Oak;
            2.   The US Highway 60 and Fisher Road intersection by Barkley
Regional Airport; and
            3.   The US Highway 62 and McCracken Boulevard intersection.
         (b)   All parking lots of more than four parking spaces shall include
planted trees in accordance with Schedule 1, below:
SCHEDULE 1
Number of Spaces Number of Trees Required
SCHEDULE 1
Number of Spaces   Number of Trees Required
1 to 4 spaces      No trees required
15 to 30 spaces    1 tree for each 6 spaces or fraction thereof, up to 30
                   spaces
31 to 100 spaces   5 trees for the first 30 spaces, plus 1 tree for each
                   additional 7 spaces or fraction thereof
101 to 196 spaces  15 trees for the first 100 spaces, plus 1 tree for each
                   additional 8 spaces or fraction thereof
197 to 304 spaces  27 trees for the first 196 spaces, plus 1 tree for each
                   additional 9 spaces or fraction thereof
305 to 504 spaces  39 trees for the first 305 spaces, plus 1 tree for each
                   additional 10 spaces or fraction thereof
505 or more spaces 59 trees for the first 505 spaces, plus 1 tree for each
                   additional 11 spaces or fraction thereof
 
         (c)   Trees shall be at least one and one-half inches in diameter at a
point six inches above the ground, when planted. The tree type shall be
approved by the Zoning Administrator. Trees shall be protected from potential
damage by vehicles. Thirty percent of required trees shall be placed within the
perimeter of the actual parking surface area in those parking lots of over 20
spaces.
         (d)   Interior landscaping for vehicular use areas (VUAs). Landscaping
shall include trees, shrubs, flowers, or other living matter. Landscaping shall
be provided for vehicular use areas in accordance with the following standards.
            1.   A minimum of 5% of the total VUA shall be landscaped and the
landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the paved area. VUA landscaping shall
only be required for uses that have more than 20 parking spaces. This section
shall not apply to parking lots that are used for the sole purpose of selling
vehicles.
            2.   VUA landscaping shall contain a variety of trees and be
dispersed in the form of planting islands or peninsulas throughout the VUA. The
minimum size of planting areas shall be 200 square feet, with the minimum
dimensions of ten feet by 20 feet.
            3.   No more than one tree shall be planted per 200 square feet of
islands of peninsulas.
            4.   Per Illustration #1, below, planting islands within the VUA
shall be required at the end of every other parking row, when parking rows are
provided in the interior portions of the parking lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f247e2881f6f0a83a4b1aadba7153d3ea500e93c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-955.png]
         Illustration #1
               a.    All planting islands shall be planted with grass, low
ground cover, shrubs, flowers, or any combination of these. Hard surfaces or
gravel are not permitted in lieu of plant materials.
               b.    All planting islands shall have a minimum of six-inch
curbs installed to protect the planting area from vehicular traffic.
               c.   All plant material (other than grass, or ground cover),
located within landscape islands where vehicle overhangs are needed, shall be
setback a minimum of two feet, six inches from the edge of the pavement or the
face of the curb.
               d.   Sign landscaping. Landscaping shall be located around the
base of freestanding signs. The landscaping shall be ornamental in nature, with
shrubs, flowers and other ornamental plant materials. Sign landscaping is not
required for freestanding signs permitted before the adoption of Ordinance
2022-11. The amount of landscape area required shall be one square foot of
landscape area per one square foot of sign area. At least 50% of the required
landscaping area shall be planted with trees and/or shrubs.
               e.   Building landscaping. Any blank facade or portion of a
facade of a building that is not used for outdoor display, storage or loading
and unloading shall be required to provide the following landscaping, if the
wall is visible from a public right-of-way. BLANK FACADES shall be classified
as any wall that does not have windows used for display or entry doors for
employees or general public. Building that are 10,000 square feet or smaller
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
                  i.   Trees shall be provided on an average of at least one
tree per 40 linear feet of blank facade, as defined above, and shrubs shall be
provided on an average of at least one shrub per ten linear feet of blank
facade. This landscaping is not required to be placed in a linear design, but
shall be required to be dispersed throughout the length of the building facade.
                  ii.   Facades that abut VUAs shall have a minimum-eight-feet-
wide planting area. This planting area can be reduced by four feet if sidewalks
arc installed.
   (H)   Enforcement.
      (1)   To assure compliance with the submitted and approved site plan,
inspections will be conducted by the County Planning Office after the
installation of landscaping.
      (2)   The removal or destruction of landscape material previously
approved by the county shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance.
Replacement of landscape material shall be of like size as that which was
removed or destroyed.
      (3)   Violation of this chapter shall be grounds for the refusal of a
certificate of occupancy, require replacement of landscape material, and/or
will subject those in violation to established fines and penalties of the
zoning ordinance.
   (I)   Waiver of requirements. The Planning Commission shall have the
authority to grant a waiver of any of the requirements in this section upon
written request, which outlines the rationale for the waiver. The Planning
Commission shall review each written request and grant a waiver only under:
unusual or extreme circumstances that cause an unreasonable hardship such as
the size of the lot; or when an innovative or alternative approach can be made
that still meets the intent and purpose of this section.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS
§ 150.070 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered without building permits, as required, by the county.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with these
zoning regulations.
   (B)   Exemptions. The following structures are exempt from minimum yard
setbacks and zoning permit:
      (1)   Fences;
      (2)   Portable carports constructed without foundations or footers;
      (3)   Accessory buildings that are 120 square feet or less; and
      (4)   Above grade pools, tennis courts, recreation courts, and their
appurtenances.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.071 SITE PLAN REQUIRED.
   A site plan shall be submitted for review for all structures, buildings, and
uses that require a permit. All site plans and parking layouts, except on lots
serving single-family dwellings, shall be developed in accordance with this
chapter and approved by the Planning and Zoning Administrator, the County
Engineer and the Floodplain Manager, after which a building permit may be
issued by the Building Inspector.
   (A)   A site plan shall consist of a combination of written and graphical
material which:
      (1)   Describe the land by legal description or street address;
      (2)   Has been prepared by a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer as required by the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   The material, both written and graphical, shall be in a manner
prescribed by the Zoning Administrator that is sufficient and necessary to
verify compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Site plans shall be:
      (1)   Approved;
      (2)   Approved with corrections. The site plan is approved; provided the
applicant makes the noted changes; or
      (3)   Denied. The site plan is not approved. If the site plan is denied,
the developer may appeal their decision to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2020-06, passed 6-22-2020)
§ 150.072 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   A certificate of occupancy may be issued by the enforcement officer if
required in advance of the use or occupancy for:
   (A)   A building hereafter erected, or a change in the use of an existing
building;
   (B)   Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of
these zoning regulations and amendments thereto that is changed, extended,
altered, or rebuilt thereafter;
   (C)   The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the
nonconforming use fails to comply with the provisions of these zoning
regulations;
   (D)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot, building,
or structure complies with all the provisions of these zoning regulations; and
   (E)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the enforcement officer, and a copy shall be furnished, upon request,
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building,
structure, or land involved.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.073 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Requests for variances, conditional use permits, zone changes, development
plans, site plans, nonconforming use changes, and similar items, application
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator in form prescribed by the
Administrator that is sufficient to serve the objectives of county development
policies, practices, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
STORM WATER CONVEYANCE AND MANAGEMENT
§ 150.085 PURPOSE.
   Storm water management is vital in promoting the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public. It is the intent of this subchapter, in an effort to
minimize the dangers of flooding to life and property, that certain runoff
control devices be provided as land area are developed or redeveloped. The
design criteria for storm water conveyance and management facilities are
outlined in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.086 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the content clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY PLAN REVIEW STAFF.  The County Road Supervisor and/or other
designated officials.
   CONTROLLED RELEASE STRUCTURE. A facility constructed to regulate the volume
of storm water runoff that is conveyed during a specific length of time.
   CONVEYANCE STRUCTURES. Water-carrying devices or improvements such as
channels, ditches, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, and the like.
   DETENTION OR RETENTION. Restraining the rate of storm water runoff with some
natural or manmade devices.
   DEVELOPED.  Conditions after construction or other manmade change to
improved or unimproved land, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations.
   EXCESS STORM WATER. That portion of storm water runoff, which exceeds the
capacity of the storm sewers or natural drainage, channels serving a specific
watershed.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Asphalt, concrete or any other surface, which does not
allow measurable infiltration.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Water which follows by gravity in channels formed by the
surface topography of the earth prior to changes made be the efforts of humans.
   OFF SITE. External to the boundary of a development.
   ON-SITE. Internal to the boundary of a development.
   POINT DISCHARGE. Release of storm water at a specific location.
   RUNOFF. Rainfall excess after natural losses from infiltration, evaporation,
transportation or incidental poundage.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE. The rate at which storm water runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
   STORM WATER STORAGE AREA. An area designed to temporarily accumulate excess
storm water.
   SWALE. Surface-type conveyance for storm water, usually designated to carry
incidental, localized runoff.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.087 STORM WATER CONVEYANCE AND MANAGEMENT FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All development occurring within the county shall provide for properly
sized storm water conveyance facilities and shall contain on-site, or provide
off-site, storm water management facilities capable of controlling increased
runoff relative to its predeveloped condition. Unless included in exemptions
listed herein, no application for a final plan of subdivision shall be approved
unless it includes a plan describing the manner in which storm water runoff
erosion and sediment resulting from the development will be controlled or
managed or a documented request for a waiver thereof.
   (B)   Similarly, unless exempt, no permit shall be issued for any parcel or
lot either an adequate storm water management plan addressing erosion,
sediment, and storm water, or a documented request for a waiver, has been
approved.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.088 STORM WATER CONVEYANCE FACILITIES DESIGN.
   (A)   The following criteria shall control when designing storm water
conveyance facilities;
      (1)   Open channels and roadside ditches: 25-year design storm;
      (2)   Storm sewers and inlets design storm: 25-year design storm; and
      (3)   Entrance pipes and cross drains: 25-year design storm.
   (B)   Maximum headwater under 100-year storm shall not be allowed to overtop
roads or increase the flooding potential in the affected areas.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.089 EROSION CONTROL.
   Plans for storm water conveyance systems shall include appropriately
designed temporary and permanent erosion-control measures for the open channel
structures and all de-vegetated land draining to both open and closed conduits
within the system. (Refer to Best Management Practice for Construction
Activities prepared by the Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Cabinet - should be used as a design manual for erosion and sediment
control.)
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.090 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES DESIGN CRITERIA.
   The following criteria shall be followed when designing a storm water
management facility.
   (A)   Design storm. Storm water management facilities shall be designed to
retain the difference in the pre-development and post-development, twenty-five
year, 24-hour storm event. The effect of the 100-year storm must be considered
and documented in the design of all storm water management facilities. Any
detention basin located in a parking lot shall not be designed to hold water
more than six inches deep.
   (B)   Design calculation. Design calculations submitted must include, but
are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Drainage area. Indicate if pre-development and post-development
areas differ;
      (2)   List area drainage types and run-off coefficient numbers for
predevelopment and post-development conditions;
      (3)   Stage - Storage curve for the proposed storm water management
facility;
      (4)   Stage - Discharge curve for the outlet structure of the proposed
storm water management facility;
      (5)   Inflow and outflow hydrographs for pre-development and post-
development conditions; and
      (6)   Emergency spillway design calculations.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2020-06, passed 6-22-2020)
§ 150.091 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The final storm water management plan shall include, but not be limited to
the following:
   (A)   All calculation, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
storm water management facility;
   (B)   All plans and profiles of proposed storm sewers and open channels
including horizontal and vertical controls, elevations, sizes, slopes, and
materials;
   (C)   Location, dimensions, and design details required for the construction
of all facilities;
   (D)   A description of the operation and maintenance needs for the storm
water management facility;
   (E)   All information relative to the design and operation of emergency
spillways;
   (F)   Project specifications relative to erosion and sedimentation control.
(Refer to Best Management Practice for Construction Activities prepared by the
Kentucky Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet for design
guide line associated with erosion and sediment control.); and
   (G)   All easements, rights-of-way, ownership, and maintenance
responsibilities for all storm water management control structures during and
after development. The identity of the responsible individual, corporation, or
association and the specific maintenance must be outlined on the plan.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.092 EXEMPTIONS.
   Exemptions from the storm water management requirements contained herein
shall be granted to the following:
   (A)   Any proposed subdivision that would contain no new streets and no more
than five lots;
   (B)   Residential subdivisions or residential planned unit developments,
where minimum lot size is greater than two acres;
   (C)   Any nonresidential development for which the area covered by an
impervious surface is less than 10,000 square feet and a concentrated flow is
not created to impact an adjacent property; however, when future development
will cause the area covered by an impervious surface to exceed 10,000 square
feet, storm water management will be required for the existing and proposed
development; provided further, that any nonresidential development having an
imperious surface in place prior to July 1, 2001 shall not be counted and shall
not be required to be included in the storm water management plan; and
   (D)   Waivers may also be granted if, in other cases, the developer can
provide sufficient documentation that the proposed development will not result
in an adverse impact either upstream or downstream of the proposed site.
Waivers shall be granted solely at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.093 DESIGN CERTIFICATION.
   Design of all storm water management and conveyance facilities shall be
prepared and stamped by a professional civil engineer. Design methods shall be
in accordance with the Kentucky Department of Highways, Manual of Instructions
for Drainage Design, latest edition.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.094 CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATION.
   Prior to final approval of the development, the professional civil engineer
must submit certification that the storm water conveyance and management
facilities were constructed in accordance with the approved plan. Any request
for deviation from the approved plan during construction shall be submitted to
the Planning Department in writing for approval.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.105 INTENT AND SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide for the efficient,
reasonable, and impartial enforcement of these zoning regulations by
authorizing an enforcement officer, the basic procedure for complying with
these zoning regulations and the penalties for violators.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.106 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL.
   The Judge/Executive shall appoint enforcement and administrative personnel.
All other provisions of this zoning code and any other county ordinances
notwithstanding, the Judge/Executive shall have sole direction for appointing
personnel for the enforcement and administration of this zoning code.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.107 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   A Board of Adjustment (hereinafter known as “the Board”) shall be
appointed and organized in conformance with the KRS 100.217.
   (B)   The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Bylaws. To adopt bylaws for its own government;
      (2)   Conditional uses. To hear and decide applications for conditional
use permits that allow uses which are specifically named in the zoning
provisions, and which may be suitable only in specific locations in the zone if
certain conditions are met;
      (3)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement,
permit, decision, grant, determination, or refusal made by the enforcement
officer or other administrative office in the carrying out of this chapter, and
for interpretation of the zoning map. The Board of Adjustment has authority to
said appeals, and to make literal interpretations of the pertinent provisions
in order to correct any possible misinterpretation, and to make only those
departures from a literal conformance of the zoning regulations, which are
specifically delegated to it;
      (4)   Procedures for all appeals to Board. Appeals to the Board may be
taken by any person or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved
by an official action, order requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal, or
decision of any zoning administrative or enforcement officer. Such appeal shall
be taken within 30 days of a decision by the official, by filing with said
officer and with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof,
and giving notice of such appeal to any and parties of records. Said officer
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed form was taken and shall be treated as and be the
respondent in such further proceedings. At the public hearing on the appeal
held by the Board, any interested person may appear and enter his or her
appearance, and all shall be given an opportunity to be heard;
      (5)   Public notice of appeal hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable
time for hearing the appeal and give public notice in accordance with KRS
Chapter 424, as well as written notice to the appellant and the Administrative
Official at least one week prior to the hearing, and shall decide it within 60
days. The affected party may appear at the hearing in person or by attorney;
      (6)   Variance. To hear and decide on applications for dimensional
variance where, by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness or unusual
shape of the site, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, or some
other extraordinary situation or condition of that site, the literal
enforcement of the dimensional requirements of the zoning provisions would
deprive the applicant of reasonable capacity to make use of the land in a
manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the same zone. The
Board may impose any reasonable conditions or restrictions it decides to grant.
The Board shall deny any request for a variance arising from circumstances that
are the result of willful violations of the zoning regulation by the applicant
subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation form which relief is
sought;
      (7)   Findings necessary for granting variances. Before any variance is
granted, the Board must find that the granting of the variance will not
adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, will not alter the
essential character of the general vicinity, will not cause a hazard of
nuisance to the public, and will not allow an unreasonable circumvent of the
requirements of the zoning regulation. In making these finding, the Board shall
consider whether:
         (a)   The requested variance arises from special circumstances, which
do not generally apply, to land in the general vicinity, or in the same zone;
         (b)   The strict application of the provisions of the regulation would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land or would create an
unnecessary hardship on the applicant; and
         (c)   The circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant
subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation from which relief is
sought.
      (8)   Nonconforming use change. To permit a change from one nonconforming
use to another, providing the new nonconforming use is in the same or a more
restrictive zoning classification in accordance with these zoning regulations;
      (9)   Limits of authority. The Board of Adjustment shall not possess the
power to grant a variance to permit a use of any land, building, or structure,
which is not permitted by the zoning provisions for the zone in question; or to
alter density requirements in the zone in question. The Board does not possess
the authority to permit a use not authorized by these zoning regulations;
      (10)   Application of variance. A dimensional variance applies to the
property for which it is granted, and not the applicant. A variance also runs
with the land, and is transferable to any landowner of the land, but the
applicant cannot transfer it to a different site;
      (11)   Additional authority. In granting a variance, the Board may attach
thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features
of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in the
furtherance of the purposes of these zoning regulations;
      (12)   Report. A written report on each variance that is granted or
denied by the Board shall be submitted to the County Fiscal Court with a copy
retained in the files of the planning office; and
      (13)   Members. The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2022-11, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 150.108 ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The county may employ a staff or contract with planners or other
persons, as it deems necessary to accomplish its assigned duties as delineated
in KRS Chapter 100. The administrative and enforcement officer has initial
authority for the literal enforcement of these zoning regulations. They have no
discretionary authority to allow any departure from the literal conformance
with the zoning regulations.
   (B)   The Circuit Court has jurisdiction to determine all questions and
issues properly brought before it on appeal from the decisions of the Board of
Adjustment or Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.109 AMENDMENTS AND DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is to provide guidance for the
zoning ordinance amendment processes, including text and map amendments. It
shall also be the intent of this section to guide the use of development plans,
which may be used for a variety of planning and zoning processes, including map
amendments. The Planning Commission in its obligation to promote the public
health, safety, and general well-being shall consider, but not be limited to,
the following in its amendatory and development plan considerations:
      (1)   The conservation of natural resources, which may include various
wildlife forms, vegetation, steep slopes, surface water, ground water,
floodplain, soils, geologically sensitive areas, air quality, noise, sufficient
sunlight exposure, and the like;
      (2)   The conservation of sites that have historic or architectural
value;
      (3)   The provision for safe, efficient vehicular and pedestrian
transportation, off-street parking and loading within the development and the
community and neighborhood;
      (4)   The provision for sufficient open space and recreational
opportunities;
      (5)   The compatibility of the overall site design (buildings, parking,
circulation, signs, screening, and landscaping) and land use with the existing
and projected future land use of the area;
      (6)   The provision for adequate drainage facilities to prevent runoff
problems during times of peak precipitation and flooding to the site and the
surrounding community/neighborhood;
      (7)   The provision that infrastructure needs shall, as they relate to
essential services and infrastructure systems, be adequately addressed;
      (8)   The development plan’s compliance with the comprehensive plan and
all applicable regulations as per county subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Initiation and actions required for amendment. This chapter, including
both the text and the zoning map, may be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified, or repealed. A proposal for amendment to any zoning regulation may
originate with the Planning Commission or with the Fiscal Court, or with the
owner of the property in question for map amendments. Regardless of the origin
of the proposed amendment, it shall be referred to the Planning Commission
before adoption.
   (C)   Public notice of proposed amendments.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall then hold at least one public hearing
after notice as required by KRS Chs. 100 and 424. The Planning Commission shall
send copies of the notice to adjoining property owners surrounding the proposed
zoning change within 200 feet of the property proposed for a map amendment.
      (2)   All procedures for public notice and publication as well as for
adoption shall be the same as for the original enactment of a zoning ordinance
(KRS Ch. 424).
   (D)   Findings required for granting amendment. Before any map amendment is
granted, the Planning Commission must find that the map amendment is in
agreement with the comprehensive plan, or, in the absence of such a finding,
that one or more of the following apply, and such findings shall be recorded in
the minutes and records of the Planning Commission:
      (1)   That the existing zoning classification given to the property is
inappropriate and that the proposed zoning classification is appropriate;
      (2)   That there have been major changes of an economic, physical, or
social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the
comprehensive plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of
the area.
   (E)   Variances and conditional use permits. The Planning Commission may
hear and finally decide applications for variances or conditional use permits
when a proposed development plan requires a map amendment and one or more
variances or conditional use permits. The Planning Commission shall assume all
powers and duties otherwise exercised by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to
KRS Ch. 100 and this chapter. The applicant for the map amendment may elect to
have any variances or conditional use permits for the same development to be
heard and finally decided by the Planning Commission at the same public hearing
set for the map amendment, or by the Board of Adjustment as otherwise provided
for by KRS Ch. 100 and this chapter.
   (F)   Development plan requirements.
      (1)   When required. A preliminary development plan shall be required in
the following instances:
         (a)   The Planning Commission, as a condition to the granting of any
zoning change, shall require the submission of a development plan which, where
agreed upon, shall be followed; except for a single principal structure and
accessory structures for a single family dwelling, a duplex dwelling, a triplex
dwelling, or a four-plex dwelling on a single lot or ownership parcel. As a
further condition to the granting of a zoning change, the Planning Commission
shall require that substantial construction be initiated within two years
following the enactment of the map amendment, provided that such zoning change
shall not revert to its original designation unless there has been a public
hearing. The development plan shall be a continuing condition for the area
rezoned unless amended as required herein;
         (b)   When there is a proposal for multiple principal buildings on a
single ownership parcel or lot;
         (c)   The subdivision process may substitute for the development plan
process.
      (2)   Plans defined. For purposes of this division (F) and the plans
required herein, the following definitions shall apply:
         (a)   SKETCH PLAN. This plan will be used to determine the essential
graphic and written materials required for a specific map amendment and those
specific actions, such as map amendments, variances, or conditional use permits
that may be requested of the Planning Commission. The sketch plan may be
conceptual, but should indicate any site or surrounding features or conditions
that may affect the proposed development or surrounding properties or rights-
of-way, the proposed buildings, access points, parking and loading areas,
landscaping and screening areas, existing and proposed utilities, proposed
location for solid waste storage and access to same, and any other conditions
on the site or surrounding properties or proposed development features which
may affect the development of the site or surrounding properties or rights-of-
way. The sketch plan does not have to be detailed or highly finished drawings
but should address the issues and conditions that may be essential to the
development.
         (b)   PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN. This plan shall be that plan
adopted by the Planning Commission when the Planning Commission favorably
recommends a map amendment to the Fiscal Court. The preliminary development
plan shall include that information as determined in the pre-application
conference. No building permits shall be issued based upon a preliminary
development plan.
         (c)   FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. This plan is, in effect, a final site
plan with that level of detail as may be required for obtaining those permits
and approvals necessary for construction. It shall include all information
required as set forth hereinafter and as necessary for the review of the
proposed development and its compliance with any applicable law or regulation,
including any previously approved preliminary development plan.
      (3)   Content and format of development plans. All development plans
shall be prepared on mylar or other material capable of clear reproduction.
Required plan information shall be as follows:
         (a)   Contents of preliminary development plan. A preliminary
development plan shall contain the following minimum information:
            1.   A title block containing the plan name, development plan type
(preliminary or final), name and address of developer and plan preparer, and a
written and graphic scale;
            2.   The boundary of the subject property and the zoning and owner
names and addresses for all adjoining property;
            3.   Date, appropriate north point, and graphic scale;
            4.   A vicinity, or key map, oriented in the same direction as the
design scheme, scale not smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet;
            5.   Topography, with contours at an interval of not greater than
five feet. USGS quadrangles may be used as a base. This requirement may be
waived by the discretion of the County Engineer.
            6.   Scale of one hundred feet to one inch or larger;
            7.   Location, arrangement and approximate dimensions of existing
and proposed streets, roads, driveways, sidewalks, and parking areas. Profiles
and cross-sections of proposed streets or roads;
            8.   Perimeter screening, recreational, and other open spaces;
            9.   Approximate size, location, floor area, and use of proposed
and existing buildings;
            10.   Approximate location of lot lines for projects anticipated to
involve land subdivision;
            11.   Approximate location and dimensions of all existing and
proposed easements;
            12.   Approximate location and sizes of existing and proposed
utilities;
            13.   Minimum building setback lines;
            14.   Floodplain as determined by Federal Emergency Management
Agency, (F.E.M.A.), and classification, as per F.E.M.A. codes;
            15.   Approximate location and dimensions of storm drainage areas,
conceptual drainage controls and stormwater retention;
            16.   Plats shall be submitted not larger than 24 by 36 inches in
size.
         (b)   Contents of final development plan. A final development plan
shall contain all information as required for preliminary development plans
under the provisions below, except that the plan information shall be of an
exact nature, rather than approximate or general.
   (G)   Map amendment and development plan procedures.
      (1)   Preapplication conference.
         (a)   Prior to any application for an amendment, the applicant shall
meet informally with county planning staff to determine the following:
            1.   The effect of the proposed development on the existing
neighborhood, traffic patterns, and infrastructure systems;
            2.   How the proposed development relates to the comprehensive
plan;
            3.   The various regulations that may apply to the proposed
development;
            4.   An explanation of the required contents of the preliminary
development plan, and any other required submission of materials; and
            5.   An explanation of the amendment process.
         (b)   At the time of the meeting with the planning staff, the
applicant should present a sketch plan, as outlined in division (F)(2)(a)
above.
      (2)   Formal application. To formally request the Commission to consider
action on any zone map amendment and/or preliminary development plan, the
applicant shall file a complete application (with respect to all applicable
provisions of this chapter and other county ordinances, regulations and
policies), pay the filing fee, and provide copies of all written and graphic
material as required. Also the date for the public hearing will be set.
      (3)   Refiling. Upon reenacted amendment proposals, the applicant must
wait one year before reapplying with the same proposal, unless the Planning
Commission grants permission to resubmit sooner.
      (4)   Review. The planning staff shall send the development plan to
concerned agencies and interests for their respective technical review. If
necessary, or requested by the applicant, the interest and technical review
bodies may meet together to resolve, if possible, all differences and
difficulties associated with the development proposal. These meetings will be
open to all interested parties, including the public.
      (5)   Zoning map amendment procedure.
         (a)   Proposed map amendments shall follow the alternative zoning map
amendment procedures set out in KRS 100.2111. The Planning Commission
recommendation relating to the proposed amendment shall become final and the
map amendment shall be automatically implemented subject to the provisions of
KRS 100.347, and as set forth in the Planning Commission recommendations,
unless within 21 days after final action by the Planning Commission:
            1.   Any aggrieved party that files a written request with the
Planning Commission that the final decision shall be made by the Fiscal Court;
or
            2.   The Fiscal Court files a notice with the Planning Commission
that the Fiscal Court shall decide the map amendment. It shall take a majority
of the entire Fiscal Court to override the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
      (6)   Planning Commission action. No development plans will be considered
for Commission action until they have been reviewed by the appropriate review
agencies or interests. The Commission may pursue the following action:
         (a)   Approval. The development plan is ready for approval as
presented.
         (b)   Conditional approval. The development plan will be approved when
the developer has complied with the conditions of approval set forth in the
Commission’s action on the development plan.
         (c)   Disapproval. The development plan has been disapproved by the
Planning Commission. To request new review and action, the developer must file
a new application as set forth in this section.
         (d)   Postponement. In circumstances where further resolution is
required, the Commission may act to postpone final action on the development
plan until further information or resolution of conflicts can be ascertained in
accordance with KRS 100.211.
      (7)   Final development (site) plans procedures.
         (a)   Only after the Planning Commission has adopted the preliminary
development plan, the applicant must present a final development plan as set
forth in division (F)(2)(c) prior to the issuance of a building permit. County
staff will check the final development plan and ensure that:
            1.   The plan is in compliance with the preliminary development
plan.
            2.   The plan is in compliance with the comprehensive plan, this
chapter, other county ordinances, regulations or policies, and all other
applicable laws and regulations.
            3.   Where appropriate the review agencies may assess the document
and forward their comments to the county prior to final development plan
approval.
         (b)   If the final development plan complies with division (G)(7)(a)
above, the Planning Commission Chair will certify on the face of the plan that
all planning requirements and applicable conditions have been satisfied.
   (H)   Amendments to development plans. Amendments to approved development
plans can be made only by official Planning Commission action following a
public hearing. Content, format, and procedures shall be the same as for the
original submission. However, amendments, which fully meet the requirements set
forth hereinafter as minor amendments, shall be approved and certified by the
county without further action by the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Minor amendments defined. Minor amendments are intended to expedite
approval in those situations where amendments are of minor significance and
generally relate to the shifting of previously approved spaces. Such
amendments:
         (a)   Shall not decrease the overall land area in wards or other open
spaces;
         (b)   Shall not increase building ground area coverage, floor area, or
height, or increase the number of dwelling units;
         (c)   May increase building ground area coverage for accessory
buildings, or principal buildings if additions are less than 10% and additional
parking can be provided without disruption to major plan elements;
         (d)   Shall not change the location of cross-section of any street and
shall not increase the number or change the location of street access points on
arterial or collector streets;
         (e)   May include a reduction in parking spaces only when an
associated reduction in floor area or number of dwelling units would permit a
lesser number of minimum required off-street parking spaces than required for
the original development plan. To qualify as a minor amendment this reduction
may not be less than would be required by the zoning district regulations. For
any case where parking in excess of the minimum requirement was provided on the
original development plan, that same number of spaces shall be provided in
excess of the minimum requirement for the proposed minor amendment plan.
      (2)   Procedures for minor amendments.
         (a)   Filing. To request approval of minor amendments to development
plans, the developer shall file with the county a completed application form,
and copies of the plan as required by the terms and conditions of the county’s
application form.
         (b)   Review. The county shall review the plan for compliance with all
applicable requirements and ordinances and shall consult with concerned
agencies as appropriate to assure proper plan review. Upon determination that
all requirements have been met, county staff shall submit its finding to the
Planning Commission Chair for certification. If any question arises as to
compliance, however, the plan shall be referred to the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Certification. Upon certification of approval by the Planning
Commission Chair, county staff shall have copies of the plan prepared and
distributed to other public agencies at the expense of the developer, and
return the original plan tracing to the developer.
      (3)   Content and format of minor amendments. Minor amendments shall have
the same content and format requirements as the original development plan,
except that:
         (a)   The title shall indicate the plan as a minor amendment;
         (b)   A note shall be added listing the exact nature of the requested
changes;
         (c)   The following will be the required language for the Planning
Commission Chair’s certification: “I do hereby certify that this development
plan amendment complies with zoning ordinance provisions regarding amendments
to development plans.”
         (d)   Owners of interest will complete a certification to be signed
and witnessed as follows: “I (We) do hereby certify that I am (we are) the only
owner(s) of the property shown hereon, and do adopt this as My (Our)
development plan for the property,” which will be required language for all
property.
   (I)   Relationship to subdivision regulations. The relationships between
development plans and the subdivision regulations are established as follows:
      (1)   Applicability of subdivision regulations. Although development
plans are not subdivision plats, quite often the development plan does indicate
a need or intent to subdivide property. For any such development plan, the
design and improvement standards contained within the subdivision regulations
shall be applied to proposals contained on the development plan.
      (2)   Combining plans. Development plans and preliminary subdivision
plats may be combined. It is recognized that for certain development situations
it can be advantageous to both the applicant and the Planning Commission to
combine requirements for development plans and preliminary subdivision plats in
order to streamline the development approval process while not reducing the
quality of the review. The following provisions shall be applicable to any such
combined plan:
         (a)   The developer shall meet with county staff no later than five
working days in advance of the filing deadline to discuss the appropriateness
if filing a combined plat.
         (b)   The plan shall show all information required for a development
plan (preliminary or final as appropriate) and all information required for a
preliminary subdivision plat as set forth in the subdivision regulations.
      (3)   Substitution of plans. A preliminary or final subdivision plat may
be substituted for development plans required in conjunction with map amendment
requests. It is recognized that in certain cases a preliminary or final
subdivision plat would be as appropriate or more appropriate to be considered
in conjunction with a map amendment request than would a development plan.
Generally, such situations involve developments where placement of structures
will be tightly controlled by the streets, lot pattern, and requirements for
placement of structures within the zone, and where the applicant sees fit to
have plans prepared at the required level of detail for subdivision plats prior
to receiving a zone change approval. When an applicant is required to provide a
development plan in conjunction with a zoning map amendment request, the
applicant may file a subdivision plat in place of the development plan, if
deemed appropriate by the county. In any disputed case, the county shall make
the final judgment as to whether a development plan or a subdivision plat is
required.
(Ord. 2021-07, passed 6-28-2021)
§ 150.110 REMEDIES.
   If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
repaired, converted, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation
of these zoning regulations, the enforcement officer or other appropriate
authority or any adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or
other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of
such building, structure, or land.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
§ 150.111 FEE SCHEDULES.
Fee Schedule for County Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Adjustment - Zoning
Application Fee Number of Plat Copies to Submit*
Fee Schedule for County Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment
- Zoning
Application                             Fee    Number of Plat Copies to Submit*
Zone change (map amendment)             $500   1 pdf
Development plan                        $200   1 pdf
Major amendment ot development plan     $100   1 pdf
Full site plan with storm water and/or
erosion control (does not include       $225   1 site plan/1 storm water, 1 pdf
preliminary and final subdivision plat
fees)
Cellular tower (also requires           $2,500 1 pdf
subdivision plats)
Cell tower equipment upgrades or co-    $150   1 pdf
locations
Conditional use                         $250   1 pdf
Variance                                $200   1 pdf
Non-conforming use change               $200   1 pdf
Home based business                     $50    1 pdf
Planned united development (PUD)        $500   1 pdf
Multiple principal structures           $200   1 pdf
Similar permitted use                   $75    1 pdf
Special called meeting for Planning and
Zoning Commission and/or Board of       $500   N/A
Adjustment (does not include any fees
for various applications above)
Parking waiver                          $100   1 pdf
Zone verification or compliance letter  $75    N/A
All public notice advertisement fees, County Court Clerk recording fees, and
similar charges and expenses are not included in the fees listed above.
All fees listed above must be paid in full prior to any actions to be taken by
the respective commission or board.
Publication fee:
Comprehensive plan: $50
Additional fee for documents submitted after deadline: $200
*No hard copies required if submitting electronically except for stormwater
plans
 
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 3-27-2023; Ord. 2025-03, passed 5-12-2025)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this chapter,
and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise provided, the offender
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less
than $10 but not more than $500 or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or
both, for each offense or violation. Every day the offense continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-07, passed 11-27-2017)
TITLE XVII: PLANNING
   Chapter
      
170.   FLOOD HAZARD MITIGATION GRANT PROGRAM
      
171.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 170: FLOOD HAZARD MITIGATION GRANT PROGRAM
Section
   
170.01   Conditions under hazard mitigation grant
§ 170.01 CONDITIONS UNDER HAZARD MITIGATION GRANT.
   Pursuant to the policies stated in the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program
Administrative Handbook (revised April 1, 1996), each of the following
restrictive covenants and conditions shall be recorded in the transfer of any
property deeds acquired under the hazard mitigation grant.
   (A)   The property shall be dedicated and maintained in perpetuity for uses
compatible with open space, recreational and/or wetland management practices.
   (B)   No new structures will be built on the property, other than a public
facility that is open on all sides or is a restroom and is functionally related
to open space. Structures that are walled on all sides must meet NFIP minimum
requirements.
   (C)   After completion of the project, no application for additional
disaster assistance will be made for any purpose with respect to the property
to any federal entity or source, and no federal entity or source will provide
such assistance.
   (D)   The deed must stipulate that the purchasing jurisdiction must obtain
the approval of the commonwealth and FEMA Regional Director before conveying
ownership of the property to another public agency. Property transfer to
private citizens and corporations shall not be approved. All development rights
to the property must be retained by the County Fiscal Court or other public
agency so designated.
   (E)   Property may be leased to private individuals for only those land uses
as approved under this specific federal disaster declaration (DR-1163-KY) as
amended June 17,1997.
   (F)   The County Fiscal Court may amend this section after first receiving
approval from the State Division of Water, State DES and National Flood
Insurance Program to require additional, consistent restrictive covenants and
conditions as necessary for the protection of the general health and safety of
the people in the floodway of the Ohio River.
(Ord. 98-1, passed 3-9-1998)
CHAPTER 171: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
171.01   Authorization, findings, purpose
   
171.02   Definitions
   
171.03   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
171.04   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas
   
171.05   Establishment of development permit
   
171.06   Compliance
   
171.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
171.08   Interpretation
   
171.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
171.10   Enforcement
   
171.11   Appeals and variance procedures
   
171.12   Application of chapter
Administration
   
171.25   Designation of Local Administrator
   
171.26   Establishment of development permit
   
171.27   Duties and responsibilities of Local Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
171.40   General construction standards
   
171.41   Specific standards
   
171.42   Standards for streams without established base flood elevation
(unnumbered A Zones) and/or floodways
   
171.43   Standards for shallow flooding zones
   
171.44   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
171.45   Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the
letter “A”
   
171.46   Critical facilities
 
   
171.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 171.01 AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS, PURPOSE.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the commonwealth has in
KRS 100 delegated to local government units the authority to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Fiscal Court of the county, hereby adopts the
following regulations.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic
inundation which result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and by
the location in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise
protected from flood damage.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
loss due to flooding by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
properly due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood height or velocity;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood waters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
areas.
   (D)   Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such
a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding;
      (7)   Ensure that potential home buyers are on notice that property is in
a special flood hazard area; and
      (8)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the
principle source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination
of both. In A ZONES, flood waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are
usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year flood, base
flood elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principle structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and should be
designed to have mining flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   A1-30 AND AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual
chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
   AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one
and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
   AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between
one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) Flood depths are
shown.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.
   AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO AND AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-
year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
   A99 ZONE. The part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to
be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under
construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three
feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   B AND X ZONES (SHADED). Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood,
areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot
or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD). BASE FLOOD is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH and AR/AO
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1%
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all four sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground;
including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank, or other human-made
facility or infrastructure. See definition for STRUCTURE.
   C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular
program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop
extra measures for protection from flooding.
   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the
Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated or qualified community
official) from available technical studies, historical information and other
available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by
flood waters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe
consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or
unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the
health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not
limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to
avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes,
hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle and
equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called
upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities
important to maintaining or restoring normal services before, during and after
a flood, and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials,
hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or permanent storage
of materials or equipment.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
piling, columns (post and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. (See
freeboard requirements for residential and nonresidential structures.)
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM The initial phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized
rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date
of the initial FIRM.
   ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE)
used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage or access to the
structure.
   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to
as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the county based on
specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of
special flood hazards.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-year flood have a moderate to
low risk of flooding.
   FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOOD WATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows). See MUDSLIDES.
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See flood-
related erosion.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and flood-related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and/or the flood boundary
floodway map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by flood waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP participating
community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing
natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management ordinances and
open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control), and other applications of
police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification stating that a nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities is water-tight to a specified design
elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated
debris impact forces.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory
floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/
or hydrologic analysis.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be applied not
just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level, but also to
the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as
building utilities, HVAC components and the like.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related to §
171.11, the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the
public. In examining this requirement, the County Kentucky Fiscal Court will
consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years.
Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation
are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods,
while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to
all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood
damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the property,
unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only
at very high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or
port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality that
is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result
from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or mis-
operation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL classification of a
dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its
appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood routing
capacity).
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretory of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). Increased cost of compliance coverage
provides for the payment of a claim for the cost to comply with state or
community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a direct physical loss
by flood. When a building covered by a standard flood insurance policy under
the NFIP sustains a loss and the state or community declares the building to be
substantially or repetitively damaged, ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the
cost to elevate, floodproof, demolish or remove the building. ICC coverage is
available on residential and nonresidential buildings (this category includes
public or government buildings, such as schools, libraries and municipal
buildings) insured under the NFIP.
   KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE 151.250 - PLANS FOR DAMS, LEVEES AND THE LIKE TO BE
APPROVED AND PERMIT ISSUED BY CABINET (ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC PROTECTION
CABINET).
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city,
county or other political subdivision of the state, including levee districts,
drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or similar bodies,
shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement of
any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other obstruction, except
those constructed by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, in the floodplain or
floodway of any stream, unless the plans and specifications for such work have
been:
         (a)   Submitted by the person or political subdivision responsible for
the construction, reconstruction or improvement; and
         (b)   Approved in writing by the cabinet and a permit issued;
         (c)   However, the cabinet by administrative regulation may exempt
those dams, embankments or other obstructions which are not of such size or
type as to require approval by the cabinet in the interest of safety or
retention of water supply.
      (2)   No person, city, county or other political subdivision of the state
shall commence the filling of, or place a building, barrier, or obstruction of
any sort in, any area in the floodplain or floodway unless plans and
specifications for such work have been submitted to and approved by the cabinet
and a permit issued as required in division (1) above.
      (3)   Nothing in this definition is intended to give the Cabinet any
jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction, improvement,
enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district, ditch or system
established for agricultural purposes. However, the cabinet may require
approval prior to construction of structures, dams, embankments, levees,
bridges, fill, or other construction related to agricultural operations that
impact the base flood of a stream.
   KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTE 151.320 - OFFICERS REQUIRED TO ENFORCE LAW.
      (1)   The mayor or chief executive officer of each city and the County
Judge/Executive of each county, shall have the concurrent duty of enforcing
with the cabinet, within their respective cities and counties, the provisions
of KRS 151.250, 151.280 and 151.310 and rules and regulations issued
thereunder.
      (2)   When a violation of KRS 151.250, 151.280 or 151.310 within his or
her jurisdiction is brought to the attention of a mayor or chief executive
officer of a city or a County Judge/Executive, he or she shall immediately
notify the cabinet of the location and details of such violation.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs include the following
categories:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA
amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is
not located in a SFHA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION - FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that a
structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above
the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. 
      (1)   A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
      (2)   For a LEVEE SYSTEM to be recognized, the following criteria must be
met:
         (a)   All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage,
whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially
adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the
operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised);
and
         (b)   All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or
state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a
community participating in the NFIP.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant material, void
of utilities except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support or
basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of
construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or
landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or
properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structure’s foundation
system.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities. The
term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable
structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to
be improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a
“recreational vehicle.” (See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.)
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter
suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The
letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised.
(The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be
established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by
age of structure (actual cash value) or adjusted assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of the
tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used
as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as
shown on a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is
synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of
disaster response and recovery.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river, flow
or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide
is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator
only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage
that occurs.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRMs. Refer to
FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   NEW, CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the county’s floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the county’s adopted floodplain management ordinances.
   NONRESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools,
farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, warehouses and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less
than six months duration.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and Digitally Referenced FIRMs
(DFIRMs). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or
collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried
downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). See BASE FLOOD. The flood that has
a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any
flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the 100-year flood. Over
the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing such a flood
with the SFHA.
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate
in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that
are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations. During periods of PROBATION, each insurance
policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management standards or of the standards of 44 C.F.R. §§
60.3, 60.4, 60.5 and/or 60.6.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health
of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons,
or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of
any navigable lake, or river, hay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where
more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher
amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
See BASE FLOOD.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or
other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
noncompliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or
reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or
other development
   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages
equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the structure,
beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or, four or more flood
losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or, three or more
flood losses over the life of the structure that are equal to or greater than
the current value of the structure.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended, which states that no new or renewal flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances that
are intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy
in flood-prone areas.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject to
inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a
FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO or AR.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION (INCLUDES SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND OTHER PROPOSED
NEW DEVELOPMENT). The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the
property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other human-made
facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease or development,
either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels.
   SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out
where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a
community or other third party.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building prior to the damage
occurring.
      (1)   This term includes structures that are categorized as repetitive
loss.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, “repair” is considered to
occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences.
      (3)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of reconstruction, alteration or
improvement to a building, taking place during a five-year period in which the
cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the current
market value of the building.
      (1)   For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
      (2)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions;
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure;” or
         (c)   Any building that has been damaged from any source or is
categorized as repetitive loss.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities
and pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and
pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NHP for failure to
enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for
participation in the NFTP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.
   UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment.
   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with
this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials and other transportable materials drain or are
carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake
or underlying aquifer.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B ZONES on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% probability of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. UNSHADED X ZONES (C ZONES on older
FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is
less than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood
insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.03 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and, as
determined by the Floodplain Administrator or other delegated, designated or
qualified community official as determined by the Fiscal Court of the county
from available technical studies, historical information and other available
and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the Fiscal Court of the
county, which may be subject to periodic inundation by flood waters that can
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the county.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.04 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The flood insurance study (FIS), and/or accompanying flood insurance rate
maps (FIRMs) and/or flood hazard boundary maps (FHBMs) prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) for
the county, November 1, 2011 wherein special flood hazard areas (SFHA) are
identified, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this
chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Fiscal Court by
the Floodplain Administrator and are enacted by Fiscal Court pursuant to
statutes governing land use management regulations. The flood insurance study
(FIS) and/or flood insurance rate map (FIRM), and/or flood hazard boundary maps
(FHBMs) are permanent records of the county, and are on file and available for
review by the public during regular business hours at 3700 Coleman Road,
Paducah, KY 42001, McCracken County Emergency Management Building.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See §
171.26 for instructions and explanation.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.06 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shall prevent the Fiscal Court from taking such lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011) Penalty, see §
171.99
§ 171.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.08 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Fiscal Court of the county, any
officer or employee, the commonwealth, the Federal Insurance Administration, or
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and
any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
   (B)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or the property owner,
stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this chapter and/
or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be
remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with the
approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, which
period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the
violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may
include an order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state
that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and
corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary
fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed. See division (C)
below.
   (C)   Notice of citation; notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly
authorized employee or agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable
cause to believe that a person has caused development to occur which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying
with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any
approved modifications thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain
Administrator may issue a citation to the offender stating the violation, prior
notices of violation issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the
development into conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and
within what period of time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or
penalties are recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to whom the
citation is issued shall respond to the citation within seven days of the date
the citation is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set
forth in the citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or
requesting a hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the
citation is issued does not respond to the citation within seven days, that
person shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the
determination that a violation occurred shall be considered final.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.11 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Nature of variances.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance
are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for
a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying
with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to
the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the Fiscal Court to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite
rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The
criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other man a variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The Fiscal Court of the
county shall establish an Appeal Board consisting of designated county offices
to serve on Appeal Board.
   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.
      (1)   The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court, as provided in state
statutes.
   (D)   Appeals variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger to life and properly due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by the
proposed facility;
      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case
of functionally dependent facility;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and bridges.
   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a
lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of §§
171.25 through
171.27 and §§
171.40 through
171.46 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the Fiscal Court need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the Fiscal Court believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be
made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not
destroy the historic character and design of the structure.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in the definition
section under “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization of
the public (as defined in the definition section) or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
      (6)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (7)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon request.
      (8)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of divisions (A)
through (E) above are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does
not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public
nuisance.
   (F)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
and
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see definition) upon determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall not be
issued within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.12 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the county, as identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration, and mandates that no structure or land in said areas shall
hereafter be located, or extended, converted or structurally altered without
compliance with its provisions; requires the obtaining of a permit from the
County Judge/Executive as Administrator and the State Division of Water;
permitting of manufactured homes within areas of special flood hazard; requires
that all new construction and substantial improvements be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; provides that in all
areas of special flood hazard, the lowest flood of any residential structure
constructed or substantially improved shall have the lowest floor elevated to
or above base flood elevation or has said floor flood proofed; and provides
penalties of $1,000 per day for each day a violation of this chapter continues.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 171.25 DESIGNATION OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Fiscal Court of the county hereby appoints the Director of the county’s
Building and Electrical Inspection Department to administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions and is herein referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.26 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or
other development begins within any special flood hazard area established in §
171.04. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities and may
include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature location, dimensions and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of Local
Administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can be
processed.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and
elevation of highest adjacent grade; or
         (b)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
         (c)   All appropriate certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet
the floodproofing criteria in §§
171.41(B) and
171.43(B)(2); and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction
continues, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the
state a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed
elevation, as built in relation to mean sea level. In AE, A1-30, AH and A zones
where the community has adopted a regulatory base flood elevation, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
         (b)   When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken
prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s
risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood
proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff is hereby appointed,
authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render
interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
   (B)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that:
         (a)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained:
advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and
if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies
of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit;
         (c)   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY
AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
      (2)   Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §
171.04, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer §§
171.40 through
171.46. Any such information shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court for
adoption.
      (3)   Notification of other agencies.
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the Kentucky Division of Water, and
any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority
prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse;
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
         (c)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (4)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
         (a)   Certification required by §
171.41(A) (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed and certified
elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
171.26(B);
         (b)   Certification required by §
171.41(B) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on
a completed and certified floodproofing certificate. Verify and record the
actual
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantiality
improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with §
171.26(B);
         (c)   Certification required by §
171.41(C) (elevated structures);
         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
171.44(A) (subdivision standards);
         (e)   Certification required by §
171.41(E) (floodway encroachments);
         (f)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
         (g)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
         (h)   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this
chapter as specified in §
171.10.
      (5)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions:
         (a)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
171.11(C)(2);
         (b)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided in accordance with §
171.04, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonable
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
171.40 through
171.46;
         (c)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
171.41(B), a floodproofing certificate; and
         (d)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall
be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open
for public inspection.
      (6)   Right of entry.
         (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any
condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may enter such
building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or
perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.
         (b)   If such structure or premises are occupied, he or she shall
first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure
or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request
entry.
         (c)   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
         (d)   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or
occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building,
structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Administrator for the
purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
      (7)   Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person
doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (8)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under
the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the
Administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, installation or replacement of the structure for which the permit
was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of
this chapter.
      (9)   Liability. Any officer, employee or member of the Floodplain
Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for
the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his or her duties, shall
not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member because
of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter shall be defended by the Department of Law until the final termination
of the proceedings.
      (10)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain
construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the
holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced construction
within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 171.40 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (F)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been
provided, as set forth in §
171.04, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement mechanical equipment and ductwork elevated no lower
than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter
walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of §
171.41(C).
      (1)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is specified.
      (2)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain Administrator will
determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods
include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses,
use of existing data available from other sources, use of historical data, best
supportable and reasonable judgement in the event no data can be produced.
Title 401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Chapter 4, Regulation 060,
§ 5(5)a, states as a part of the technical requirements for a state floodplain
permit. The applicant shall provide cross-sections for determining floodway
boundaries (and thereby base flood elevations) at any proposed construction
site where FEMA maps are not available. All cross- sections shall be referenced
to mean sea level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than
five-tenths foot cross-sections elevations shall be taken at those points which
represent significant breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic
characteristics of the base floodplain change. Each cross-section shall extend
across the entire base floodplain and shall be in the number and at the
locations specified by the cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant
flood damage will not occur, the cabinet may require additional cross-sections
or specific site elevations which extend beyond those needed for making routine
regulatory floodway boundary calculations.
      (3)   In all other zones, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspection
department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure
(including manufactured homes used for nonresidential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (A) above or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities:
      (1)   Be floodproofed below an elevation one foot above the level of the
base flood elevation so that the structure is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment and
ductwork, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation;
      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in §
171.26(A)(3);
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division (D) below;
and
      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood resistant materials below an
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood water. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin
1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or
         (b)   Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may he equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood water.
   (C)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures on columns, posts or pilings that include fully enclosed
areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood
elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to
allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher
than the exterior foundation grade); and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters in
both directions.
      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed on
sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the community’s flood insurance
rate map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction, including
elevation and anchoring.
         (a)   Locations include:
            1.   On individual lots or parcels;
            2.   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
            3.   In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
            4.   In substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
            5.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; and
            6.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site
upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result
of a flood.
         (b)   All manufactured homes must be:
            1.   Elevated on a permanent foundation;
            2.   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above
the level of the base flood elevation; and
            3.   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (2)   Excepting manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage
as a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that
the manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less
than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
      (3)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30,
AO, AH and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this
chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements for “manufactured
homes”.
      (4)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed
and insured in accordance with the state motor vehicle regulations, is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
171.04, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply.
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with
supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base
flood elevation levels during occurrence, of base flood discharge.
      (2)   If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
171.40 through
171.46.
   (F)   Standards for utilities.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:
         (a)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
         (b)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
      (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.42 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
171.04, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or
where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following
provisions apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be
located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles.
   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be
elevated or flood proofed to elevations established in accordance with §
171.04.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.43 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
171.04, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.
   (B)   These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of
one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water
path of flooding is unpredictable and determinate; therefore, the following
provisions apply.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above either the base flood elevation or, in Zone AO, the flood depth specified
on the flood insurance rate map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO,
if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the
flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no
flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in Zone
AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so that
any space below that level is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required as stated in §
171.41(B).
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.44 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available
(Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, shall be provided.
   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure
(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.45 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE
LETTER “A.”
   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated “A,”
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;
   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade,
total openings are to be one square inch per one square foot of floor area, at
least two openings required on opposite walls;
   (D)   Built of flood resistant materials below a level one foot above the
base flood elevation;
   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking; and
   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.46 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of
new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the floodway; however,
they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the level of the base flood
elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood
waters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 171.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor civil offense. Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof, be
fined no less than $1,000 per day for each day a violation of this chapter
continues, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2011-12, passed 12-19-2011)
TITLE XIX: SUBDIVISIONS
   Chapter
      
190.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 190: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction
   
190.001   Purpose
   
190.002   Authority and administrative agency
   
190.003   Area of jurisdiction
Definitions
   
190.015   Purpose
   
190.016   Definitions
Administrative Procedures
   
190.030   Advisory meeting with Planning Commission
   
190.031   Preliminary plat approval
   
190.032   Final plat approval
   
190.033   Variances
General Requirements and Minimum Standards of Design
   
190.045   Suitability of land for subdivision development
   
190.046   Streets
   
190.047   Blocks
   
190.048   Lots
   
190.049   Off-street loading and parking facilities
   
190.050   Utility and draining easements
   
190.051   Community assets
   
190.052   Conformance with zoning and other regulations
   
190.053   Public open space
   
190.054   Large tracts or parcels
Public Safety Policies
   
190.065   Statement of policy concerning curbside mailbox requirements
   
190.066   Statement of policy concerning culvert installation and replacement
Enforcement
   
190.080   Enforcement
   
190.081   Fee schedules
   
190.082   Zoning variances
Adoption
   
190.095   Adoption
 
   
190.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A   Subdivision public improvements completion agreement
   
Appendix B   Reserved
   
Appendix C   Reserved
   
Appendix D   Application for self-funded bond guarantee
   
Appendix E   Self-funded bond guarantee
   
Appendix F   Statement of policy concerning curbside mailbox requirements
   
Appendix G   Statement of policy concerning culvert installation and
replacement
   
Appendix H   Road specifications
   
Appendix I   Forms for final plat certification
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION
§ 190.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community
development. Once land has been divided into streets, blocks, lots, and open
spaces, a pattern has been established which usually determines how well the
county needs for residence, business, and industry will be met. It also
determines to a great extent how well it will be able to meet the demand for
home sites and how efficiently and economically it will be able to provide the
many services demanded of it.
   (B)   After land has been subdivided and publicly recorded, it is costly and
difficult to correct defects and deficiencies in the subdivision layout and in
the facilities provided. In addition, a subdivided area sooner or later becomes
a public responsibility in that roads and streets must be maintained and
various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare
of the entire county is thereby affected in many important respects. The
guidance of land development in harmony with county objectives is, therefore, a
matter of serious public concern and it is in the interest of the public, the
developer, and the future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed, and
developed in accordance with sound rules and proper standards.
   (C)   This chapter, certified copies of which are filed in the office of the
County Clerk, are designed to provide for the harmonious development of the
subdivided areas; for a coordinated layout; for the proper arrangement of
streets; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities,
recreation, light, air and access of firefighting equipment; for avoidance of
population congestion through requirements for minimum lot widths and lot
areas; for adequate provision of water, drainage, sewer and other sanitary
facilities; and for reducing flood damage potentials to the greatest extent
possible.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.002 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY.
   This chapter was prepared and adopted by the County Planning Commission
pursuant to the authority of KRS Chapter 100. It shall be administered by the
County Planning Commission. The County Planning Commission, established in
accordance with KRS Chapter 100, has fulfilled the requirements set forth in
the applicable sections of the state statutes as pre-requisite for the adoption
of such chapter. The Planning Commission shall assume all powers and duties of
a Board of Adjustment.
(KRS 100.202) (Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.003 AREA OF JURISDICTION.
   The County Planning Commission, through this chapter, shall have
jurisdiction and control over the subdivision of all land within the
unincorporated area of the county.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
DEFINITIONS
§ 190.015 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define certain words and phrases
commonly used in subdivision development. The words and terms expressed in the
present tense include the future tense. Singular words and phrases include the
plural. The word “may’ is permissive, while “shall” and “will” are mandatory.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of a tract of at least five contiguous acres for
the production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including but not
limited to livestock, livestock products, poultry, poultry products, grain, hay
pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables, flowers or
ornamental plants, including provision for dwellings for persons and their
families who are engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but not
including residential building development for sale or lease to the public.
(KRS 100.111-2)
   COUNTY PLANNER. The Judge/Executive shall appoint administrative personnel
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   DEVELOPER. An individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity or
agent thereof, which undertakes the activities covered by this chapter. The
term DEVELOPER includes subdivider, owner or builder.
   HOUSING UNIT. A house, an apartment, a group of rooms or a single room
occupied as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those:
      (1)   In which the occupants live and eat separately from other persons
in the building; and
      (2)   Which have direct access from outside of the building or through a
common hall.
         (a)   SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSES, DETACHED. Includes all detached single-
family houses.
         (b)   SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSES, ATTACHED. Includes all attached single-
family houses where:
            1.   Each unit is separated from adjoining units by a wall that
extends from ground to roof;
            2.   No unit is above or below another unit;
            3.   Each unit has separate heating systems; and
            4.   Each unit has separate utility meters.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Physical changes made to land, including structures placed on
or under the land surface, in order to make the land more usable for man’s
activities. Typical improvements include grading, street paving, curbs,
gutters, drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, utility lines of all
types, street name signs and property number signs.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision plan or the basic unit thereof, intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
   STREETS. A way set aside for vehicular traffic, regardless of size or
designation, but excluding private driveways serving only one parcel of land.
      (1)   ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. Those designed or utilized primarily
for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic.
      (2)   COLLECTOR STREETS. Those, which carry or will carry intermediate
volumes of traffic from minor streets to arterial streets.
      (3)   MINOR STREETS. Those, which are used or will be used primarily for
access to abutting properties and which carry or will carry limited volumes of
traffic.
         (a)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS. Minor streets which are parallel and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which serve to reduce the number
of access points to the arterial streets and thereby increase traffic safety.
         (b)   ALLEYS. Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the backs or to the sides of properties which otherwise abut
on streets.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or made, the use of which requires permanent
location in or on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location in or on the ground, including buildings and signs.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose, whether immediate or future sale, lease of building, development, or
if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land, providing that a
division of land for agricultural use and not involving a new street shall not
be deemed to be a subdivision.
      (2)   The term SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision and when appropriate to
the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land
subdivided; any division or redivision of land into parcels less than one acre
occurring within 12 months following a division of the same land shall be
deemed a subdivision.
   TOWN HOUSE. A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a series of
dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent building and/or
buildings by party walls or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no
visible separation between walls or roof; all of which dwellings may be located
on individual and separate lots if individually owned, or upon a single lot if
under common ownership. The construction of a town house structure across an
existing lot line shall not be deemed to abrogate that line.
   TOWN HOUSE STRUCTURE. A building consisting of two or more non-communicating
attached one-family units placed side by side, having a common wall between
each adjacent dwelling unit.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 190.030 ADVISORY MEETING WITH PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Before preparing a preliminary plat and submitting it to the Planning
Commission for approval, the subdivider should meet and consult informally with
the Planning Commission or the County Planner for the purpose of ascertaining
the locations of proposed major streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites and
other planned projects which may affect the property being considered for
subdivision.
   (B)   At this meeting, the subdivider should review with the Planning
Commission or County Planner, the minimum standard of subdivision design set
forth in §§
190.045 through
190.054. This informal review should prevent unnecessary and costly revisions
in the layout and development of the subdivision.
   (C)   Formal application or filing of a plat with the Planning Commission or
the County Planner is not required for this informal advisory meeting.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.031 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   After meeting informally with the Planning Commission or the County Planner,
the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat prior to the making of any
street improvements or the installation of any utilities.
   (A)   Preliminary plat data. The preliminary plat shall meet the standard of
design as set forth in §§
190.045 through
190.054 and shall show the following information:
      (1)   Scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger;
      (2)   Name of subdivision, names and addresses of the owners, the land
surveyor, source of title, and the owners of adjacent property;
      (3)   Date, approximate north point and graphic scale;
      (4)   Total acreage of land to be subdivided;
      (5)   Boundary lines of area to be subdivided and their bearings and
distances and locations to nearest existing intersecting street;
      (6)   Existing and proposed easements and their locations, widths and
distances;
      (7)   Streets on and adjacent to the tracts and their names, widths, and
other dimensions may be required;
      (8)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract showing proposed connections
to existing utility systems. Rear easements for utility poles and wires shall
be required wherever possible;
      (9)   A vicinity or key map, scale not smaller than 1" = 2000' showing
physical development, corporate lines and any other adjacent public or private
uses such as buildings or structures with distances to perimeter of lot line of
plat;
      (10)   Purpose and intent of the subdivision such as for residential,
commercial and industrial purposes;
      (11)   Contours at an interval of not greater than five feet. USGS
quadrangles may be used as a base;
      (12)   Flood areas as determined by Federal Emergency Management Act
(FEMA) and classification, as per FEMA codes;
      (13)   Location, size, direction of flow of storm and sanitary drainage
structures, and systems;
      (14)   Location and size of water lines;
      (15)   Lot lines and lot numbers;
      (16)   Sites and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for
parks, playgrounds, schools, or other public uses. Sites, if any, for semi-
public, commercial or multi-family uses;
      (17)   Minimum building setback lines;
      (18)   Copies of proposed deed restrictions, if any, shall be attached to
the preliminary plat;
      (19)   Profiles of proposed grade lines of all streets and improvements,
if required by the Commission; and
      (20)   Plats shall be submitted no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches in
size;
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Two copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary materials
specified shall be submitted with an application for preparatory review by the
County Planner by 3:00 p.m. Wednesday two weeks prior to the scheduled Planning
Commission meeting. Any submittal after this time will require a late fee to be
included on the agenda. Plats will be available by 12:00 p.m. the following
Friday. Any submittal that requires a public hearing must be turned in three
weeks prior to the scheduled meeting. Preliminary plats may be submitted
electronically for an additional $10 charge.
      (2)   Ten copies of the corrected preliminary plan and supplementary
materials specified shall be submitted for conditional approval to the County
Planner by 3:00 p.m. Wednesday one week prior to the scheduled Planning
Commission meeting. Any submittal after this time will require a late fee to be
included on the agenda.
      (3)   The County Planner shall notify the subdivider of the time and
place of the Planning Commission meeting not less than seven days before the
date fixed for the meeting. Similar notice shall be given to the owner of the
land immediately adjoining the area proposed to be platted as shown on the
proposed subdivision.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve
subject to modification. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval
will be stated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of
the required modifications shall be indicated in writing. The action of the
Planning Commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat with
any notations made at the time of approval or disapproval of the specific
changes required. One returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the
Planning Commission.
      (5)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute acceptance of
the final plat. The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final
plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of such approval.
An extension of time may be applied for by the subdivider and granted by the
Planning Commission.
   (C)   Subdivision of a portion of a larger tract. Whenever a part of a tract
is proposed to be subdivided and it is intended that additional parts of the
tract be subdivided in the future, a sketch plan for the entire tract shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission at the same time the preliminary plat for
the first part of the tract to be platted is submitted.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-16-2019)
§ 190.032 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and it may constitute only a portion of the preliminary plat which
the subdivider proposes to record and develop.
   (A)   Final plat data. The final plat shall give the following information:
      (1)   The plat shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or larger;
      (2)   Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale, and
true north line;
      (3)   All dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat
shall be tied to primary control points. Locations and descriptions of said
control points shall be given;
      (4)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sides
with accurate dimensions to the nearest one hundredth of a foot; bearings or
deflection angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all curves with dimensions
to the nearest minute. The subdivision shall be tied to the center line of the
nearest street intersection, monument or permanent physical boundary;
      (5)   Name and right-of-way width of each street, easement or other
right-of-way;
      (6)   Lot numbers, lot lines and lot areas;
      (7)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved;
      (8)   Minimum structure setback lines;
      (9)   Location and description of existing and set monuments;
      (10)   Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, the
location of adjoining unplatted properties, and the names and addresses of the
owners of adjoining unplatted properties;
      (11)   Notarized on plat of title showing that the applicant(s) are all
the property owner(s) and a statement by such owner(s) dedicating streets,
easements, rights-of-way and any other sites for public use (see
Form 1 in Appendix I);
      (12)   Certification on plat by land surveyor as to the accuracy of
survey and plat (see
Form 2 in Appendix I);
      (13)   Certification by the Planning Commission when individual sewage
disposal or water systems are to be installed (see
Form 1 in Appendix I);
      (14)   Certification that the developer has complied with one of the
following requirements:
         (a)   Developers funded by financial institutions shall be required to
execute the following documents in the precise form authorized by the County
Planning Commission and the County Fiscal Court:
            1.   The county subdivision public improvements completion
agreement (see Appendix A);
            2.   The county subdivision letter of credit agreement; or
            3.   The county irrevocable stand-by letter of credit.
         (b)   Developers that elect to use their own self-provided funding and
not relying on funding of a financial institution shall be required to execute
the following documents in the precise form authorized by the County Planning
and the County Fiscal Court:
            1.   The county subdivision public improvements completion
agreement (see
Appendix A);
            2.    A road bond guarantee; or
            3.   The county self-funded bond guarantee (
see Appendix E).
   (B)   Procedure. Submission of a final plat shall follow the same procedure
as for a preliminary plat:
      (1)   Two copies for preparatory review by the County Planner submitted
with an application for preparatory review by the County Planner by 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday, two weeks prior to the scheduled Planning Commission Meeting. Any
submittal after this time will require a late fee to be included on the agenda.
Plats will be available by noon the following Friday;
      (2)   Ten copies of corrected plat and supplementary materials specified
shall be submitted for conditional approval to the County Planner by 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday, one week prior to the scheduled Planning Commission meeting. Any
submittal after this time will require a late fee to be included on the agenda;
      (3)   Approval by the Planning Commission shall not constitute acceptance
by the public of the dedication of any street, public way or ground; and
      (4)   When the final plat has been approved by the County Fiscal Court
and certified thereon, one copy shall be returned to the subdivider for filing
with the County Clerk as an official plat of record.
   (C)   Required improvements prerequisite to final approval. A perfectly
prepared and recorded subdivision or plat means little to a prospective lot
purchaser until he or she can see actual physical transformation of raw acreage
into lots suitable for building purposes and human habitation. Improvements by
the subdivider spare the community a potential tax liability. The following
tangible improvements are required to be installed by the developer before
final plat approval in order to assure the physical reality of a subdivision
which approval and recording will establish legally.
      (1)   Monuments; type.
         (a)   Concrete monuments at least 36 inches in length and four inches
in diameter or four inches square with a copper dowel or center marked shall be
set at all corners on the plat.
         (b)   Iron pin or wrought or galvanized iron pipe monuments not less
than three-fourths inch in diameter and not less than 24 inches in length shall
be set at all lot corners not marked by concrete monuments.
      (2)   Concrete monuments; location.
            1.   Monuments shall be placed so that the scored or marked point
shall coincide exactly with the intersection of the lot or property line at
that point and shall be set so that the top of the monument is level with the
surface of the surrounding ground;
            2.   At the intersection of all angles in the boundary line of the
survey;
            3.   At the intersection of street property lines;
            4.   At the beginning and ending of all curves where streets and
alleys are so surveyed; and
            5.   At all angles in property lines of street and alleys.
      (3)   Streets.
         (a)   Grading specifications. All streets, roads, and alleys shall be
graded and prepared according to applicable county and state regulations to
their full widths by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks can be
constructed on the same level plane. Deviation from this standard due to
special topographical conditions will be allowed only with the special approval
of the Planning Commission. Center line grades shall be established and staked
by the subdivider.
         (b)   Minimum pavement widths. Pavement widths shall be measured
between curbs and minimum pavement widths to be provided are:
 
Collector                         22 feet
Minor streets                     20 feet
Marginal access streets           20 feet
Alleys, industrial and commercial 18 feet
 
         (c)   Construction of streets. The subdivider shall provide streets
which shall be designed to carry the expected traffic loads and which shall
conform with the standards established by the County Fiscal Court as set up by
the Planning Commission.
         (d)   Curbs and gutters.  
            1.   The subdivider shall provide curbs and gutters. Curbs shall
not be less than six inches in height and shall be constructed of Portland
cement concrete or bituminous concrete. Back-fill shall be higher than the curb
and shall slope toward the curb in order to insure that surface water drains
into the storm system.
            2.   Curbs and gutters shall be required for all new subdivisions
beginning on April 1, 2025, and thereafter. NEW SUBDIVISIONS means all proposed
subdivisions for which preliminary plats are submitted to the Planning
Commission on April 1, 2025, or thereafter.
         (e)   Sidewalks.
            1.   For the safety of pedestrians in residential and commercial
subdivisions, the subdivider shall build Portland cement concrete sidewalks on
both sides of the street to meet the following specifications:
               a.   Single-family or duplex housing development: four feet wide
and four inches thick;
               b.   Multi-family or group housing development: five feet wide
and four inches thick; and
               c.   Commercial development: 12 feet wide and four inches thick.
            2.   Sidewalks shall be required for all new subdivisions beginning
on April 1, 2025, and thereafter. NEW SUBDIVISIONS means all proposed
subdivisions for which preliminary plats are submitted to the Planning
Commission on April 1, 2025 or thereafter.
      (4)   Utilities and drainage facilities.  
         (a)   General requirements for installation of utilities. Utilities
shall be provided in rear lot easements wherever possible. When it is necessary
to install utilities in street rights-of-way, the following requirements shall
apply: after grading is completed and approved and before any pavement base is
applied, all of the in-street underground work, water mains, gas mains, and the
like, and all service connections, shall be completely installed and approved
throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. Where the
utility mains are outside the pavement area, the subdivider may be allowed to
omit the installation of service connections provided that at such time as
these connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without
breaking or weakening the existing pavement. Where the rock is known to exist
beneath the pavement area and at such depth as to interfere with the jacking of
service connections, the Planning Commission shall require the complete
installation of service connections before any base is applied. In cases where
underground utilities must be provided within the right-of-way of streets, they
shall not be installed under the paved portions of such streets.
         (b)   Water supply system. Where, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, the public water supply is reasonably accessible or available to
the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall construct a complete water
distribution system which shall adequately serve all lots and which shall
include appropriately spaced fire hydrants, and this system shall be properly
connected with the public water supply. Where a public water supply is not
within a reasonable distance or otherwise available, the subdivider shall
normally be required to construct a similar water distribution system and
connect it with an alternate supply approved by the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Sanitary sewers. Where, in the opinion on the Planning
Commission, the public sanitary sewer system is reasonably accessible or
available to the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall construct a
subdivision sewer system to adequately serve all lots and connect the
subdivision system to the public system after the county or other appropriate
sewer agency official has approved the size of the lines. Where lots cannot be
served by the extension of an existing public sanitary sewer, the subdivider
shall obtain approval of lot sizes for individual septic tanks and disposal
fields from the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Street name signs. The Planning Commission shall require the
installation of durable street name signs at all intersections. Streets signs
shall meet all MUTCD manual requirements.
         (a)   Lettering shall be at least four inches high;
         (b)   Sign shall be reflectorize or illuminated;
         (c)   Letters shall be white with a green background; and
         (d)   In residential areas, at least two street name sign posts with
double mount shall be mounted at each intersection. All street signage must be
approved by the County Road Supervisor.
      (6)   Completion of improvements prior to approval of the final plat. No
final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning Commission or accepted
for record by the County Clerk until the required improvements listed above are
constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the appropriate official.
In lieu of such prior construction, the Fiscal Court may accept a security
bond, or certified check, or irrevocable letter of credit to the county in an
amount equal to the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements
whereby the improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to
the county in the event of default on the part of the subdivider. The bond or
check shall be subject to the conditions that the improvements will be
completed within two years after approval of the final subdivision plat.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-16-2019; Ord. 2023-05, passed
3-27-2023; Ord. 2025-04, passed 4-14-2025)
§ 190.033 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Exceptional conditions. The Planning Commission may grant a variance
to this chapter where by reason of the unusual shape of a specific piece of
property, or where by reason of exceptional topographical conditions, the
strict application of this chapter would result in extreme practical
difficulties and undue hardship upon the owner of such property; provided,
however, that such relief may be granted without detriment to the public good
and without substantially impairing the modifications, the Planning Commission
may require such conditions as will substantially secure the objectives of the
standards or requirements so varied or modified. Financial disadvantage to the
property owner is not proof of hardship within the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   Group housing, planned unit developments, office and business complex
developments. Comprehensive group housing, office and business developments,
together with necessary drives and ways of access, including drives and ways of
access privately maintained but dedicated for public use may be approved by the
Planning Commission although the design of the project does not include
standard street, lot, and subdivision arrangements, provided that departure
from the standards of this chapter can be made without destroying their intent.
If the drives and ways of access are to be privately maintained, the plat of
the subdivision shall specifically indicate that said drives and ways are
dedicated for public use and that they will be developed and maintained at the
expense of the owners; and that any owner of a lot in the subdivision shall
have the right to enforce the development or maintenance of said drives and
ways by proceeding in law or in equity against all other owners of lots in the
subdivision.
   (C)   Procedural variance.
      (1)   Waiver of subdivision plats and surveys qualifying for a procedural
variance. Where a proposed subdivision would contain no new streets and no more
than five lots, the procedure of preparing a preliminary plat may be waived by
the Planning Commission.
         (a)   Plats of property containing 100 acres or less shall be drawn to
a scale of no less than one inch per 100 feet. Over 100 acres plats may be
drawn to a scale of more than one inch per 100 feet to keep the drawing on the
maximum sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches provided clarity is not
sacrificed. Multiple sheets may be used if deemed necessary to portray vital
and accurate information clearly. Smaller parcels should be drawn to a maximum
scale to accommodate the sheet size being used and half sized sheets of 18
inches by 24 inches may be used in these instances. Minimum size of script used
on these plats shall be one-tenth of an inch in height for both upper and lower
case letters and numerals.
         (b)   Name and street addresses of the owners/applicants, as available
from the County Property Valuation Office, of the property to be subdivided,
and legal source of title to the subject property shall be shown on the plat.
Owners of record of all property abutting the subject sites and the legal
source of title to those properties will be indicated on the plat. The name,
address and phone number of the professional land surveyor responsible for the
field survey and plat preparation shall be indicated on the plat.
         (c)   Date field survey made, date plat prepared, north arrow and
basis of same and any bearings shown by the plat will be indicated on the face
of the plat. Provide a brief statement on the face of the plat as to the intent
of the drawing to identify the specific lines being created and/or abolished by
the plat along with easements and other dedications that are being granted by
the drawing.
         (d)   Area of each lot or parcel of land indicated by the plat shall
be shown in square feet and the acreage equivalent, accurate to two decimal
places, shall also be indicated.
         (e)   Boundary lines, lot parcel numbers or designations of the
various properties shown on the plat, bearings and/or angular relationships,
line lengths and curve data, if appropriate, shall be shown along with the
distance from the subject property to the nearest existing intersecting street
or roadway. Also, the distance and bearing or angle from one new division line
and/or corner created by the plat to a boundary line corner of the parent
property from which the tracts or lots are subdivided shall be indicated or
shown.
         (f)   All existing or proposed easements crossing the subject property
or properties shall be shown along with their locations, widths and distances,
and the like, along with a notation for each easement indicating if the
easement is being dedicated by the plat or is existing by prior dedication. If
easements presently exist, note their source of dedication such as a prior plat
or recorded legal document. If record source of easement or easements are not
known or unobtainable, add a note to indicate such.
         (g)   Show all streets or roadways on or adjacent to subject tracts or
lots along with their names, widths and any other pertinent information,
dimensions and the like.
         (h)   Vicinity or key map at a scale not smaller than one inch per
2,000 feet with the scale of the map indicated with a north arrow and any major
adjacent physical development and corporate boundary lines.
         (i)   All existing primary buildings, accessory buildings or
structures and major improvements on the subdivided tracts or lots, including
those that may be on the parent property if the buildings or improvements are
in close proximity to the newly established boundary lines, shall be shown on
the plat. Also, indicate the distance from these buildings, structures or
improvements to the nearest relevant boundary lines.
         (j)   Present zoning designation of the subdivided property, the
parent tract, in the case of residual acreage and all adjacent property shall
be indicated on the plat. The minimum building setback line or minimum yard
line dimensions for the subject property and its parent tract for the various
uses indicated by the most current regulations of the County Zoning Ordinance
shall also be shown and/or noted on the plat.
         (k)   Flood areas as indicated by flood boundary maps published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) with the flood classifications shown
by those maps shall be shown on the plat.
         (l)   Notation that the subject properties are served by a public
water supply system and/or a public sanitary sewer system if said properties
are so served. If the properties are not served by such systems, notation
relative to this fact shall be shown on the plat.
         (m)   Sites and their acreages, if any, to be reserved or dedicated
for parks, playgrounds, schools, or other public uses shall be shown and noted
on the plat. Sites, if any, reserved for semi-public, commercial, or multi-
family uses should also be shown and noted on the plat.
         (n)   In the event it becomes necessary to close and vacate any public
utility easement and/or private roadway easement, a professional land surveyor
shall obtain the approval of all utility agencies and/or grantees of said
easements, as the case may be, as will be indicated by an executed certificate
on the plat signed by the utility company representatives and/or grantees of
said easements.
         (o)   Proposed or existing property restrictions or covenants shall be
shown on the plat or in a form suitable for recording in the County Clerk’s
office. If restrictions or covenants other than those contained in the County
Zoning Ordinance exist, the place of recording of those restrictions and
covenants should be shown by the plat.
         (p)   Plats shall be submitted on sheet sizes no larger than 24 inches
by 36 inches in size.
         (q)   In the case of any residual acreage of any parent tract of land
after the proposed lots or tracts of land are deducted therefrom, the
professional land surveyor shall show or indicate on the plat that the residual
property will still be in compliance with the County Zoning Ordinance with
respect to the remaining area and any other pertinent dimensions required as
stated by said ordinance for the particular zoning category of the property.
When the property to be subdivided contains three acres or less, the entire
boundary line of the tract of land shall be surveyed, monumented, and shown on
the plat even though all of the tract of land may not be the subject of the lot
or lots and parcels being subdivided by the plat. In the event there are
several separate tracts or parcels of land described within the deed or legal
document to the property being subdivided, the professional land surveyor shall
indicate which of the tract or tracts the subject property is being subdivided
and that the residual acreage, if any, from said tract or tracts will still be
in compliance with the aforesaid Zoning Ordinance with respect to area and any
other pertinent dimensions stated by said Zoning Ordinance. Additionally, it is
suggested that the professional land surveyor consult with his or her client’s
legal representative or other entity to determine if the entire tract or parcel
of land from which the subject property is being subdivided should be surveyed
and plated in order to avoid a conflict with KRS Chapter 100.
         (r)   All plats shall meet or exceed the “Minimum Standards of
Practice for Land Surveys in Kentucky” (latest revision) as indicated by 201
KAR 18:150 as mandated by the Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers and
Land Surveyors. In the case of a conflict between this chapter for waiver of
subdivision plats and any other ordinance, regulation or standard of practice,
the most stringent provision relative to the particular conflict will control
and prevail.
         (s)   All plats shall contain the necessary and pertinent
certifications and certificates as outlined by the latest revision of the
county subdivision regulations and the aforesaid “Minimum Standards of Practice
for Land Surveys in Kentucky”.
         (t)   Show the location of buried septic facilities, if known and if
not known as to location, place a note on plats that buried facilities do exist
locations are unknown. If the buried facilities are known as to location and if
it is appropriate, an easement for the facility should be shown and described
on plats if the facilities are to be left in place and the facilities would
affect title to newly subdivided lots.
         (u)   Two plat copies required for record in the County Court Clerk’s
office shall be signed by the property owner and/or applicant prior to approval
signatures by the Planning and Zoning Commission chair and County Judge/
Executive’s execution. Exceptions to this requirement may be made on a case-by-
case basis depending upon circumstances that have caused the property owner
and/or applicant’s failure to sign the plat or plats. Copies of the plat
submitted for consideration and approval may be filed without the property
owner and/or applicant’s signature.
         (v)   Statement to be added on the face of the plat: “No revisions or
modifications are to be made to plats signed by Chairman or Judge/Executive
without approval from Chairman or Judge/Executive”.
         (w)   Sections
190.015,
190.016,
190.031(C)(1),(2),
190.033(A)-(C),
190.045,
190.046(D)(1),
190.048(A),(B),(C),(E),
190.049,
190.050,
190.052 -
190.054,
190.080(A) and
190.081 -
190.082 of this chapter shall also be applicable to the waiver of subdivision
plats and surveys.
      (2)   Meeting all other regulations. The plat shall meet all other
regulations if and when adopted. After the Planning Commission’s approval, the
County Judge/Executive or designee shall approve the plat for recording in the
office of the County Court Clerk.
   (D)   Public utilities variance. Variances in lot size and access easements
for service roads may be granted when the subdivision or property is for the
purpose of creating a lot or parcel of land to be owned or leased and
maintained by a public utility to provide electric, water, sanitation, gas,
telephone, cable television service, or telecommunications service to the
general public, provided however, that no private sanitary disposal system
(septic tank and field) shall be installed on any substandard lot (less than
one acre in area). The Planning Commission may waive lot size when alternate
methods of sanitary sewage are proposed.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
§ 190.045 SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Land proposed to be subdivided is unsuitable for subdivision
development. If the Planning Commission finds that land proposed to be
subdivided is unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad
drainage, steep slopes, rock formation, and other such conditions as may
increase the danger of health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood
hazards; and if from adequate investigations, conducted by all the public
agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the
public, the land should not be platted and developed for the purpose proposed,
the Planning Commission shall not approve the land for subdivision unless
adequate methods are formulated by the subdivider for meeting the problems that
will be created by the development of the land.
   (B)   Scattered or premature subdivision of land. The Planning Commission
may refuse to approve what it considers to be scattered or premature
subdivision of land which would involve danger or injury to the public health,
safety, welfare, or prosperity by reason of lack of adequate water supply,
schools, proper drainage, good roads and transportation facilities or other
public services; or which would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.046 STREETS.
   (A)   Conformity to the major street (thoroughfare plan). The widths and
locations of all streets in a proposed subdivision will conform to the county
major street plan.
   (B)   Street extensions.
      (1)   The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the
continuation or projection of streets already existing in areas adjacent to the
area being subdivided unless the Planning Commission deems such continuation or
extension undesirable for specific reasons of topography or design.
      (2)   Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, it is desirable
to provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be
extended by dedication to the boundaries of such properties. Where the Planning
Commission deems it necessary, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a
temporary turn-around having a radius of at least 50 feet.
      (3)   The street system for the proposed subdivision shall provide for
extending existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case shall a
street extension be of less width than the minimum width required in this
chapter for a street in its category.
   (C)   Dedication of right-of-way for new streets.
      (1)   The dedication of right-of-way for new streets measured from lot
line to lot line shall be as shown on the county major street plan, or of not
shown thereon, shall meet the following standards:
 
Street Type             Minimum Dedicated Right-of-Way Width
Arterial streets        60 feet*
Collector streets       60 feet
Minor streets           50 feet
Marginal access streets 30 feet
Alleys                  30 feet
The county major street plan may indicate greater right-of-way widths for
certain arterial streets, but in no case shall the subdivider be required to
dedicate a right-of-way width of more than 60 feet for any one street
 
      (2)   All points of access shall be as approved by the Planning
Commission. Marginal access streets may be required by the Planning Commission
for subdivisions fronting on arterial streets.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may waive rights-of-way requirements for
cul-de-sacs or other non-thru roadways.
      (4)   Through proposed business areas, street widths shall be increased
ten feet on each side if needed to provide parking without interfering with
normal traffic movement.
      (5)   In cases where topography or other physical conditions make a
street of the required minimum width impractical the Planning Commission may
modify these requirements.
   (D)   Dedication of right-of-way for existing streets. Subdivisions platted
along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if necessary to
meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in division (C) of this
section.
      (1)   The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the
subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When the subdivision is
located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the right-of-way
width, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be
dedicated.
      (2)   Dedication of one-half of the right-of-way for proposed streets
along the boundaries of land proposed for subdivisions shall be prohibited.
   (E)   Intersections. 
      (1)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
      (2)   Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least 20
feet. When the smallest angle of street intersection is less than 60 degrees,
the Planning Commission shall require curb radii of greater length.
      (3)   No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to
either a collector or minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or
other means of access to an arterial street within 75 feet of the right-of-way
of any street which intersects such arterial street on the side on which such
lot or parcel is located. These 75 feet requirements can be reduced to 50 feet
on collector streets and 25 feet on minor streets.
   (F)   Curves in streets; horizontal and vertical.
      (1)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
      (2)   Where there is a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the
alignment of a street, a curve with a radius adequate to insure safe sight
distance shall be made. The minimum radii shall be:
 
Street Type Minimum Curve Radius
Arterial    300 feet
Collector   300 feet
Minor       100 feet
 
      (3)   All changes in grade for streets shall be connected by a vertical
curve of a minimum length necessary to provide adequate sight distance and
other safety factors.
      (4)   To calculate the minimum length for the curve connecting changes in
grade:
         (a)   Calculate the algebraic difference in grades; and
         (b)   Multiply by the appropriate value.
 
Values for crest curve Collector streets 50
                      Minor Streets     28
Values for sag curve   Collector Streets 50
                      Minor Streets     35
 
   (G)   Street grades and elevations.
      (1)   Street grades shall conform to the following:
 
Street Type Percent Grade
            Allowable Maximum Desirable Maximum
Arterial    5%                4%
Collector   7%                5%
Minor       12%               8%
 
      (2)   All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of
surface water from the pavement and from the right-of-way by grading and
drainage. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less
than .5%. Minimal grade of ditches shall be .5% and minimum grade of curbs and
gutters shall be one-third of 1%.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall not approve streets which will be
subject to inundation or flooding. All streets must be located at elevations
which will make them flood-free in order that portions of the subdivision will
not be isolated by floods. Where flood conditions exist, the Planning
Commission shall require profiles and elevations of streets in order to
determine the advisability of permitting the proposed subdivision activity.
      (4)   Fill may be used in area subject to flooding in order to provide
flood-free streets if such fill does not unduly increase flood heights.
Drainage openings shall be designed so as not to restrict the flow of water and
thereby unduly increase flood heights.
   (H)   Marginal access streets. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon or
contains an existing or proposed arterial street or highway on which traffic
volumes and vehicular speeds warrant special safety considerations, the
Planning Commission may require that marginal access streets be provided in
order that no lots will front on such existing or proposed arterial street or
highway.
   (I)   Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125
feet shall not be made.
   (J)   Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs). Minor terminal or dead-end streets or
courts which are designed so as to have one end permanently closed shall not be
longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around
having a radius at the outside of the right-of-way of a least 50 feet. The
paved area of the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum radius of no less than 35
feet.
   (K)   Street names. 
      (1)   Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other
already existing and named streets shall bear the names of such existing
streets.
      (2)   The name of a proposed street, which is not in alignment with an
existing street shall not duplicate the name of any existing street within the
county, regardless of the use of the suffix or prefix street, avenue,
boulevard, drive, place, court, lane, road, pike, highway, parkway or similar
suffix or prefix.
      (3)   Before final plat approval, the names of streets shall be approved
by the County Planning Commission.
   (L)   Private streets and reserve strips.
      (1)   There shall be no private streets platted within a subdivision,
except as stated in §
190.033(B).
      (2)   There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where
their control is vested in the county, maintained by the developer or a
neighborhood corporation and under conditions approved by the Planning
Commission and as authorized in this chapter.
   (M)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to give access to the rear of all
lots used for business and industrial purposes. Alleys shall not be provided in
residential blocks except in cases where the subdivider produces evidence of
the need for alleys which is satisfactory to the Planning Commission.
   (N)   Road specifications. County road specifications approved by the Fiscal
Court are available from the County Road Engineer’s Office.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2019-08, passed 8-16-2019) Penalty, see §
190.999
§ 190.047 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 400
feet, except as the Planning Commission considers necessary to secure efficient
use of land or desired features of street layout.
   (B)   Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of
minimum depth. However, where this would require lots to front on an arterial
street or highway or where topographical conditions or the size of the property
prevent two tiers of lots, the Planning Commission may approve a single tier of
lots of minimum depth.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
190.999
§ 190.048 LOTS.
   (A)   Relationship to streets.
      (1)   All lots shall front on a public street or road for a minimum
distance of 75 feet, except those lots which front on the turn-around of
permanent dead-end streets shall front on such turn-arounds for a minimum
distance of 40 feet; or when the portion of a lot is being used exclusively for
access and meets the width requirements in division (A)(4). However, the
Planning Commission may grant a variance to the requirements of this section
when all of the following circumstances and conditions exist:
         (a)   When the lot(s) does not front on a public street or road.
         (b)   When, because of the location of the lot(s), extreme practical
and financial difficulties would place an undue hardship on the owner of the
lot(s).
         (c)   When ingress and egress to the proposed lot(s) can be adequately
and perpetually provided by a private access easement from a public highway or
road; provided however, such a private access easement shall be a minimum width
as listed below:
 
20' wide Less than 2 acres
30' wide Less than 3 acres
40' wide Less than 4 acres
50' wide 4 acres or larger
 
      (2)   The private access easement shall extend from the front of the
proposed lot(s) to a public highway or road and said private access easement
shall be maintained by the lot(s) owner it is serving without any obligation on
the county to maintain same. An ingress and egress easement may be shared by up
to three lots.
   (B)   Arrangement. Each lot in a subdivision shall contain a building site
free from the danger of flooding. Except where unfeasible, side lot lines shall
be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines.
   (C)   Dimensions.
      (1)   Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the county
subdivision and/or Planning Commission regulations where applicable except that
residential lots served by septic tanks and field lines shall be at least 75
feet wide at the building setback line and one acre in area or the minimum lot
width and area determined by the County Health Officer, whichever width and
area is larger. Lots conveyed by deeds, executed prior to October 6, 1978,
which are less than one acre in area and which were in compliance with the
minimum requirements of the Department of Health at the time of conveyance, may
be granted a variance and approved by the Planning Commission provided that
said lots comply with all other regulations.
      (2)   Lot dimensions and minimum size shall follow the requirement of the
County Zoning Ordinance. Minimum lot width shall be measured at the building
setback line.
      (3)   Ratio of lot frontage to depth shall not exceed one to eight
without variance from the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Corner lots. Corner lots (lots which abut on two intersecting streets)
shall comply with the front yard setback provisions along the street upon which
the building on the corner lot fronts. A ten-foot reduction in the front yard
provision is allowed on the side facing the secondary street, provided such
reduction does not result in a side yard of less than 20 feet.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2021-08, passed 6-28-2021)
§ 190.049 OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING FACILITIES.
   In commercial and industrial subdivisions and in the portions of residential
subdivisions reserved for commercial or industrial uses, the lots or parcels
platted for commercial or industrial sites shall be large enough to provide for
off-street loading and unloading facilities and off-street parking facilities.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.050 UTILITY AND DRAINING EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the Planning
Commission shall require easements at least 12 feet in width centered along all
rear lot lines for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas
mains, water mains and other utility facilities. Where necessary or advisable
in the opinion of the Planning Commission, similar easements shall be provided
alongside lot lines or across lots.
   (B)   If the Planning Commission deems it necessary for proper drainage
within or through a subdivision, it shall require that a storm water easement
or drainage right-of-way be provided and maintained by the developer or
abutting property owners.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall require easements at least 15 feet in
width parallel and adjacent to all road right-of-way for poles, wire conduits,
storm sewers, gas mains, sanitary sewers, water mains and other utility
facilities.
   (D)   Where necessary or advisable in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, a similar easement shall be provided along parent tracts along with
any necessary right-of-way dedications.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.051 COMMUNITY ASSETS.
   In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for natural features such as
large trees, unusual rock formations and water courses; for sites which have
historical significance; and for similar assets which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision and to the county. The Planning
Commission may prepare a list of all such features within its area of
subdivision jurisdiction which it deems worthy or preservation.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.052 CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING AND OTHER REGULATIONS.
   No final plat of land within the area of force and effect of an existing
zoning ordinance will be approved unless it conforms with such ordinance.
Whenever there is a discrepancy between the minimum standards set forth in this
chapter and those contained in the zoning ordinance or other official
regulations, the highest standard shall apply.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.053 PUBLIC OPEN SPACE.
   Where a school, neighborhood park, recreation area, or public access to
water frontage which is shown on an official map or in a plan for future land
use, made and adopted by the Planning Commission, is located in whole or in
part in the applicant’s proposed subdivision, the Planning Commission may
require the dedication or reservation of such open space within the proposed
subdivision for school, park, recreation or other public purposes.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.054 LARGE TRACTS OR PARCELS.
   When land is divided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such
parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and
logical resubdivision.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
PUBLIC SAFETY POLICIES
§ 190.065 STATEMENT OF POLICY CONCERNING CURBSIDE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.
   See
Appendix F.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.066 STATEMENT OF POLICY CONCERNING CULVERT INSTALLATION AND REPLACEMENT.
   See
Appendix G.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 190.080 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Recording requirements. No plat or plan of a subdivision of land
located within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall be admitted to
the records of the county or received or recorded by the County Court Clerk
until said plat has received final approval in writing by the Planning
Commission as provided in the KRS Chapter 100. Admission to the records shall
not be construed as approval.
   (B)   Utilities; legal status. No board, public officer or authority shall
accept, layout, improve, or authorize utilities to be laid in any street within
the territory for which the Planning Commission has adopted a major
thoroughfare plan unless the street has received the legal status of a public
street prior to the adoption of the major street plan, or unless the street is
shown on a subdivision plat or a street plat which has been approved by the
Planning Commission as provided in KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
190.999
§ 190.081 FEE SCHEDULES.
Fee Schedule for County Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Adjustment - Zoning
Application Fee Number of Plat Copies to Submit
Fee Schedule for County Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment
- Zoning
Application                    Fee                Number of Plat Copies to
                                                  Submit
Preliminary subdivision
(major) (subdivision with any
public improvements) public
improvements include:          $400               1 pdf
constructed drainage, streets,
curb, gutters, sidewalks and
constructed public utilities
Preliminary subdivision review
Over 5 lots (subdivisions with $150               1 pdf
no public improvements)
Full site plan with storm
water and/or erosion control                      1 site plan/1 storm water, 1
(does not include preliminary  $225               pdf
and final subdivision plat
fees)
Final subdivision              $0                 1 pdf
Waiver of subdivision (minor)
(maximum of 5 lots, including  $50 (one lump sum) 1 pdf
residual) (with no public
improvements)
Special called meeting for
Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or Board of Adjustment     $500               N/A
(does not include any fees for
various applications above)
All public notice advertisement fees, County Court Clerk recording fees, and
similar charges and expenses are not included in the fees listed above.
All fees listed above must be paid in full prior to any actions to be taken by
the respective commission or board.
Additional fee for documents submitted after deadline: $200
 
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 2023-05, passed 3-27-2023; Ord. 2025-04, passed
4-14-2025)
§ 190.082 ZONING VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may hear and finally decide applications for
zoning variances when a proposed development requires a subdivision and one or
more variances.
   (B)   Applications, at the time of filing a subdivision application, may
elect to have any variance for the same development to be heard and finally
decided by the Planning Commission at the same public hearing set for the
subdivision.
   (C)   In hearing applications, the Planning Commission shall assume all
powers and duties otherwise exercised by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to
KRS 100.231, 100.233, 100.237, 100.247 and 100.251.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
ADOPTION
§ 190.095 ADOPTION.
   (A)   Adoption process. Before the adoption of this chapter or any amendment
thereto, a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission. A public
notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and county in accordance with KRS
Chapter 100.
   (B)   Effective date. This chapter shall take effect and be in force
immediately upon their adoption by the County Fiscal Court on November 27,
2017.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
§ 190.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Recording of plats. Any County Clerk who receives, files or records a
plat in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined no less than
$100 nor more than $500 as provided in KRS Chapter 100.
   (C)   Transfers of property.
      (1)   Any person who transfers or negotiates to transfer any lot in a
subdivision before the final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the
Planning Commission and recorded in the County Clerk’s office, or attempts the
description of lands by metes and bounds in violation of this chapter, shall
pay to the county a penalty of $100 for each parcel of land so transferred as
provided in KRS Chapter 100.
      (2)   The county may, by action in the Circuit Court, enjoin the
transfers or agreement to transfer land as provided in KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
APPENDIX A: SUBDIVISION PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made this   _____ day of ________________, 20___, by and
between the McCracken County Fiscal Court (“County”), with a principal mailing
address of 300 South 7th Street, Paducah, Kentucky 42003; and (name and mailing
address of developer) (“Developer”) and (name and mailing address of Owner)
(“Owner”).
   RECITALS
A.   The Owner is the owner of real property located in McCracken County
legally described as set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated by
reference herein (“Property”).
B.   The Owner and the Developer have applied for approval of a final plat of
subdivision of the Property to be known as
_______________________________________ (“Subdivision”).
C.   The Developer has submitted to the County for its approval the engineering
plans and specifications for the public improvements consisting of storm water
retention basins and the grading, drainage, curbing and paving for the publicly
used street system, (“Public Improvements”) for the Subdivision prepared by
__________________________________________ dated _____________________    last
revised _____________________________ (“Plans”) and the County has accepted the
Plans.
D.   The County is willing to accept the Plan only upon the condition that the
Owner and the Developer agree to cause the Public Improvements for the
Subdivision to be installed and completed in a good and workmanlike manner with
materials of good quality in strict accordance with the Plans, County
specifications and the County Subdivision Regulations, fully paid for and
maintained by the Developer as determined by the County Engineer.
      NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises hereinafter set
forth and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and
sufficiency of which is expressly acknowledged, it is agreed by and among the
parties as follows:
1.   The County agrees to accept the final Plan provided that the Developer
satisfy all conditions precedent to such acceptance as set forth in the
McCracken County Subdivision Regulations and the county road specifications.
2.   The Owner and Developer jointly and severally promise and agree as
follows:
   A.   To construct the Public Improvements, or cause them to be constructed,
in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of good quality acceptable to
the County Engineer and in strict accordance with the Plans and the McCracken
County Subdivision Regulations and to complete phases _____ (A), _____ (B),
_____ (C), _____ (D) of construction set forth in paragraph three (3) below on
or before the completion dates therein specified and completion of all Public
Improvements, and
   B.   To pay to the contractors and material suppliers who furnish labor or
materials, or both for the construction of the Public Improvements the full
amounts due them for such labor and materials, and
   C.   To maintain the Public Improvements for the full duration of the
project up to the final completion date as set forth in paragraph three (3)
below. The Developer’s maintenance obligations shall include, but are not
limited to:
         I.   Maintaining the Public Improvements;
         II.   Repairing any damage to the Public Improvements caused by the
Developer, its agents, servants, employees or its successors and assigns, or by
any contractor hired by the Developer, its agents, servants, employees,
successors or assigns, or any subcontractor hired by such contractor; and
         III.   Repairing or replacing any defective workmanship or materials
in the Public Improvements, and
3.   Completion Dates: The Public Improvements shall be completed in accordance
with the following schedule as time is of the essence:
   A.   Curb and gutter roadways or non-curb and gutter roadways site grading,
including grading and drainage of streets, detention and retention ponds shall
be completed on or before ______________________________.
   B.   Curb and street base, including “first lift” of pavement, shall be
completed on or before ___________________________.
   C.   Curb and gutter roadways final street surface (“second lift”),
including necessary repairs to street base, (“first lift”), catch basins,
manholes and other structures located between curb lines shall be completed on
or before ______________________________.
   D.   Non-curb and gutter roadways, complete grading of ditch sections,
proper installation and maintenance of pipe drainage structures, street
aggregate base, (“first lift”) of pavement base and final street surface
(“second lift”) including necessary repairs to the aggregate base and (“first
lift”) of pavement shall be completed on or before ___________________________.
4.   The Owner and Developer further agree to cause to be maintained at all
times proper security to guarantee the completion of payment for and
maintenance of the Public Improvements as required by the McCracken County
Subdivision Regulations in the form of either (1) an irrevocable standby letter
of credit; (2) a self-funded bond guarantee; or (3) a performance/warranty
surety bond. In the event said letter of credit nears its expiration date and
is not renewed, the County may collect on the same.
5.   The failure of the County to insist upon the strict and prompt performance
of the obligations herein contained shall not constitute or be construed as a
waiver or relinquishment of the County’s rights thereafter to enforce such
obligation, but the same shall continue in full force and effect. If the
performance of any obligation to be performed under this Agreement by the
Owner/Developer is delayed as a result of circumstances which are beyond the
reasonable control of the Owner/Developer (which circumstances may include acts
of God, war, acts of civil disobedience, strikes or similar acts), the time for
such performance shall be extended by the amount of time of such delay.
6.   This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the
Parties, their successors and assigns.
7.   Venue, Attorney’s Fees: The parties agree that the proper venue for the
enforcement of this Agreement shall be the McCracken County Circuit Court. The
Developer and Owner, jointly and severally agree to reimburse the County for
any reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs incurred by the County in
enforcing or attempting to enforce the obligations of the Developer and the
Owner, regardless of whether a lawsuit is actually filed, within 30 days after
the receipt of copies of paid invoices for such attorney’s fees and court
costs.
IN WITNESS HEREOF AND BY AFFIXING THE SIGNATURES OF THEIR AUTHORIZED AGENTS
BELOW, THE PARTIES HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE AND CERTIFY THAT THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS
SET FORTH HEREIN WERE AGREED UPON BY THE PARTIES IN THE COURSE OF GOOD FAITH
NEGOTIATIONS CONDUCTED AT ARMS LENGTH. SAID SIGNATURES FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGE AND
CERTIFY THAT THE PARTIES HAVE BEEN GIVEN ADEQUATE TIME TO READ, REVIEW AND SEEK
CLARIFICATION FROM LEGAL COUNSEL PERTAINING TO ALL RIGHTS AND DUTIES SET FORTH
HEREIN AND NOW FULLY UNDERSTAND ALL SUCH RIGHTS AND DUTIES AND INTEND TO BE
BOUND BY THE SAME.
   MCCRACKEN COUNTY FISCAL COURT
   _____________________________________
   McCracken County Judge/Executive
   NOTARY SEAL
   STATE OF KENTUCKY
   COUNTY OF MCCRACKEN
   I certify the following was duly sworn before me on the _____ day of
_________________, 20___.
   _____________________________________
   Notary Public
   My commission expires: ________________
   DEVELOPER
   By:__________________________________
   Title:_________________________________
   NOTARY SEAL
   STATE OF KENTUCKY
   COUNTY OF MCCRACKEN
   I certify the following was duly sworn before me on the ______ day of
________________, 20___.
   _____________________________________
   Notary Public
   My commission expires: _________________
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
APPENDIX B: RESERVED
APPENDIX C: RESERVED
APPENDIX E: SELF-FUNDED BOND GUARANTEE
   WITNESSETH
   Self-Bond No. ______________
WHEREAS,                                                       (hereinafter
referred to as Guarantor) owns or controls
                                              (hereinafter referred to as
Operator);
WHEREAS, Guarantor satisfies the financial requirements and criteria set by the
McCracken County Subdivision Regulations pertaining to self-funded Bond
guarantees;
WHEREAS, Operator has requested and desires to place with the McCracken County
Fiscal Court its self-bond to secure public improvement as set forth in the
Subdivision Public Improvements Agreement;
WHEREAS, Guarantor desires to guarantee the funds pledged under Operator’s
self-bond;
WHEREAS, Guarantor has the full authority under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky, under which it is incorporated, its articles of incorporation and by-
laws to enter into this guarantee;
WHEREAS, Guarantor has full approval from its Board of Directors to enter into
this guarantee;
WHEREAS, it is in the best interests of Guarantor, in the legitimate
furtherance of its purposes and business, to enter into this guarantee;
I)   NOW, for value received, and in consideration of the approval and
execution of Self-Bond No. __________, Guarantor, a corporation created and
existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, their successors and
assigns, jointly and severally, do hereby covenant, guarantee, promise and
agree to make prompt payment upon demand of the full amount, or portions
thereof, of the self-bond of Operator, on the terms and conditions described
herein, said payment of monies to be used for the completion of public
improvements in strict compliance with the terms of the Subdivision Public
Improvements agreement. This guarantee covers any and all demands, liabilities,
charges, and expenses of whatsoever kind or nature, which McCracken County may
at any time sustain or incur by reason of or in consequence of having accepted
the self-bond or Operator, including all litigation costs and all
administrative costs reasonably incurred by McCracken County in any successful
effort to enforce obligations and requirements of the Operator with respect to
the operation or activity that is bonded.
II)   This Corporate Guarantee is a continuing guarantee and is to be in full
force and effect until all of the terms of Operator’s self-bond and Subdivision
Public Improvements Agreement has been satisfactorily performed or otherwise
discharged to the satisfaction of McCracken County.
III)   Guarantor hereby fully consents to the following, any of which shall not
affect nor change or discharge the obligations of this guarantee:
   A)   Any renewals, revisions, modifications to the terms of the self-bond,
including increases or decreases in the dollar amount of the bond, or the lands
to which it applies.
   B)   Any extension of time for performance of the whole or any part of the
conditions of the self-bond.
   C)   Any changes, revisions, modifications or renewals to the terms of the
permits, including the mining and reclamation plans contained therein.
IV)   Guarantor expressly waived the following:
   A)   Notice of the acceptance of this Corporate Guarantee by McCracken
County.
   B)   Notice of renewals, revisions, modifications to the self-bond.
   C)   Notice of changes, revision, modifications or renewals of the terms of
the permits of the Operator.
   D)   Notice of any extensions of time for performance of the whole or any
part the condition of the self-bond.
   E)   Notice of bond forfeiture proceedings, notice of any demand for payment
of self-bond; or any dishonor thereof.
   F)   All other notices to which Guarantor might otherwise be entitled in
connection with this Corporate Guarantee or the obligation hereby guaranteed.
   G)   The institution of any civil actions or the exhaustion of legal
remedies against the Operator as a condition to enforce of this Corporate
Guarantee.
V)   This Corporate Guarantee is subject to the following conditions, to-wit:
   A)   Any demand for funds shall be accompanied by a signed statement that
McCracken County has forfeited, in whole or in part, the self-bond.
   B)   This Corporate Guarantee shall be limited in amount as follows:
      1)   Public Improvement costs: the indebtedness reflected by the cost of
completion of the Public Improvements in compliance with the Subdivision Public
Improvements Agreement.
      2)   Litigation and administrative costs: the actual amount of such costs
reasonably incurred in any successful effort to enforce requirements and
obligations of the Operator and/or the obligations of the Guarantor under this
agreement. Litigation and administrative costs shall not be limited by the
indebtedness reflected by the approved self-bond.
   C)   If the Operator fails to complete the Public Improvements in compliance
with the Subdivision Public Improvements Agreement, the Guarantor shall be
required to pay to McCracken County the amount in full necessary to complete
the approved reclamation plan, no to exceed the bond amount, within ten (10)
business days after receipt of McCracken County demand for payment. Guarantor
hereby agrees that demands for payment may be based and are payable on
projections of costs or their actual accrual and that liability for payment
shall not be contingent on the costs having been presently sustained.
   D)   This Corporate Guarantee may be canceled only upon notice of said
cancellation being sent to the Operator and McCracken County at least ninety
(90) days in advance of the proposed cancellation date and then only upon
acceptance of the cancellation by McCracken County. The cancellation shall be
accepted by McCracken County if the Operator obtains a suitable replacement
bond before the proposed cancellation date or if the lands for which the self-
bond, or portion thereof, was accepted have not and will not be disturbed under
the terms of the permit, or the self-bond has been released in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 22, Article 3 and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
VI)   This Corporate Guarantee shall be and continue effective notwithstanding
any present or future legal disability of the Operator.
VII)   There are no conditions or limitations to this Corporate Guarantee
except those contained herein at the date hereof, and thereafter no alteration,
change or modification hereof shall be binding or effective unless executed in
writing, signed by the guarantor, and approved by McCracken County.
VIII)   Guarantor agrees to pay all costs and expenses incurred by McCracken
County which are expended in any successful action instituted to enforce the
terms of this guarantee.
IX)   This guarantee shall be good and effective notwithstanding any change or
changes in the business name of the operator.
X)   No changes, revisions, modifications or renewals to the self-bond of the
Operator or the terms of permits shall act as a release of the Guarantor from
this Corporate Guarantee.
XI)   All notices required to, or which may be given shall be effective when
received by the addressees at the addresses specified below. Personal delivery
shall have the same effect as notice given by mail. Notices given by mail shall
be sent certified.
   GUARANTOR
 
Name Address
     
     
     
 
      FOR                                                                
 
Name Address
     
     
     
 
XII)   In case of the insolvency, bankruptcy or dissolution of the Operator,
all funds represented by the self-bond shall immediately become due and payable
and this Corporate Guarantee may thereupon be enforced.
XIII)   This Corporate Guarantee is one of payment and not of collection.
XIV)   The failure of any person or persons to sign this Corporate Guarantee
shall not release or affect the liability of Guarantor.
XV)   This Corporate Guarantee is a binding contract and shall be construed
under and subject to the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky with jurisdiction
and venue rested solely in the McCracken County Circuit Court.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
APPENDIX F: STATEMENT OF POLICY CONCERNING CURBSIDE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS
WHEREAS, all policy related decisions of McCracken County, Kentucky
(hereinafter “County”) are guided by its duty to safeguard and provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens;
WHEREAS, because concrete, brick, stone and other custom made mail receptacles
are unable to bend, give or fall out of the way in the event of a motor vehicle
collision, such receptacles present a reasonably foreseeable risk of harm to
motorists;
WHEREAS, in light of this foreseeable risk, the United States Postal Service’s
Postal Operations Manual (“POM”) and the Federal Highway Administration have
set forth pertinent safety standards that the County is duty bound to follow
and enforce;
NOW THEREFORE, it is presently the intent of the County to accept, adopt and
enforce the following mail receptacle safety requirements within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the County as stated herein:
Section 1: Curbside Mailbox Safety Requirements:
The County requires that any and all curbside mail receptacles installed or
replaced after the effective date of this policy comply with the following
safety design requirements:
A wooden support no larger than 4 x 4 inches or a 2 inch diameter standard
steel or aluminum pipe; and
Such post shall be buried no more than 24 inches deep to ensure that the post
is able to give way in the event of a collision; and
There shall be no potentially dangerous materials used in erecting a
receptacle, such as concrete, brick, stone or any other hard/inflexible
substances.
Section 2: Exception to Aforesaid Mailbox Safety Requirement:
In keeping with the safety requirements of the POM and the Federal Highway
Administration, an exception or variance from the curbside mailbox safety
requirements stated in Section 1 above shall be granted upon an applicant’s
having obtained written pre-approval from the Postmaster for a varying design
and having tendered proof of the same to the McCracken County Judge/Executive’s
Office.
Section 3: Reimbursement for Damage to Curbside Mailbox Receptacles:
It is the County’s policy to fully compensate and reimburse citizens for damage
to their property that is caused by authorized agents of the County performing
in the course and scope of their duties. In the event of damage to a curbside
mailbox receptacle, regardless of its original design and construction
materials, the County’s duty to compensate and reimburse the aggrieved party
shall be limited to an amount equivalent to the cost of replacing a curbside
mail receptacle that fully complies with the requirements set forth in Section
1 above.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
APPENDIX G: STATEMENT OF POLICY CONCERNING CULVERT INSTALLATION AND REPLACEMENT
WHEREAS, all policy related decisions of McCracken County, Kentucky
(hereinafter “County”) are guided by its duty to safeguard and provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens;
WHEREAS, the County has a direct interest in the mutual infrastructural
benefits to the County as well as the citizens of sound water control measures
and desires to share duties with the citizens in the efforts of controlling
water via proper installation of approved culverts;
NOW THEREFORE, it is presently the intent of the County to accept, adopt and
enforce the following policy concerning culvert installation and replacement
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the County as stated herein:
Section 1: New Construction Culvert Installation.
   a.   The property owner shall contact the McCracken County Road Department
to obtain and complete a culvert installation/replacement application wherein
all information pertinent to the culvert installation/replacement request shall
be communicated.
   b.   The property owner shall obtain an entrance permit from the McCracken
County Building and Electrical Department at no cost.
   c.   The property owner is responsible for marking the proposed location of
the driveway/culvert so that the McCracken County Engineer can review the sight
distance and proper sizing of the culvert may proceed.
   d.   Sizing will be conducted by the McCracken County Engineer utilizing
acceptable engineering practices and taking into consideration the constraints
of right of way, the extent of downstream grading required, finished floor
elevation of proposed residential structures and existing structures and the
overall lay of the land for the best end result.
   e.   The property owner is responsible for furnishing the culvert pipe based
upon the specifications made by the McCracken County Engineer.
   f.   The McCracken County Road Department is responsible for the
installation of the culvert as specified by the McCracken County Engineer. The
McCracken County Road Department shall be responsible for the routine cleaning
of the culvert channel. Any other maintenance shall be the responsibility of
the property owner.
Section 2: Replacement of Culverts Installed Prior to Adoption of this Policy.
   a.   The property owner shall contact the McCracken County Road Department
to obtain and complete a culvert installation/replacement application wherein
all information pertinent to the culvert installation/replacement request shall
be communicated.
   b.   The property owner shall obtain an entrance permit from the McCracken
County Building and Electrical Department at no cost.
   c.   Evaluation of the necessity of replacement and the individual culvert
sizing will be conducted by the McCracken County Engineer utilizing acceptable
engineering practices and taking into consideration the constraints of right of
way, the extent of downstream grading required, finished floor elevation of
proposed residential structures and existing structures and the overall lay of
the land for the best end result.
   d.   The property owner is responsible for furnishing the culvert pipe based
upon the specifications made by the McCracken County Engineer.
   e.   If the McCracken County Engineer determines that the culvert requires
replacement, the McCracken County Road Department is responsible for the
removal of the existing culvert and the installation of the new culvert as
specified by the McCracken County Engineer. The McCracken County Road
Department’s installation responsibility expressly excludes the replacement of
the final surface (i.e. asphalt, concrete, etc.). Final surface replacement is
the responsibility of the property owner.
   f.   The McCracken County Road Department shall be responsible for the
routine cleaning of the culvert channel. Any other maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
   g.   In the event the McCracken County Engineer determines that a specific
culvert does not need to be replaced, the McCracken County Road Department
shall have responsibility to do so. However, the property owner may move
forward with replacement or resetting of the culvert himself or via licensed
contractor at the sole expense of the property owner and pursuant to the
specifications required by the McCracken County Engineer.
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
APPENDIX H: COUNTY ROAD SPECIFICATIONS
EFFECTIVE MARCH 01, 2000
Introduction & Purpose
   A.   The following standards shall govern, guide and control all engineering
involved in planning, constructing, modifying or extending any: road or street
located in McCracken County.
   B.   The owner, developer, or his agent, and/or contractor, shall keep
himself fully informed of current state, county laws, ordinances, resolutions,
or regulations which in any manner affect the development or work contemplated.
Strict compliance with these standards is required, in order to insure the
orderly expansion of roads to the highest practical standards with a maximum
efficiency for the greatest public benefit.
   Inspection, Compliance and Acceptance
Inspection
   A.   Any improvement constructed to County standards must be inspected
during construction by a representative of the County Engineer.
   B.   The contractor shall request an inspection during construction by
giving a 24-hour working day notice prior to constructing, modifying, or
extending any road or street in McCracken County. Failure to notify may result
in non-acceptance of improvement.
   C.   There shall be a fifty (50) dollar/per lot inspection fee. This fee
shall be paid to the McCracken County Fiscal Court, prior to final inspection.
Compliance
   A.   All material and workmanship that is to become a permanent part of any
improvement covered by these standards shall conform to the requirements for
the particular material or workmanship as set forth in these standards. The
contractors or developers shall supply any and all certificates of compliance,
certified test results, or shall perform tests as required to assure the County
that the material being incorporated into the work has met the requirement
specified.
   MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
RIGHT-OF- WAY WIDTHS
   A.   MINOR STREETS - Curb and gutter construction, less than 500' in length
and physically blocked from future extension: 40' wide
   B.   Standard Subdivision, residential streets: 50' wide
EARTHWORK
   A.   CLEARING AND GRUBBING - To prepare the site for road construction, the
roadway area should be stripped of trees, topsoil, large roots, old unsuitable
fill, organic or soft soil. Under no circumstances shall the debris from the
cleaning operation be permitted for fill.
   B.   BACKFILLING EXCAVATED AREAS - Backfilling excavated areas shall be
accomplished using clean materials of approvable quality determined by the
County Engineer or his designee. Backfill areas shall be placed in one (1) foot
lifts and each lift compacted to 95% maximum density. Compaction tests shall be
conducted every 500' of backfilled roadway. The costs of all testing will be
assumed by the County.
   C.   FILL - All fill below roadways shall be placed in six (6) inch lifts,
and each lift compacted to 95% maximum density. Compaction tests shall be
conducted every 500' of roadway fill area. The costs of all testing will be
assumed by the County.
SUBGRADE
   A.   Subgrade materials shall be that of the backfill material. The material
shall be free of large rock, wood, roots, and other unsuitable materials, and
shall be of a quality acceptable to the County Engineer or his designee. The
subgrade shall be sloped to drain and be evaluated by the County Engineer or
his designee prior to placement of aggregate base.
BASE COURSE
   A.   All base course material shall be one of the below listed alternates:
      1.   Six (6) inch of bank gravel with a four (4) inch DGA cap.
            Or
      2.   Eight (8) inches of DGA
   B.   The base course shall be placed in no greater than six (6) inch thick
lifts. The lifts shall be compacted to 95% maximum density. Compaction test
shall be conducted every 500 feet of roadway. The cost of all testing will be
assumed by the County.
PAVING
   A.   Prior to any paving operations, the County Engineer or his designee
shall inspect and proof roll the compacted base course. Paving operation shall
not begin until approval to do so is obtained from the County Engineer or his
designee.
   B.   THICKNESS OF PAVEMENT - No deviations may be permitted on the following
minimum paving thicknesses.
      1.   Two (2) inches of compacted Class I Base with One (1) inch of
Compacted Class I Surface.
All asphaltic concrete roads shall be cored every 200 feet or at least three
(3) cores, and the core holes filled with concrete upon completion of test. The
compacted asphalt must be a minimum of three (3) inches thick and have a
compaction no less than 95% of laboratory maximum density. The cost of all
testing will be assumed by the County.
Failure to comply with thickness and density shall result in non-acceptance by
the County.
SHOULDERS
   A.   Shoulders shall be at least six (6) feet wide, grass surfaced and there
shall be less than a two (2) inch drop-off from the pavement edge to the
shoulder.
CURB AND GUTTER
   A.   Curb and gutter material shall be Portland Cement Concrete with a
minimum structural strength of 3500 pounds per square inch and shall conform to
Kentucky Transportation Cabinet Standard Specifications for road and bridge
construction.
RESTORATION
   A.   Upon completion of road construction, the area from back of curb or
pavement to the right of way line shall be graded to a smooth, attractive
appearance and seeded, mulched or hydro seeded.
DRAINAGE
   A.   Drainage plans shall be submitted to the County Engineer or his
designee. Drainage work shall not commence until approval is given by the
County Engineer or his designee. A ten (10) year return period shall be used
for design work.
OCCUPANCY OF LOTS
   A.   Prior to acceptance of any development’s roadways into the McCracken
County Road System, at least 25% of the development’s lots shall have started
construction of the lot’s principal structure, or at least one (1) year past
final paving, whichever occurs first.
ROAD BONDING AND ACCEPTANCE
   A.   All roads to be dedicated must submit a road bond using the McCracken
County Road Department Standard Bond Form. The amount of bond shall be set by
the McCracken County Fiscal Court.
   B.   Prior to expiration of the above bond and prior to County acceptance,
the County will inspect and require any and all damage to the roadway be
repaired. Failure to repair roads will result in the County making a claim on
the bond for roadway repair.
ACCEPTANCE
   A.   Prior to final acceptance by the County of any improvements constructed
in compliance with these standards, the following requirements shall be
completed.
      a.   The Contractor shall request a final inspection by the County
Engineer or his designee by giving a 24-hour working day notice.
      b.   Any deficiencies noted during the final inspection shall be
corrected.
      c.   The Consulting Engineer shall prepare a complete and accurate
reproducible set of “As Built” plans, when so required by the County Engineer.
These plans shall be signed by both the Consulting Engineer and the County
Engineer. These “As Built” plans are to be filed in the office of the County
Engineer as a permanent County record.
When all of the above requirements have been executed; the County Engineer, by
letter will inform the developer that the improvements are ready for acceptance
by the County as completed.
Signed by Judge/Executive Orazine            February 28, 2000
McCracken County Judge/Executive            Court Order Date
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
APPENDIX I: FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATION
   Form 1
   (On Plat)
   CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
   WATER AND SEWAGE SYSTEM
   CERTIFICATION OF ACKNOWLEDGEMENT NOT APPROVED BY HEALTH        DEPARTMENT
PLEASE READ BELOW CERTIFICATE
(The above statement is required to be in bold type, underlined and at least 1/
4" tall)
I/We hereby certify that I/we am/are the owner’s of the property shown and
described hereon and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free
consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, and dedicate all
streets, alleys, walks, parks and other open spaces to public or private use as
noted. I/we understand that the approval of this plat shall not be deemed to
constitute an acceptance by the McCracken Fiscal Court that the lots in this
subdivision are suitable for a private sewage disposal system. The owner or
developer of any lot, or lots, must meet the minimum requirements and obtain
the necessary approvals for the use of a private sewage disposal system from
the Department of Housing, Buildings and Construction, Division of Plumbing,
Commonwealth of Kentucky, or any successor governmental agencies.
I hereby certify that I have read and understand the foregoing notice.
Owner                               Date:                        Owner
                      Date:                                      
Owner                               Date:                        Owner
                      Date:                                      
   State of Kentucky
   SS
   County of McCracken
I,                                      , a notary public in and for the State
& County aforesaid, do hereby certify that the foregoing plat of survey was
this day presented to me by                  , known to me, together with the
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication shown hereon, which was, executed in my
presence and acknowledged to be their free act and deed.
Witness my hand and seal this              day of
                                                ,               
My Commission expires on the        day of
                                                ,               
   Notary Public
Form 2
   (on plat)
CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is to the best of my
knowledge and belief to be true and correct survey to the accuracy required by
the McCracken County, Kentucky, Planning Commission and that the monuments have
been placed as shown hereon, all in accordance with the minimum standards of
practice as promulgated by the Kentucky Revised Statute and the Kentucky
Administrative Regulations.
Date:                                             
Professional Land Surveyor:                                             
   Form 3
   (on plat)
   CERTIFICATE OF FINAL APPROVAL FOR RECORDING
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown here on was given final
approval by the McCracken County Fiscal Court.
Date
Judge Executive or designee
   Form 4
   (on plat)
   CERTIFICATE OF FINAL APPROVAL FOR RECORDING
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown herein has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Regulations for McCracken County, Kentucky, with
the exception of such variances if any, as are noted in the minutes of the
Planning Commission and that the subdivision plat was given final approval by
the McCracken County Planning Commission.
Planning Commission meeting held                                             
McCracken County Planning Commission Chair
   Form 5
   (on plat)
   CERTIFICATE OF FINAL APPROVAL FOR RECORDING
I hereby certify that the Corporate Surety, Cash or Equivalent has been posted
and approved by McCracken County Fiscal Court; in the amount sufficient to
assure such completion of all required improvements.
Date:                                             , 20       
Judge Executive or Designee McCracken County, Kentucky
   Form 6
   (on plat)
   CERTIFICATE OF RECORDING
   “State of Kentucky, County of McCracken”
I,                                             , Clerk for the county and state
aforesaid do hereby certify that this plat was this day lodged in my office for
record and that I have recorded same with this and the foregoing certificate in
my office.
Given under my hand and seal this
the                                                day of   , 20       
By                                             D.C.
                                             Clerk
Recorded in plat section                                            
page                                            
   Form 7
   (on plat)
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon substantially complies
with McCracken County regulations and policies as required.
Date                                             Judge Executive or Designee
                                            
(Ord. passed 11-27-2017)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Reference Code Section
KRS Reference            Code Section
Chapter 23A              35.05
Chapter 24A              35.05
Chapters 39A to 39F      31.02
39B.020                  31.02
39B.030                  31.02
39B.030(3)               31.02
39B.050                  30.06,
                         31.02
39B.050(1)(c)            31.02
39B.070                  31.02
39B.070(3)               31.02
39D.030                  32.03
39D.040                  32.03
39F.020(1)               30.06
39F.120(9)(a)(b)         30.06
39F.200                  30.06,
                         31.02
41.240(4)                35.20
61.300                   50.02
61.870                   34.26
61.870 et seq.           34.26
61.878                   150.038
Chapter 64               35.05
65.210 et seq.           30.09,
                         51.01
65.210 - 65.314          31.04
65.520                   90.05
65.760                   35.07
65.870                   32.01
                         31.10,
65.8801 - 65.8840        31.11,
                         31.22,
                         110.03
66.480                   35.20
67.077(4)                36.01
67.083                   31.01
67.083(3)(j)             72.03
Chapter 68               90.03
Chapter 75               30.05,
                         35.07
76.231                   33.01
82.625                   35.04
83A.010(6)               10.02
83A.010(8)               10.02
83A.065                  10.99
83A.090                  10.18
91A.010(4)               10.02
91A.010(8)               10.02
91A.080                  35.37,
                         35.76
91A.080(8)               35.82
91A.080(14)              35.79
91A.350 to 91A.390       31.04
91A.350                  35.60
91A.350(2)               31.04
91A.360                  31.04
91A.360(1)(a)            31.04
91A.360(1)(b)            31.04
91A.360(1)(c)            31.04
91A.390(1)(a)            31.04
91A.390(3)               35.60
                         150.001,
                         150.002,
                         150.038,
                         150.108,
                         150.109,
Chapter 100              171.01,
                         190.002,
                         190.033,
                         190.080,
                         190.095,
                         190.999
100.111-2                190.016
100.201(3)               150.053
100.202                  190.002
100.2111                 150.109
100.217                  150.107
100.231                  190.082
100.233                  190.082
100.237                  190.082
100.247                  190.082
100.251                  190.082
100.347                  150.109
100.985 - 100.987        150.038
Chapter 109              111.01
118.025                  30.01
131.010(6)               35.81
Chapter 132              30.04
136.120                  35.37
136.320                  35.80
139.470                  90.03
151.250                  171.02
151.280                  171.02
151.310                  171.02
154.20-250 to 154.20-284 35.37
154.50-310 et seq.       31.03
154.50-316               90.05
Chapter 173              30.04
173.470                  30.04
173.490                  30.04
186.010(4)               35.07
186.020                  35.04
198B.060(8)              70.03
198B.060(10)(a)          70.07
198B.070                 70.08
198B.140                 70.99
218A.010(51)             132.16
224.868                  111.01
226.030 - 226.050        98.03
227.550                  110.13
Chapter 237              32.01
Chapters 241 - 244       93.001
Chapter 241              93.003
241.010                  93.001
241.030                  93.001
241.200                  93.018
Chapter 242              93.001
                         35.37,
Chapter 243              93.001,
                         93.003,
                         93.030
243.020 - 243.670        93.001
243.020(3), (4)          93.066
243.120                  150.016,
                         150.053
243.155                  150.016
Chapter 244              93.003
244.080                  93.062
244.083                  93.048
244.280(4)               93.045
244.290(4)               93.045
Chapter 258              50.02,
                         50.04
258.119                  50.01
273.161(3)               90.05
278.010(3)               150.038
286.3-135                35.03
Chapter 304              35.75
304.10                   35.75
304.14-030               35.75
304.29-241               35.80
304.38-060               35.80
304.49-010               35.80
398.010                  31.02
                         33.09,
                         33.13,
                         72.04,
Chapter 424              92.03,
                         150.034,
                         150.107,
                         150.109
446.010(1)               10.02
446.010(2)               10.02
446.010(9)               10.02
446.010(10)              10.02
446.010(12)              10.02
446.010(13)              10.02
446.010(14)              10.02
446.010(15)              10.02
446.010(17)              10.02
446.010(18)              10.02
446.010(23)              10.02
446.010(25)              10.02
446.010(26)              10.02
446.010(27)              10.02
446.010(28)              10.02
446.010(30)              10.02
446.010(31)              10.02
446.010(33)              10.02
446.010(37)              10.02
446.010(39)              10.02
446.010(43)              10.02
446.010(47)              10.02
446.010(46)              10.02
446.010(49)              10.02
446.010(55)              10.02
446.020(1)               10.03
446.020(2)               10.03
446.030                  10.04
446.050                  10.05
446.060                  10.06
446.080(1)               10.03
446.080(3)               10.03
446.080(4)               10.03
446.090                  10.07
446.100                  10.08
446.110                  10.09
446.140                  10.01
522.030                  150.038
534.040(2)(c)            10.99
630.030                  130.02
                         
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        12-19-1994  35.20
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
340.0       7-12-1979   73.01
320.1       - -1980     31.01
91-5        11-12-1991  35.06
91-6        11-25-1991  131.01 –
                        131.14
94-2        5-9-1994    91.01 –
                        91.03
                        90.01 -
94-3        8-8-1994    90.06,
                        90.99
95-1        5-22-1995   35.21
96-1        5-13-1996   35.04
96-5        10-14-1996  35.03
97-2        2-24-1997   31.03
97-1        3-13-1997   32.01
97-3        4-28-1997   130.01 –
                        130.05
97-5        11-19-1997  92.01 –
                        92.08
98-1        3-9-1998    170.01
98-3        9-14-1998   33.01 –
                        33.18
                        97.01 - 97.04,
98-4        1-11-1999   97.99,
                        Ch. 97 Appendix
99-3        4-12-1999   30.04
99-3.1      6-28-1999   30.04
                        95.01 –
99-6        11-15-1999  95.13,
                        95.99
98-3.1      12-13-1999  33.02,
                        33.05
96-5.1      2-28-2000   35.03
99-6.1      3-27-2000   95.03 –
                        95.06
                        96.01 –
2000-4      4-24-2000   96.08,
                        96.99
-           6-12-2000   30.06
2000-9      7-10-2000   31.02
2000-10     7-24-2000   30.05
2001-5      9-10-2001   30.03
2002-5      6-24-2002   35.05
2000-9.1    8-12-2002   31.02
                        70.01 –
2002-7      9-9-2002    70.08,
                        70.99
                        33.05,
                        33.07,
98-03.2     12-2-2002   33.09,
                        33.10,
                        33.13
2004-14     8-9-2004    30.10
2004-15     9-15-2004   30.01,
                        30.99
2005-8      5-23-2005   34.01 –
                        34.05
2006-7      10-30-2006  30.10
2006-12     12-11-2006  30.08
                        35.35 –
2007-16     - -2007     35.46,
                        35.99
2008-5      3-26-2008   30.09
2008-9      6-23-2008   72.01 –
                        72.08
                        90.01 -
2009-6      6-24-2009   90.06,
                        90.99
2011-6      - -2011     35.01
                        132.01 –
2011-14     11-28-2011  132.03,
                        132.99
                        132.15 –
2011-15     11-28-2011  132.17,
                        132.99
                        171.01 –
                        171.12,
                        171.25-
2011-12     12-19-2011  171.27,
                        171.40-
                        171.46,
                        171.99
                        98.01 –
                        98.10,
2011-17     12-19-2011  98.20 –
                        98.28,
                        98.99
2012-7-7958 10-8-2012   51.01 –
                        51.09
                        34.20 –
2012-6      1-28-2013   34.31,
                        34.99
                        94.01 –
2013-1      3-24-2013   94.04,
                        94.99
                        50.01 –
2013-2      5-28-2013   50.08,
                        50.99
2016-06     5-23-2016   30.07
2016-10     6-27-2016   71.01,
                        71.02
2016-11     7-11-2016   32.02
2016-16     10-24-2016  35.01
                        111.01 -
                        111.03,
                        111.15 -
2017-06     9-11-2017   111.22,
                        111.35 -
                        111.40,
                        111.55 -
                        111.58
                        150.001 -
                        150.003,
                        150.015 -
                        150.019,
                        150.030 -
                        150.039,
                        150.050 -
2017-07     11-27-2017  150.058,
                        150.070 -
                        150.073,
                        150.085 -
                        150.094,
                        150.105 -
                        150.108,
                        150.110,
                        150.999
                        190.001 -
                        190.003,
                        190.015,
                        190.016,
                        190.030 -
                        190.033,
                        190.045 -
--          11-27-2017  190.054,
                        190.065,
                        190.066,
                        190.080 -
                        190.082,
                        190.095,
                        190.999,
                        Ch. 190 Appendices
                        93.001 -
                        93.004,
                        93.015 -
                        93.019,
                        93.030 -
                        93.034,
2018-01     3-12-2018   93.045 -
                        93.048,
                        93.060 -
                        93.066,
                        93.080,
                        93.081,
                        93.999
2018-04     6-25-2018   35.01
2018-05     8-13-2018   35.35,
                        35.37
2018-06     9-24-2018   35.01
2018-07     11-5-2018   32.03
                        150.051,
                        150.052,
2019-08     8-16-2019   150.055,
                        190.031,
                        190.032,
                        190.046
                        35.61 –
2019-09     8-21-2019   35.66,
                        35.99
2019-10     8-21-2019   31.04
2020-01     2-10-2020   35.75 –
                        35.83
2020-04     5-11-2020   Adopting Ordinance
2020-06     6-22-2020   150.071,
                        150.090
2021-03     3-8-2021    150.040,
                        150.051
2021-06     8-9-2021    150.041
2021-07     6-28-2021   150.109
2021-08     6-28-2021   190.048
2021-12     9-13-2021   71.01,
                        71.02
2021-14     9-27-2021   91.04
2021-18     12-13-2021  150.040
2022-05     8-22-2022   30.02
                        35.60 –
2022-09     11-21-2022  35.66,
                        35.99
                        150.016,
                        150.035,
                        150.039,
                        150.042,
2022-11     1-9-2023    150.051 –
                        150.053,
                        150.055,
                        150.058,
                        150.094,
                        150.107
2022-12     1-9-2023    36.01
2023-02     1-23-2023   71.02
2023-05     3-27-2023   190.032,
                        190.081
2023-06     3-27-2023   150.111
2023-12     7-24-2023   32.02
2023-13     7-24-2023   30.03
2024-03     6-24-2024   30.09
2024-05     6-24-2024   36.01
2024-06     6-24-2024   35.07
2024-08     6-24-2024   93.034,
                        93.045
2024-09     8-12-2024   36.01
2024-11     9-9-2024    31.10 -
                        31.25
                        110.01 -
                        110.06,
                        110.10 -
2024-12     9-9-2024    110.13,
                        110.20 -
                        110.22,
                        110.99
2024-17     12-16-2024  35.46
2025-03     5-12-2025   150.038,
                        150.111
2025-04     4-14-2025   190.032,
                        190.081
2025-10     6-23-2025   36.01
                       
 
 
