McLEAN COUNTY, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 25-340.1 passed 10-23-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE MCCLEAN COUNTY FISCAL COURT
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Kentucky empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE MCCLEAN
COUNTY FISCAL COURT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY THAT:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the McLean County Fiscal Court are
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the McLean County
Fiscal Court.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
                  10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
                  30.   County Administrative Code
                  31.   Code of Ethical Conduct
                  32.   Officials and Organizations
                  33.   General Administrative Policies
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
                  50.   Solid Waste Management
                  51.   Sewers
                  70.   General Provisions
                  71.   Traffic Rules
                  72.   Parking Regulations
                  73.   Recreational Vehicles
                  74.   Traffic Schedules
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
                  90.   Animals
                  91.   Streets and Sidewalks
                  92.   Nuisances
                  93.   Fireworks; Fire Prevention
                  94.   Littering
                  95.   Hazardous Substances
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
                  110.   General Licensing Provisions
                  111.   Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants and Solicitors
                  112.   Pawnbrokers
                  113.   Insurance Companies
                  114.   Sexually-Oriented Businesses
                  115.   CATV Franchises
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
                  130.   General Offenses
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
                  150.   Building Regulations; Construction
                  151.   Flood Damage Prevention
                  152.   Subdivisions
                  153.   Zoning
   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
                  I.   Agreements and Contracts
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
                  References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
                  References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and re- ordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory.
Introduced and 1st reading May 12, 2022
Adoption and 2nd reading May 26, 2022
Ayes  4
Nays  0
  /s/  
McLean County Judge/Executive
/s/  
McLean County Fiscal Court Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
McLean County Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may
be substituted. Title heads, chapter heads and section and division heads or
titles, and explanatory notes and cross-references, do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to those
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01". Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of the state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature, except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and maintained by
the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information on
vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards.
(KRS 446.010(55))
   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(10))
   COUNTY. McLean County, Kentucky.
   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted.
(KRS 446.010(12))
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by authority
of the state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Fiscal Court.
(KRS 83A.010(6), KRS 91A.010(4))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FISCAL COURT. The governing body of the county.
   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by
authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(18))
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A County Fiscal Court member.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(KRS 446.010(26))
   MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
   OATH. Includes affirmation in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH.
(KRS 446.010(28))
   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited PARTNERSHIPS.
(KRS 446.010(30))
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables granted police powers,
coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional
officers, marshals, police officers and other persons with similar authority to
make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even-numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected, and the election in odd-numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(KRS 446.010(39))
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the county.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   SWORN. Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of
office without a lawful incumbent therein, when the person elected or appointed
to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has been no
election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies whether
the VACANCY is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the state,
county, city or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases, and
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to that meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in
which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public
office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just
mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall mean the
time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or
compliance with the notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include those acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of County Fiscal Court in
enacting any ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held
unconstitutional the remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the
ordinance provides otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially
and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part
that it is apparent that County Fiscal Court would not have enacted the
remaining parts without the unconstitutional part; or unless the remaining
parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the intent of County Fiscal Court.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of County Fiscal Court.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of County Fiscal Court as long as it takes effect prior to
the effective date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
County Fiscal Court which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of County Fiscal Court, as long
as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the
original amendment.
   (E)   No other action of County Fiscal Court repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment, as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect; except that, the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the County
Fiscal Court, or a certain county officer or employee, to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall
remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances
until County Fiscal Court shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   The method of amendment set by the county should be used by the county
to amend, add or repeal a chapter, section or division of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (KRS 83A.090)
   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
Statutory references:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065
   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNTY ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
      
31.   CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
      
32.   OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: COUNTY ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
30.001   Introduction; purpose and authority
   
30.002   Short title
   
30.003   Definitions
   
30.004   Amendments
General Administration
   
30.015   County Judge Executive
   
30.016   Organization/reorganization of county departments and agencies
   
30.017   Special districts
   
30.018   County representation on boards and commissions
   
30.019   Appointed positions
   
30.020   Appointment/removal of administrative personnel and members of boards
and commissions
   
30.021   Procedures for administrative agencies
Operation of Fiscal Court
   
30.035   Meetings
   
30.036   Presiding Officer
   
30.037   Quorum
   
30.038   Disturbing meetings
   
30.039   Order of business
   
30.040   Minutes
   
30.041   Rules of order
   
30.042   Ordinances, orders and resolutions
Fiscal Management
   
30.055   Budget preparation procedures
   
30.056   Budget hearing procedures and requirements
   
30.057   County Treasurer
   
30.058   Account balance; expenditures; records
   
30.059   Claims against county
Personnel Administration
   
30.070   General
   
30.071   Job classification
   
30.072   Personnel policy of constitutional officers
   
30.073   Applicants
   
30.074   Supervision
   
30.075   Discipline procedures
   
30.076   Affirmative action
   
30.077   Scope of coverage
   
30.078   Definitions
   
30.079   Classification of employees
   
30.080   Hours of work
   
30.081   Personnel, employee records
   
30.082   Personal conduct
   
30.083   Safety
   
30.084   Applicants; hiring; credentials; collection and appointment; methods
of filling vacancies; and the like
   
30.085   Transfers
   
30.086   Promotions
   
30.087   Attendance
   
30.088   Holidays, vacations and other leaves of absence
   
30.089   Court appearances
   
30.090   Overtime and compensation
   
30.091   County vehicles
   
30.092   Health insurance
   
30.093   Retirement program
   
30.094   Training and career development
   
30.095   Performance evaluation
   
30.096   Disciplinary action
   
30.097   Demotions, suspensions and separations; reinstatement
   
30.098   Grievance procedures
   
30.099   Personnel file
   
30.100   Political activity
   
30.101   Sexual harassment
   
30.102   Expense reimbursement
Drug- and Alcohol-Free Workplace; Substance Abuse Policy
   
30.115   Purpose and goal
   
30.116   Definitions
   
30.117   Covered workers
   
30.118   Applicability
   
30.119   Policy requirements
   
30.120   Prohibited behavior
   
30.121   Consequences
   
30.122   Return-to-work agreements
   
30.123   Assistance
   
30.124   Confidentiality
   
30.125   Policy administration and enforcement
   
30.126   Responsibility
   
30.127   Communication
County Property
   
30.140   County Road Department
   
30.141   County property generally
Purchases and Contracts
   
30.155   Authorization of county contracts
   
30.156   Selection of vendors and contractors (procedures for sealed bidding)
   
30.157   Determination of bidder qualification
   
30.158   Prerequisite to use negotiated process
   
30.159   Negotiated process
   
30.160   Small purchase procedures
   
30.161   Hold harmless clause
   
30.162   Storage and inventory control (receiving, storing and disbursing
repetitive use items)
   
30.163   Disposition of county surplus property
Boards and Commissions
   
30.175   Maintenance of records
   
30.176   Regular meetings
Special Districts
   
30.190   Procedures for creation and dissolution
   
30.191   Appointments and removals
County Services
   
30.205   Public Works Department (Road Department)
   
30.206   County road system
   
30.207   Planning and subdivision regulations
Internet, Email and Social Media
   
30.220   Acceptable, unacceptable use of internet and email
   
30.221   Communications
   
30.222   Software
   
30.223   Copyright issues
   
30.224   Security
   
30.225   Violations
   
30.226   Computer use
   
30.227   Social media
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.001 INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The General Assembly of the commonwealth enacted KRS 68.005 in 1978
for the purpose of promoting efficient administration of county government. KRS
68.005 requires the Fiscal Court to adopt a County Administrative Code, which
includes, but not limited to, procedures and designation of responsibility for
the following:
      (1)   General administration of the office of County Judge Executive
(hereinafter “County Judge”), county administrative agencies and public
authorities;
      (2)   Administration of county fiscal affairs, including budget
formulation; receipt and disbursement of county funds, preparation of records
required for the county audit, and for filing of claims against the county;
      (3)   Personnel administration, including description and classification
of non-elected positions, selection, assignment, supervision and discipline of
employees, employee complaints and the county affirmative action program;
      (4)   County purchasing and award of contracts; and
      (5)   Delivery of county services.
   (B)   The County Judge, as the chief executive officer of the county, is
responsible for the organization and management of the administrative functions
of county government. The Fiscal Court sets the county’s policies and
priorities. The County Judge must execute these policies and priorities. The
statute provides only general guidance as to the form and substance of a
county’s internal administrative organization.
   (C)   For this reason, the Fiscal Court of the county enacts the following
County Administrative Code.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This document shall be known and may be cited as the “McLean County
Administrative Code”.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. McLean County, Kentucky, a governmental entity.
   COUNTY JUDGE EXECUTIVE. The County Judge.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. Elected county officials other than the County Judge.
   FISCAL COURT. The county body vested with the legislative powers of the
county.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.004 AMENDMENTS.
   The Fiscal Court shall review this chapter annually during the month of June
and may, by a two-thirds’ majority of the entire Fiscal Court, amend this
chapter at that time. The County Judge may at other times prepare and submit
amendments to this chapter for approval by the majority of the Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 30.015 COUNTY JUDGE EXECUTIVE.
   (A)   The County Judge shall be the chief executive and administrative
officer of the county and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
of an executive and administrative nature consistent with the Kentucky
Constitution, Kentucky Revised Statutes and the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The responsibilities and/or duties of the County Judge, as defined by
KRS 67.710, are as follows:
      (1)   Provide for the execution of all ordinances and resolutions of the
Fiscal Court, execute all contracts entered into by the Fiscal Court, and
provide for the execution of all laws by the state subject to enforcement by
him or her or by officers who are under his or her direction and supervision;
      (2)   Prepare and submit to the Fiscal Court for approval an
administrative code incorporating the details of administrative procedure for
the operation of the county and review such code in June of each year for
revisions or at the request of the Fiscal Court;
      (3)   Furnish the Fiscal Court with information concerning the operations
of the county departments, boards or commissions, necessary for the Fiscal
Court to exercise its powers or as requested by the Fiscal Court;
      (4)   Require all officials, elected or appointed, whose offices utilize
county funds, and all boards, special districts and commissions exclusive of
city governments and their agencies located within the county to make a
detailed annual financial report to the Fiscal Court concerning the business
and condition of their office, department, board, commission or special
districts;
      (5)   Consistent with procedures set forth in KRS Ch. 68, prepare and
submit to the Fiscal Court an annual budget and administer the provisions of
the budget when adopted by the Fiscal Court;
      (6)   Keep the Fiscal Court fully advised as to the financial condition
and needs of the county and make such other reports from time to time as
required by the Fiscal Court or as he or she deems necessary;
      (7)   Exercise with the approval of the Fiscal Court the authority to
appoint, supervise, suspend, and remove county personnel (unless otherwise
provided by state law); and
      (8)   With the approval of the Fiscal Court, make appointments to or
remove members from such boards, commissions and designated administrative
positions as the Fiscal Court, charter, law or ordinance may create. The
requirement of Fiscal Court approval must be designated as such in this chapter
or the county charter.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.016 ORGANIZATION/REORGANIZATION OF COUNTY DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.
   (A)   The County Judge may create, abolish or combine any county department
or agency or transfer a function from one department or agency to another;
provided that, the County Judge submits a written plan for the reorganization
to the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The reorganization plan shall state the need, how the reorganization
will meet the need, the services and functions to be expanded, abolished or
reduced as a result of the plan, the long and short term costs, and the plan’s
impact on existing and/or proposed personnel and services.
   (C)   The plan shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court for approval at a
meeting of the Fiscal Court. If not disapproved within 60 days, the plan shall
become effective. The plan shall be subject to public inspection at least 60
days prior to its effective date.
   (D)   The County Judge or the Fiscal Court may cause the records and
accounts of any administrative agency to be examined at any time.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.017 SPECIAL DISTRICTS.
   The County Judge may, with approval of the Fiscal Court, create any special
district or abolish or combine any special districts; provided, such district
was created solely by the county.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.018 COUNTY REPRESENTATION ON BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   The County Judge shall assure the representation of the county on all
boards, commissions, special districts, and joint city-county programs in which
county participation is required.
   (B)   Every independent board, commission, agency or special district which
requires participation by county government shall submit a copy of its by-laws
and a list of its governing body members to the County Judge and the Fiscal
Court within 30 days of the start of the county government term of office. The
independent board, commission, agency or special district shall submit a
revised copy of its by-laws within 30 days of their approval when amended. When
a vacancy exists, the list of governing body members should be submitted to the
County Judge no later than 30 days before the County Judge nominates a
candidate for the vacancy.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.019 APPOINTED POSITIONS.
   (A)   The County Judge may appoint an assistant to assist with the execution
of his or her administrative duties.
   (B)   The County Judge may appoint a Deputy County Judge Executive.
   (C)   The County Judge may appoint, subject to the approval of the Fiscal
Court, a budget officer to assist with the county fiscal affairs.
   (D)   The County Judge may appoint, subject to the approval of the Fiscal
Court, other personnel to assist with the county administrative and fiscal
duties.
   (E)   A member of the Fiscal Court may be appointed by a majority of the
Fiscal Court to temporarily assume the duties of the County Judge, where both
the County Judge and the Deputy County Judge Executive, if a Deputy County
Judge Executive has been appointed, are absent from the county during an
emergency, or where both are incapacitated due to sickness, injury or mental
incompetence.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.020 APPOINTMENT/REMOVAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL AND MEMBERS OF BOARDS
AND COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   The County Judge shall inform the Fiscal Court of any open position on
county boards or commissions, or in designated administrative positions.
   (B)   The County Judge shall appoint qualified individuals to administrative
positions and to boards and commissions, with the appointment subject to fiscal
court approval. The Fiscal Court shall act on such appointment within 30 days.
If the Fiscal Court does not act on the appointment within the 30-day period,
said appointment shall be deemed approved by the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   If the Fiscal Court rejects the appointment, the County Judge shall
submit an additional appointment(s) for each position.
   (D)   The appointment shall be filed and entered into by index into the
County Executive Order Book which shall be maintained in the office of the
County Judge.
   (E)   The County Fiscal Court may require an appointee to appear at a public
hearing for the purpose of questioning the nominee about matters relating to
the appointed position. The nominee shall be notified by mail if this is the
intention of the Fiscal Court. The Fiscal Court shall provide the nominee with
an opportunity to make a statement to the Fiscal Court concerning his or her
nomination and qualifications.
   (F)   No person shall be selected as a member of a board or commission or
for an administrative position if the person holds or is employed in an
incompatible position.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.021 PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES.
   Each county agency shall maintain the following records:
   (A)   A financial statement containing the total amount of appropriations
for the agency or department, the amount spent and encumbered by the department
or agency during the preceding month, the total amount encumbered during the
fiscal year and the amount of the total appropriation which is still available
for spending;
   (B)   Within 30 days after the close of each fiscal year, each
administrative agency and county department shall make a full report to the
County Judge and to the Fiscal Court. The report shall include a financial
statement and the general scope of the operation of the agency during the
preceding year;
   (C)   Each administrative agency, department and each county office, board
commission or other group requesting county budget funds shall submit a
detailed annual budget request to the County Judge by February 1 of each year,
which shall contain a brief explanation of the need for such funds;
   (D)   Each administrative agency of the county shall keep minutes of its
meetings to reflect on record its official actions; and
   (E)   The Judge Executive or Fiscal Court may cause the records and accounts
of any administrative agency or county department to be examined at any time.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
OPERATION OF FISCAL COURT
§ 30.035 MEETINGS.
   (A)   By December 31 of every calendar year, the County Judge Executive
shall establish the schedule meeting dates and times for two regular meetings
per month for the subsequent calendar year.
   (B)   All meetings of members of Fiscal Court at which any public business
is discussed or any action taken shall be open to the public in accordance with
the Kentucky Open Meetings Act (KRS Ch. 61).
   (C)   The County Judge may call a special meeting of the Fiscal Court for
the purpose of transacting any business over which the Fiscal Court has
jurisdiction.
   (D)   Whenever the County Judge is unable, or refuses to call a special
meeting, a majority of the Fiscal Court may call a special meeting.
   (E)   Special meetings shall be called and conducted in accordance with the
Kentucky Open Meetings Act (KRS Ch. 61). Specifically written notice of a
special meeting must be delivered personally or by mail to each member of
Fiscal Court and to each news service and each local radio or television
station which has on file with the Fiscal Court a written request to be
notified of special meetings. Notice of a special meeting must be delivered at
least 24 hours prior to the time of the meeting as specified in the notice. If
an emergency exists and 24-hour notice is not possible, then notice that is
reasonable under the circumstances and calculated to inform the public shall be
given the news media and the public.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.036 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The County Judge shall be the presiding officer of the Fiscal Court at
all regular and special meetings.
   (B)   If the County Judge is not present or able to preside, a majority of
the magistrates shall elect one of their members to preside.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.037 QUORUM.
   (A)   Not less than a majority of the members of the Fiscal Court shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
   (B)   No proposition shall be adopted, except with the concurrence of at
least a majority of the members present, with the exception that passage of an
ordinance requires a majority of the entire Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.038 DISTURBING MEETINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the Fiscal Court or to
behave in a disorderly manner at any such meeting.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this section may be prosecuted
under the appropriate provisions of the Kentucky Penal Code.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.039 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   At each regular meeting of the Fiscal Court, an agenda will be
presented prior to the meeting. This agenda shall be followed unless dispensed
with by a majority vote of the members presented.
   (B)   At each special or emergency meeting of the Fiscal Court, the agenda
shall be followed with no other topics presented or discussed during the
special or emergency meeting.
   (C)   The County Treasurer/Finance Officer in consultation with the Judge
Executive shall prepare an itemized list of all valid bills requiring Fiscal
Court approval.
   (D)   No bill shall be approved for payment unless contained in the itemized
list for the meeting.
   (E)   A majority of the Fiscal Court members may vote to forgo division (D)
above and approve payment of bills not included on the itemized list as long as
the bill is presented to Fiscal Court.
   (F)   The Fiscal Court may approve payment of the list of valid bills as a
whole unless there is an objection voiced to any specific item.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.040 MINUTES.
   (A)   The Clerk of the Fiscal Court shall attend all meetings of the Fiscal
Court and keep a full and complete record of its proceedings.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Fiscal Court shall keep an index of all Fiscal Court
records and make such index of all Fiscal Court records available for public
inspection in accordance with the Kentucky Open Records Act (KRS Ch. 61).
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.041 RULES OF ORDER.
   (A)   Except when in conflict with the foregoing provisions, Robert’s Rules
of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be
suspended at any time by consent of a majority of the members present at the
meeting.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.042 ORDINANCES, ORDERS AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   An ORDINANCE means an official written act of the Fiscal Court, the
effect of which is general and lasting in nature, which is enforceable within
the jurisdiction of the county or a lawful appropriation of money.
   (B)   All ordinances shall be introduced in writing; relate to one subject
only; and contain a title which expresses the subject; such as, “An Ordinance
relating to...”
   (C)   There shall be inserted between the title and the body of each county
ordinance an enacting clause written in the following manner: “Be It Ordained
by the Fiscal Court of the County of McLean Commonwealth of Kentucky...”
   (D)   County ordinances shall be amended by ordinance and only by setting
out in full each amended section.
   (E)   No county ordinance shall be passed until it has been read on two
separate days, unless an emergency is properly declared, but ordinances may be
read by title and a summary only.
   (F)   No County ordinance shall be passed until it has been published
pursuant to KRS Ch. 424. Prior to passage, ordinances may be published by
summary. Publication shall include the time, date and place at which the county
ordinance will be considered, and the place within the county where a copy of
the full text of the proposed ordinance is available for public inspection. If
consideration for passage is continued from the initial meeting to a subsequent
date, no further publication shall be necessary if at each meeting the time,
date and place of the next meeting are announced.
   (G)   All county ordinances and amendments shall be published after passage
and may be published in full or in summary form at the discretion of the Fiscal
Court.
   (H)   An order or resolution may be utilized for action by the Fiscal Court
where the action is specific in nature, not for an uncertain time period, and
which is enforceable within county boundaries. All orders or resolutions shall
be adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Fiscal Court present
provided there is a quorum present.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
§ 30.055 BUDGET PREPARATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Department heads shall prepare a budget request for all operational
appropriations with detailed explanations for any change from the prior year
budget by February 1 of each fiscal year, the County Treasurer shall obtain
budget proposals prepared by each county office or agency receiving funds from
the Fiscal Court, including the Jailer, which proposal will contain the amount
of funds requested and a brief explanation of the need for such funds. A budget
request form, may be obtained from the County Treasurer and shall be prepared
for each budgeted appropriation which is capital in nature and has a useful
life than greater of one year, or for any increase in normal operating
appropriations which exceed the prior year budget appropriation. The department
head is required to attach supporting documentation to the estimate cost used
to determine the amount to be budgeted.
   (B)   The County Treasurer shall prepare a report of anticipated revenue
from General Fund taxes and intergovernmental transfers from city, state and
federal government. By June 1 of each year, each county fee office shall submit
for Fiscal Court approval their yearly fees budget.
   (C)   The County Judge shall review the expenditures in each classification
of each fund for the preceding year and for the current year.
   (D)   The County Judge may obtain from the County Treasurer receipts for
actual expenditures made during the current fiscal year.
   (E)   An estimate shall be made of expenditures for the remainder of the
current year and of any surplus, by fund, which will remain.
   (F)   The County Judge shall obtain from the sheriff an annual settlement
showing county taxes collected, not later than October 1 of the current year
and by April 1 of each year of the county property assessment levels from the
County Property Valuation Administrator.
   (G)   The County Judge shall submit the completed proposed budget to the
Fiscal Court not later than May 1 of each fiscal year.
   (H)   The County Fiscal Court shall make comments, amendments and
tentatively adopt the proposed budget prior to the County Judge submitting the
budget to the state’s Local Finance Officer.
   (I)   Following action by the Fiscal Court, but not later than June 10, the
budget shall be submitted to the state’s Local Finance Officer for approval as
to form and classification.
   (J)   The county budget approved by the state’s Local Finance Officer shall
be submitted to Fiscal Court for adoption in the form of an ordinance not later
than July 1.
   (K)   The County Judge shall cause a copy of the proposed budget to be
posted in a conspicuous place in the courthouse near the front door not less
than seven days before final adoption.
      (1)   A summary of the county budget shall be published in accordance
with KRS Ch. 424 before final adoption by Fiscal Court.
      (2)   A summary of the county budget shall be published in accordance
with KRS Ch. 424 within 30 days after adoption by Fiscal Court.
      (3)   The County Judge shall maintain a copy of the budget as adopted,
together with any amendments adopted thereafter, for public inspection.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.056 BUDGET HEARING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Notice of the proposed use hearing on the CRA fund shall be
published not less than seven days in advance of the scheduled hearing.
      (2)   The County Judge shall conduct the proposed use hearing.
      (3)   Copies of the published notice and written minutes of the hearing
shall be maintained by the County Judge as public record.
   (B)   Prior to adoption of the county budget and submittal to the state’s
Local Finance Officer, the Fiscal Court shall conduct a budget hearing on the
entire county budget to show the relationship of LGEA fund uses to other funds
and uses. The date of the final budget hearing may be immediately prior to the
first reading of the budget ordinance.
   (C)   Notice of the budget hearing shall be published in at least one
newspaper of general circulation and other news media in the community shall be
advised. The preceding shall be as follows:
      (1)   Published notice of budget hearing not less than ten days prior to
the scheduled hearing;
      (2)   The Fiscal Court shall conduct the budget hearing; and
      (3)   Copies of the published notice and written minutes of the hearing
shall be maintained by the County Judge as public record.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.057 COUNTY TREASURER.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall receive and deposit all funds due the county.
   (B)   County funds shall be paid out only on order of Fiscal Court.
   (C)   No expenditures may be made in excess of revenues or for purposes
other than appropriated.
   (D)   No appropriations may be made which exceed adopted budget amounts.
   (E)   The Treasurer shall keep an appropriation expenditure ledger. The
ledger shall be a record of each budget appropriation, all expenditures from
the appropriation and each budget fund.
   (F)   The Treasurer shall maintain a general ledger in which all
transactions are entered, either in detail or in summary. Each fund (General
Fund, Road Fund, Local Government Economic Aid and the like) shall have a
complete balancing set of general ledger accounts. Control accounts shall be
established for the cash receipts register and the appropriation expenditure
ledger.
   (G)   The Treasurer shall maintain a cash receipt register containing
columns for total cash received, source of revenue and miscellaneous revenue
for each fund.
   (H)   The Treasurer shall maintain an appropriation expenditure ledger. This
ledger is a group of accounts supporting in detail the appropriation and
expenditure accounts of the general ledger. An account must be provided for
each appropriation made in the budget. The original appropriation and all
amendments and transfers authorized by order of the Fiscal Court shall be
entered. All expenditures shall be charged to an appropriation account.
   (I)   The Treasurer shall maintain a record of all warrants paid (except
payroll) in chronological order in a warrant distribution register. Columns
shall provide for date, payee, warrant number, appropriation expenditure
account number and amount. Separate columns shall provide for each fund so that
one register serves all funds.
   (J)   The Treasurer shall maintain a payroll authorization book, designed to
facilitate convenient preparation and certification of the payroll. One order
of the Fiscal Court may be made to authorize payment for all employees for more
than one payroll period.  Effective January 2024, payroll shall be conducted on
a 24-pay-periods-a-year basis.
   (K)   The Treasurer shall maintain an individual earnings record for each
employee, including gross earnings, deductions and net pay at the time
computed.
   (L)   The Treasurer shall maintain a notes payable register which provides
information on notes for temporary loans in anticipation of the current year’s
revenue, indicating the principal amount, interest rate, due date, fund and
other necessary details.
   (M)   The Treasurer shall maintain a bond register which records the history
and authorization of each bond issue, whether general obligation bonds, revenue
bonds or special levy bonds. A separate sheet shall be prepared for each issue.
   (N)   The County Treasurer shall also have the following duties:
      (1)   CDs -keep investment ledger, know when CDs mature, check interest
rates at each bank and reinvest if necessary, in order to earn the most
interest possible for the county;
      (2)   Deposit all checks and cash received, keep receipts ledger and post
to each individual revenue line item. This is done on a daily basis;
      (3)   Make sure each fund has a positive cash balance, transfer funds
when necessary from fund to fund;
      (4)   Complete and have budget amendments approved by Court and
Frankfort, plus prepare public notice for newspaper;
      (5)   Prepare and balance quarterly financial for Court approval and send
to Frankfort;
      (6)   Reconcile bank statements in each of the bank accounts;
      (7)   Prepare monthly financial statements and receipts page for each
fund for Fiscal Court;
      (8)   Prepare year-end financial statements by each line item. This is
presented to Court for Court approval and published in newspaper;
      (9)   Prepare payroll for Sheriff’s office, County Clerk’s office, County
Attorney’s office and all county employees, county officials and prepare FICA
and Federal deposits and reports for Sheriff’s office, county officials, county
employees, plus County Clerk’s office;
      (10)   State tax report for all above payroll;
      (11)   Prepare quarterly tax reports for all payrolls showing all FICA
and federal taxes and deposits made;
      (12)   Calculate and prepare all W-2s for county. Prepare quarterly
unemployment wage report on gross payroll of all employees;
      (13)   Budget preparation; attend budget workshop; advertise LGEA and
county road aid monies; advertise readings of proposed budget; determine
expenses, revenues from state, taxes and various other miscellaneous revenue;
prepare each line item as to future need and past expenses; and
      (14)   Send bills to businesses.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021 ; Ord. 23.230-1, passed 7-13-2023 )
§ 30.058 ACCOUNT BALANCE; EXPENDITURES; RECORDS.
   (A)   At the beginning of each fiscal year, the total amount of the
appropriation represents the free balance, or unused appropriation amount, for
each account.
   (B)   As expenditures are made during the year, the amount of the
expenditure is subtracted from the free balance to keep an accurate record of
the exact amount of the unused appropriation at any time.
   (C)   When any item is ordered, the free balance is encumbered in that
amount, although it may be considerable time before the actual expenditure
occurs.
   (D)   The County Judge shall write and sign all warrants directing the
Treasurer to make payments authorized by Fiscal Court. The County Judge shall
maintain a record of all warrants.
   (E)   At the close of each fiscal year, the County Judge will be responsible
for the preparation of records necessitated by the annual county audit and
audit of the County Judge’s office. The annual audits of the books, accounts
and papers of the county and the County Judge shall be conducted by the state’s
Auditor of Public Accounts or a certified public accountant.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.059 CLAIMS AGAINST COUNTY.
   (A)   The County Judge shall account for all claims against the county.
   (B)   All claims for payment from the county shall be filed in writing with
the County Judge.
   (C)   Each claim shall be recorded by date, receipt and purchase order
number and presented to the Fiscal Court at its next meeting.
   (D)   Each order of Fiscal Court approving a claim shall designate the
budget fund and classification from which the claim will be paid and each
warrant shall specify the budget fund and classification. Each order of the
Fiscal Court disapproving a claim shall state the reason for the disapproval of
the claim.
   (E)   The payroll for county officials and regular county employees,
recurring utility expenses and other recurring payments such as interest and
principal on bonded debt owed pursuant to approved contracts or other debt
instruments are hereby preapproved. Other recurring expenses may be preapproved
by the Fiscal Court upon authorization of the state’s Local Finance Officer.
   (F)   The depositor of county funds shall not honor any warrant on the
county unless it is signed by two of the following: the County Judge; the
County Treasurer; and/or the County Treasurer’s administrative assistant. In
the absence of the County Judge, the Deputy County Judge may sign.
   (G)   All offices collecting county or state monies shall remit said funds
to the County Treasurer for deposit in an interest drawing account until
settlement is made to the commonwealth and county. County fees shall be
remitted to the county no later than the tenth day of each month following the
month of collection unless a written waiver is given by Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
§ 30.070 GENERAL.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the county to maintain equal employment
opportunities for its labor force which will be in compliance with applicable
federal and state laws. The county is an at-will employer and is not subject to
merit system governance or regulations.
   (B)   As an equal opportunity employer, the county is committed to
nondiscrimination in hiring, promotion, discharge, pay, fringe benefits and
other aspects of employment, on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, age, national origin, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, genetic information or ancestry, or because the individual is a
smoker or non-smoker, as long as the person complies with any workplace policy
concerning smoking.
   (C)   Should you have any questions regarding this matter, please contact
your supervisor or the County Judge.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.071 JOB CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The County Judge will be responsible for the preparation of a
descriptive job classification plan for all non-elected positions.
   (B)   Each job classification shall be in writing and include:
      (1)   A concise, descriptive title;
      (2)   Description of the duties and responsibilities of each position in
each classification; and
      (3)   Minimum and preferred qualifications for each position.
   (C)   All positions in a single class shall be sufficiently alike to permit
use of a single title, description, qualifications and pay range.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.072 PERSONNEL POLICY OF CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICERS.
   (A)   Each elected official shall be responsible for the supervision of all
employees working within their particular office.
   (B)   Each elected official may develop a personnel policy for the operation
of their respective office.
   (C)   In the alternative, each elected official may choose to adopt the
personnel policies approved by Fiscal Court for the operation of their office
(§§ 30.070 through 30.103 of this chapter). Should the elected official elect
to utilize the personnel policies of the Fiscal Court, the elected official
shall designate same, in writing, and deliver same to the County Judge.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.073 APPLICANTS.
   (A)   (1)   Each applicant shall fill out and sign a standard written job
application form, and each application shall be kept on file for at least two
years. All applicants shall sign a release authorizing the county to download
and review the applicant’s Kentucky driving history record or the driving
history record for the state in which the applicant is licensed.
      (2)   Note: counties should review the commonwealth’s Department for
Libraries and Archives records retention schedule periodically. For
applications, where the applicant becomes a county employee, the application,
plus certain other employment records must be kept on file for 60 years.
   (B)   An applicant may be required to interview with the position’s
immediate supervisor prior to being hired.
   (C)   Upon recommendation of the department or office supervisor, the County
Judge shall make the selection, subject to approval of Fiscal Court, and notify
the applicant and supervisor in writing of the selection.
   (D)   Equal employment opportunity (EEO) information may be obtained from
the applicant, but shall not be used to exclude any person from employment.
   (E)   All part-time and temporary employees, funded through state or federal
programs, shall be recruited and selected in accordance with the appropriate
program guidelines.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.074 SUPERVISION.
   The County Judge is responsible for the supervision of county employees.
This responsibility may be delegated to supervisory employees.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.075 DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The County Judge shall discipline county employees by written
reprimand, suspension or discharge. All disciplinary actions require Fiscal
Court approval. Approval may come after the imposition of the discipline.
   (B)   Any employee who is suspended by the County Judge may appeal the
action to the Fiscal Court at any time within ten days after said action.
   (C)   The Fiscal Court shall conduct whatever investigation it believes the
appeal warrants and render a written decision within ten days after said appeal
has been made.
   (D)   Employees under other Constitutional office holders will be
reprimanded by that by that office holder.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.076 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   (A)   The County Judge shall develop and maintain an affirmative action plan
consisting of:
      (1)   A statement of policy;
      (2)   Methods of dissemination of the policy;
      (3)   Workforce analysis; and
      (4)   Goals and timetables.
   (B)   The County Judge is responsible for the implementation of the
affirmative action policy of the county.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.077 SCOPE OF COVERAGE.
   (A)   The following county employees are expressly exempted from coverage:
      (1)   The County Judge, Fiscal Court members, constables and all elected
officials;
      (2)   All members of boards and commissions of the county;
      (3)   Consultants, advisors and counsel rendering temporary professional
advice;
      (4)   Independent contractors;
      (5)   Employees of the coroner and all other elected officials, except
when said elected officials have specifically adopted these polices; and
      (6)   Employees made available to county by other agencies.
   (B)   All county employment positions not expressly exempted from coverage
by this section shall be subject to the provisions herein.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.078 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOCATION. The assignment of an individual position to specific class of
work based on the kind, difficulty, skill and responsibility of the work
performed.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. The person or body having authority under the laws of
the commonwealth to make appointments to positions. Unless otherwise specified,
the APPOINTING AUTHORITY shall be construed to mean the County Judge.
   APPOINTMENT. The act of appointing authority by which a position is filled.
   COUNTY EMPLOYEES. Those employees supervised by the County Judge and the
Treasurer.
   DEMOTION. Changing one employee from one class of work to a different class
of at a lower pay grade.
   DISMISSAL. The termination of an employee.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. Any elected official holding one of the county
constitutional offices other than the County Judge.
   LAYOFFS. The involuntary separation of an employee from his or her position
and class due to a reduction in work force.
   PERFORMANCE RATING. An appraisal or evaluation of an employee’s work
performance.
   POSITION. An individual job within the county’s personnel system.
   POSITION DESCRIPTION. A detailed written description of the specified duties
assigned to and performed by a particular employee.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. A working test normally established as 90 days, during
which an employee is required to demonstrate by actual performance, his or her
fitness to perform the duties of the position to which appointed. Upon
justification to the appointing authority and written notification to the
employee involved, a department head may extend the PROBATIONARY PERIOD beyond
the three full calendar months. The PROBATIONARY PERIOD does not apply to
transfers from another department.
   RESIGNATION. The voluntary termination of employment by an employee.
   RETIREMENT. The termination of employment and transfer to retired status of
an employee.
   TERMINATION. The separation of an employee from the county personnel system
by resignation, retirement, layoff, dismissal or death.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.079 CLASSIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   All employees of the county workforce shall be classified as full-
time, part-time seasonal or temporary.
      (1)   Full-time employee: an employee who works 40 hours per week on a
regular scheduled basis. These employees are eligible for the county’s benefit
package, subject to the terms, conditions and limitations of each benefit
program as set forth herein.
      (2)   Part-time employee: an employee who works less than 40 hours per
week, but on a regularly scheduled basis.
      (3)   Part-time PRN employees: an employee who works in a position that
is not considered to be of temporary nature but does not have regularly
scheduled hours and is only on an as needed basis. Hours of work may on
occasion exceed a 40-hour work week under extraordinary circumstance, but will
usually be less than 24 hours per week, which a cap of 96 hours monthly.
      (4)   Seasonal employee: temporary positions which coincide in duration
with a particular season or seasons of the year and that may recur regularly
from year to year, in which case the period of time shall not exceed nine
months in any event.
      (5)   Temporary employee: are positions of employment with a
participating agency for a period of time not to exceed 12 months and not
renewable (full or part time).
   (B)   (1)   Except for emergency medical service employees, each employee
hired by the Fiscal Court shall be placed on probation for a period of at least
three months. Due to the manner in which EMS employees are scheduled to work,
all EMS hires shall be subject to a six-month probationary period. During this
period of probation, the employee shall be oriented thoroughly as to the
responsibilities of the job. The employee may be dismissed at any time without
right of appeal, during the probation period. At the end of the designated
probationary period, the employee shall be reevaluated by his or her department
head or supervisor. The evaluation will measure the employee’s job performance,
attitude and attendance. Once the evaluation is completed a recommendation will
be made to the Fiscal Court to either place the employee on a regular status of
full-time or part-time employee, to extend probation or to terminate said
probationary employee.
      (2)   Note: employees receive CERS benefits when averaging 100 hours per
month over a one- year period. The period is either a fiscal or calendar year,
and is calculated by both methods with the employee qualifying by either
method.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.080 HOURS OF WORK.
   (A)   County offices shall be open during the following hours: 8:00 a.m. to
4:30 p.m. and a 30- minute lunch break, with the exception of the Road
Department, Sheriff’s office, emergency medical service, transfer site and
animal control, which hours vary from time to time.
   (B)   An employee’s work hours shall be assigned by the department head,
direct supervisor or elected official.
   (C)   Overtime work shall be approved in advance by the County Judge or the
supervisor. In exceptional circumstances, as determined by the County Judge,
the County Judge may approve overtime work after the overtime work has
occurred. Failure to abide by this overtime policy may result in disciplinary
action to the employee.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.081 PERSONNEL, EMPLOYEE RECORDS.
   (A)   Beginning the first day of employment, all new employees shall report
to an office designated by the County Judge to supply any information needed to
complete personnel records, execute payroll withholding authorization and
enroll in the employee benefit program.
   (B)   It shall be the obligation of the employee to maintain current
information by notifying the Treasurer of all changes in personal or family
status, home address, telephone number or any other changes which would affect
payroll withholding or employee benefits.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.082 PERSONAL CONDUCT.
   Images presented and statements made by all employees of the county can
affect the entire organization; therefore, employees are expected to be
courteous and appropriately dressed at all times.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.083 SAFETY.
   The health and safety of all county employees is of major importance. All
employees shall report all hazardous conditions in their work area at once to
their immediate supervisor. The supervisor shall document in writing the
hazardous condition. All injuries should be reported immediately to the
supervisor and within 24 hours to the County Judge’s office.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.084 APPLICANTS; HIRING; CREDENTIALS; COLLECTION AND APPOINTMENT; METHODS
OF FILLING VACANCIES; AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Credentials. If it should come to the attention of the County Judge
that an employee was hired on the basis of false credentials, said employee
will be subject to immediate demotion or dismissal. All employees shall be a
high school graduate or GED recipient, unless otherwise approved by the Fiscal
Court prior to FY 2021.
   (B)   Selection and appointment.
      (1)   Each applicant shall fill out and sign a written job application
and each application shall be kept for at least two years.
      (2)   The supervising official, along with the Judge-Executive, shall
select job candidates to be submitted to Fiscal Court for approval. Fiscal
Court shall approve all salaries or appropriate salary schedules.
      (3)   All employees whose positions are funded through state or federal
programs shall be recruited and selected in accordance with the appropriate
program guidelines.
   (C)   Methods of filling vacancies. The Judge Executive shall make
nominations for all vacant county positions in consultations with the
department or office supervisor and subject to the approval of the Fiscal
Court. The County Judge may transfer or promote an existing employee into a
vacant position where that employee meets all qualifications for that position.
The County Judge is not mandated to fill open positions with internal
candidates. The County Judge may fill vacant positions from applications
already on hand or by any means which does not violate state law. The county is
not required to advertise any employment vacancies prior to filling a position.
   (D)   Recruitment, evaluation and certification. The County Judge shall be
responsible for:
      (1)   Accepting complete application forms from the applicants;
      (2)   Conducting interviews, reference checks and evaluating training,
experience and credentials ; and
      (3)   Overseeing the Employee Career Tier System Applications (Exhibit
J).
   (E)   Announcements of vacancies.
      (1)   Notice of employment opportunity and necessary examinations, if
any, may be publicized at the County Judge’s discretion.
      (2)   Such notices shall:
         (a)   List the vacant position(s);
         (b)   Specify for each position its position title, nature of work to
be performed and qualifications for employment in the position; and
         (c)   Tell when and where to file applications for employment in the
position.
   (F)   Application form.
      (1)   All applicants shall utilize the county application form. Copy of
which is attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein. The applicant
shall provide:
         (a)   Information about the applicant’s training, experience and
character; and
         (b)   Whatever additional information the County Judge deems pertinent
to an evaluation of the applicant’s fitness for the position for which he
applies.
      (2)   The County Judge shall review each application to ascertain the
applicant’s qualifications for the position.
   (G)   Appointments.
      (1)   The qualifications of an applicant for a position shall be
ascertained on the basis of one or more of the following:
         (a)   Job-related performance (internal candidates);
         (b)   Information provided on the application;
         (c)   Interview(s);
         (d)   References; and
         (e)   Other appropriate means.
      (2)   Where a declaration of emergency has been declared in accordance
with KRS Ch. 39B, the County Judge may hire employees on a temporary basis for
emergency purposes without Fiscal Court approval. No employee may start work
prior to Fiscal Court approval being granted, except in accordance with KRS Ch.
39B.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021 ; Ord. passed 7-13-2022; Ord. 23.230-1, passed
7-13-2023 )
§ 30.085 TRANSFERS.
   (A)   Any full-time employee may request a transfer from one position to
another position; provided that, position is vacant and one for which the
employee possesses the qualifications.
   (B)   Any such transfer must be approved by the Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.086 PROMOTIONS.
   (A)   An employee may be promoted from one position to another if the
employee has the qualifications for the higher position. These qualifications
shall be ascertained on the basis of job related information, interview and
evaluations of performance, training and experience. The same procedures as
those authorized for ascertaining his qualifications for initial appointment to
a position shall be followed.
   (B)   In the filling of a vacancy in a position above the entrance level,
preference may be given to promotion of present employees. If the County Judge
deems it in the best interest, the County Judge may fill the position by
appointment of a person from outside the current workforce.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.087 ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   The standard work week for county employees shall be 40 hours per
week, unless otherwise prescribed by the Fiscal Court. Specific departmental
work schedules shall be prescribed by department heads, with the approval of
the County Judge. Work schedules for seasonal, temporary and part-time
employees shall be specified by the County Judge according to the needs of the
county and the rules and schedule stipulated for regular employees.
   (B)   Employees shall be at their places of work in accordance with
prescribed schedules. The supervisor shall maintain daily attendance records of
employees under the supervisor’s direction.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.088 HOLIDAYS, VACATIONS AND OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Holidays.
      (1)   The Fiscal Court shall adopt a holiday schedule. The current
holiday schedule is:
         (a)   December 31 and New Year’s Day;
         (b)   Martin Luther King, Jr., Day;
         (c)   Good Friday (one-half day);
         (d)   Memorial Day;
         (e)   Independence Day;
         (f)   Labor Day;
         (g)   Veteran’s Day;
         (h)   Thanksgiving Day, plus the following day;
         (i)   Christmas Day, plus one day as directed by the Fiscal Court; and
         (j)   Election day, when there is a Presidential election.
      (2)   When a holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Fiscal Court may
designate the days to be observed as a holiday (usually in accordance with the
state given dates).
      (3)   Employees that are required to work on any holiday will receive a
vacation day that may be utilized in accordance with division (B) below. An
employee in the first year of service may utilize the vacation day prior to
achieving one year of service. All vacation days earned under this section must
be utilized within three months from the date the vacation day was earned. In
the event the employee works less than four hours on the holiday, the employee
will only receive a half of a day of vacation time. In the event that the
employee works four hours or greater, than in that event, the employee will
receive one full day of vacation.
      (4)   The Departments working five day/seven and one-half hour work weeks
will received seven and one-half hours pay for each adopted holiday. The
Departments working five day/eight hour work weeks will receive eight hours’
pay for each adopted holiday. At no time shall a holiday be worth more than
seven and one-half hours if it results in the employee’s time exceeding 37 and
one-half hours for Departments working five day/seven and one-half hour work
weeks. At no time shall a holiday be worth more than eight hours if it results
in the employee’s time exceeding 40 hours for Departments working five day/
eight hour work weeks.
      (5)   In order to receive holiday pay, an employee must work his, her or
their last scheduled day prior to and his, her or their first scheduled day
after said holiday, unless previously approved by both supervisor and Judge
Executive.
      (6)   Part-time employees shall receive one and one-half their regular
rate of pay for working holidays.
      (7)   Seasonal and temporary employees do not receive holiday pay. If the
employee works over 40 hours during the week that has a holiday or works over
40 hours in any given week, then hours over 40 will be paid at time and one
half. Supervisor’s department heads or elected officials may schedule a full-
time regular employee or employee may request to switch their holiday off with
another day within the same work week. The request must occur prior to the
holiday and should not cause a scheduling conflict for other employees. All
employees understand that by working the actual holiday they will not receive
any additional pay but will be taking a different day off within that week.
Time sheets must reflect this switch with the employee, supervisor, department
head or elected official’s signature beside the days switched.
   (B)   Vacation.
      (1)   Full-time employees may apply for vacation leave after one year of
service.
      (2)   All regular full-time employees with one year of service shall be
entitled to five working days’ (or 40 working hours’) vacation leave. All
regular full-time employees with two years of service shall be entitled to ten
working days’ vacation leave. All regular full-time employees with three to six
years of service shall receive one additional days’ vacation leave for each
additional year of service. All regular full-time employees with seven years of
service or more shall be entitled to 15 working days’ vacation leave.
Accumulated vacation leave must be taken within  730  days of employment
anniversary date unless there is special circumstances that exist. The employee
must notify his, her or their supervisor one week in advance before taking his,
her or their vacation time. Furthermore, all full-time employees shall be
afforded a paid vacation day during the month of their birth, which day must
also be scheduled with their supervisor one week in advance before taking from
vacation days. In no event shall any employee be allowed to “cash-in” or
receive a lump sum payment for any unused vacation leave due to his or her
resignation, dismissal or retirement.
      (3)   Part-time, seasonal and temporary employees shall not be eligible
to earn vacation leave.
      (4)   No employee shall be permitted to take vacation leave that has not
been earned. Vacation pay shall be at the current rate of salary.
      (5)   Vacation days should be scheduled on anticipated “slack” time in a
manner that does not interfere with the functions and services of the office.
No employee shall take more than ten consecutive working days’ vacation leave
without prior approval from their supervisor. The supervisor shall review all
vacation leave requests and shall forward the request and the supervisor’s
recommendation to the County Judge. Approval by the County Judge is mandatory.
      (6)   The County Judge’s office or its designee shall keep records of
vacation leave for each individual employee, with the exception of the office
of the County Clerk, which office shall keep its own vacation, sick and comp-
time records.
      (7)   All employees may take leave without pay if the leave is approved
by the County Judge.
      (8)   Absences on account of sickness, injury or disability in excess of
that authorized for such purposes may, at the request of the employee and with
the approval of the County Judge, be charged to vacation leave credit.
      (9)   Vacation request form must be filled out and approved by the Judge
Executive or designee before vacation time can be used.
   (C)   Sick leave.
      (1)   Accumulation of sick leave.
         (a)   Sick leave is a benefit, not a right. Paid sick leave entitles
employees to time off to recuperate from illness or accident, while retaining
their employment rights and pay for the time off. Its main purpose is to
provide income for employees absent a relatively short time because of personal
illness or injury.
         (b)   Full-time employees shall be eligible to accrue sick leave at
the rate of one day per month accruing at the end of each month for each full
month worked. As an example, a newly hired full- time employee shall accrue
eight hours of sick time on the thirtieth day of his, her or their employment,
which they can use immediately in the preceding month. Part-time, seasonal and
temporary employees are not eligible for sick leave.
         (c)   Sick leave may be accumulated from year to year up to 60 days.
New hires after FY 2021 will be limited to 50 days max.
      (2)   Use of sick leave.
         (a)   Personal illness, injury or visits to medical provider; and
         (b)   Illness or injury in the immediate family spouse, children,
parents or relatives living in the employee’s home).
      (3)   Consecutive days. A county official may allow three consecutive
days of sick leave without a medical provider’s excuse, but any days over a
three-day period must be accompanied by a medical provider’s ‘return to work’
note unless otherwise authorized by the department head.
      (4)   Unused time. Upon separation from employment by the county for any
reason (i.e., termination, resignation or retirement) employees shall not be
compensated for any unused sick time.
      (5)   Reporting sick leave.
         (a)   To be paid sick leave, the employee has the responsibility to
report his, her or their inability to be on the job. Failure to notify the
supervisor prior to the established work time may result in loss of pay for
that day and may result in disciplinary action against the employee. If
notification is not possible prior to the start of the established work time,
the employee shall notify the supervisor as soon as is possible.
         (b)   Sick leave time used will be subtracted on a hour-for-hour
basis.
         (c)   Upon return to work the employee shall file a notice of leave
form stating the reasons for the absence, unless the employee filed the form
prior to taking sick leave. The form must be approved by the supervisor before
being charged to sick leave. Individual records of all sick leave credit shall
be maintained by the county.
         (d)   The county may require the employee to submit a ‘return to work’
note from a medical provider when the absence occurs before or after a holiday
or other scheduled day off or when an employee has a record of repetitious
usage of short amounts of sick leave over an extended time period. The employee
may be required to take a medical examination on returning from sick leave or
on such occasions that it is in the best interest of the county. The medical
examination shall be given by a physician designated by the county.
         (e)   False or fraudulent use of sick leave shall be cause for
disciplinary action, up to, and including, dismissal.
      (6)   Sick leave donation program.
         (a)   Eligibility.
            1.   Both recipients and donors must be current employees of the
county.
            2.   A donor may not donate an amount of sick leave which would
cause his or her sick leave balance to go below 120 hours.
            3.   An employee becomes eligible to receive donated sick leave at
the point in time when all four of the criteria below are met:
               a.   The employee or member of his or her immediate family
suffers from a “medically certified” illness, injury, impairment or physical or
mental condition which has caused, or is likely to cause, the employee to go on
leave for at least ten consecutive working days;
               b.   The employee’s need for absence is certified by a licensed
practicing physician;
               c.   The employee has exhausted all of his or her available paid
leave: and
               d.   The employee has complied with this policy governing the
use of sick leave.
Participation in the sick leave sharing program is at the discretion of the
employee and requires approval of the County Judge or elected official.
         (b)   Guidelines on sick leave sharing. In the event of a prolonged or
catastrophic illness or injury, or an extended absence due to illness of a
family member, eligible employees who accrue sick leave and who have exhausted
their leave balances may have sick leave donated to them by other eligible
county employees. The forms needed to receive or donate leave may be obtained
from the County Judge’s or the elected official’s office. Listed below is the
chronological flow of actions and documents:
            1.   Recipient completes application and submits it along with the
physician’s certification to the Treasurer. The Treasurer collects all
information, and transmits the appropriate documents to the County Judge or
elected official;
            2.   The application is reviewed to ensure that the certification
of the physician is complete and the form is correctly filled out. The
Treasurer shall verify that the employee will exhaust his or her leave during
the projected absence. The employee does not have to have exhausted his or her
leave before he or she submits the application. The employee also does not have
to have been off for ten days in order to apply, but must have a situation
where it is likely to cause an absence for at least ten consecutive days. A
file will be created for the recipient by the Treasurer. All medical
information must be kept in a locked file separate from the personnel files;
            3.   Donor(s) completes donation form and submits to the Treasurer
or the elected official’s assistant. The Treasurer verifies the donor’s leave
balance for eligibility. After the form is signed by the appointing authority,
the donor’s sick leave balance is reduced by the hours donated;
            4.   Receive and file forms. The Treasurer will stamp all donation
forms with a received date and file the forms in the file for the appropriate
recipient;
            5.   Prepare and process payrolls. Upon certification of
eligibility, all donated leave is to be added to recipient’s sick leave
balance. As the employee utilizes leave for the sick leave sharing qualifying
condition, the employee will be paid as usual, reporting sick leave used;
            6.   Sequence of leave usage. Transfer all leave donated to the
recipient at the time of donation, not on a pay period basis, up to the amount
requested. As the recipient accrues leave, the recipient’s leave time must be
used first. The recipient can then use time donated to him or her. The
recipient uses donated leave in the order in which it is received;
            7.   Recipient can retain leave after return to work. The recipient
may retain the donated leave upon return to work only if the recipient
documents that leave will be needed for continuing treatment relating to the
condition which caused the individual’s absence. For example, if the employee
was absent due to surgery to remove a malignant tumor and returns to work, but
will require periodic absences for radiation therapy, the excess leave may be
retained for that purpose. However, the employee may not retain the excess
leave to be used for any unrelated condition; and
            8.   Sequence of restoring unused leave to donors. When the
recipient returns to work and the donated leave is no longer needed for the
qualifying condition, excess leave shall be returned to donors in reverse order
of donation (last donor’s leave is returned first). If the donor has left
employment, the returned hours should be credited to the inactive record for
restoration if the employee is rehired.
   (D)   Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
      (1)   General. FMLA, being 29 U.S.C. §§ 2611 et seq., provides
entitlement for up to 12 weeks of job protected, unpaid leave, during any 12-
month period for the following reasons:
         (a)   The birth of a son/daughter or care for newborn child;
         (b)   The placement of a son/daughter for adoption or foster care;
         (c)   Care for the employee’s spouse, son/daughter or parent with a
serious health condition; and
         (d)   The employee’s own serious health condition.
      (2)   Qualifying exigency leave. The FMLA requires that employers provide
employees up to 12 weeks of leave in a 12-month period to tend to any
“exigency” resulting from a service member’s call to duty. The new FMLA
regulations clarify that exigency leave may be taken by eligible employees
(consisting of not only a spouse, son, daughter or parent, but also “next of
kin” - the next nearest blood relative) while their spouse, son, daughter or
parent is on active duty or call to active duty status in the National Guard or
Reserves, or if the family member is a retired member of the regular Armed
Forces or the Reserves. An employee whose family member is on active duty or
call to active duty for the regular Armed Forces does not qualify for this
leave. Qualifying exigencies include short-notice deployment, military events
and related activities, childcare and school activities, financial and legal
arrangements, counseling, rest and recuperation, post-deployment activities and
additional activities.
      (3)   Military caregiver leave. An eligible employee is entitled to 26
work weeks of leave in a 12-month period to care for a covered service member
in the Armed Forces (including the National Guard and Reserves) who becomes ill
or injured as a result of his or her military service. The 12-month period
begins when the employee starts using her or his leave. This leave may only be
taken once per injury, but may be taken again if there are additional injuries.
More than one family member may qualify for the leave.
      (4)   Maintenance of benefits. If the employee was qualified for health
insurance benefits when leave begins, the employer shall maintain health
benefits for the employee in the same manner during periods of FMLA leave as if
the employee continued to work.
      (5)   Unused sick leave. However, the employee must exhaust all
accumulated sick leave and annual leave time prior to receiving unpaid FMLA
leave.
      (6)   Employee contribution. Upon employee being granted FMLA leave, the
employee must continue to pay his or her own employee contribution to the
health insurance plan ordinarily required of an employee. The employer will
continue to pay the contribution ordinarily paid by the employer under the
current health insurance plan. If the employee contribution payment is not paid
by the employee, in such event, the employer may terminate the health insurance
benefits of the employee during FMLA leave. However, the employee may exercise
his, her or their rights for COBRA benefits.
      (7)   Commencement of benefits. In order to qualify for FMLA benefits,
the employee must have worked for the employer for at least 12 months prior to
the commencement of benefits and worked at least 1,250 hours in the prior year.
The 12-month period need not be consecutive. Employment prior to a break in
service of more than seven years need not be counted unless the break in
service was occasioned by the fulfillment of National Guard or Reserve military
service obligations.
      (8)   Entitlement. Upon the employer granting FMLA leave, the employee
receives an entitlement of up to 12 weeks of job protected unpaid leave during
any 12-month period. The fixed 12 month “leave year” shall commence January 1
of each year and conclude on December 31 of each year.
      (9)   Written notice. When the need for leave is foreseeable, the
employee must give the employer at least 30 days’ written notice of his or her
intent to receive FMLA leave benefits. If the leave is not foreseeable, the
employee must provide written notice as soon as possible. The employer reserves
the right to require medical certification of a serious health condition for
the employee’s health or a member of his or her family, as defined herein. The
employer may also require periodic written medical reports during the leave of
the employee’s health status, health status of his or her family as defined
herein, as well as “fitness-for-duty” certification upon return to work from a
health care provider.
      (10)   Definition. SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION means an illness, impairment,
injury or physical/mental condition that involves either:
         (a)   Any period of incapacity or treatment connected with inpatient
care in a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility, and any
period of incapacity or subsequent treatment in connection with such impatient
care; or
         (b)   Continuing treatment by a health care provider which includes
any period of incapacity that prevents the employee or family member from
working, attending school or any other regular daily activity.
      (11)   Donated sick leave. Any employee desiring to benefit from “donated
sick leave” must be granted same and utilize same prior to applying for leave
without pay under FMLA. Upon FMLA leave being granted to the employee, the
employee may not participate in the donated sick leave plan until the employee
has returned to work on a regular paid basis with a letter from a health care
provider stating that the employee is fit for duty.
      (12)   Authorization. Upon the employer granting leave without pay under
FMLA, as provided for herein, the County Judge or elected official shall
authorize same in writing and provide the employee and the county treasurer a
copy of the written approval. All applications for leave without pay and all
approvals of same, not in writing, shall disqualify the employee from health
benefits otherwise provided herein.
   (E)   Funeral (bereavement) leave.
      (1)   When an employee’s immediate family member dies, the Fiscal Court
allows up to three days off with pay. IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER, as defined for
bereavement, is defined as parents, grandparents, spouse, brothers, sisters,
children, grandchildren, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, parent or step-parent of
spouse, step-parent, step-child, foster parent or foster child.
      (2)   When an employee’s extended family member dies, the Fiscal Court
allows up to eight hours off with pay for the day of the funeral. If the
funeral service falls on a weekend or holiday, the employee shall be allowed to
take the eight hours off with pay on the day preceding or the day following the
weekend or holiday. No additional compensation will be provided if the employee
does not take the funeral (bereavement) leave. EXTENDED FAMILY MEMBER is
defined as brother-in-law, sister-in-law, niece, nephew, grandparent of spouse,
great grandparent or aunt or uncle of employee or employee’s spouse.
      (3)   In the event an employee desires to extend leave beyond the days
set out above due to a death in the immediate or extended family, the employee
may use sick leave, vacation leave or time without pay upon receiving approval
from the Judge-Executive.
      (4)   Supervisors should immediately notify the Judge-Executive when one
of the employees in his or her department has a death in their family. The
Fiscal Court will send a bereavement gift not to exceed $75 when an employee’s
immediate family member passes away. This condolence will be sent through the
Fiscal Court secretary’s office and not through the individual department.
   (F)   Leave without pay.
      (1)   In addition to authorized leave referenced above, the County Judge
or elected official may authorize an employee to be absent, without pay, for
personal reasons.
      (2)   Leave of absence without pay will not be granted until all vacation
leave has been exhausted.
      (3)   Request for leave for personal reasons shall be submitted in
writing to the County Judge or elected official, stating reasons for the
request, the date the leave shall begin and the probable date of return.
      (4)   Leave without pay may be revoked at any time upon 48 hours’ notice
to the employee.
   (G)   Maternity leave/paternity leave.
      (1)   The County Judge or elected official may grant maternity leave and
paternity leave for full-time permanent employees with temporary disability due
to pregnancy, childbirth, adoption or any impairment thereof, and miscarriage
for a period not to exceed six weeks. Additional leave time may be granted.
      (2)   An employee granted maternity leave or paternity leave shall use
any accrued sick leave and vacation time with the remaining periods as time off
without pay.
      (3)   The employee must notify the County Judge or elected official as
far as possible in advance of the employee’s intention to request maternity
leave or paternity leave, including approximate dates, in order to allow the
County Judge or elected official time to prepare for any staff adjustments.
   (H)   Military leave. Pursuant to KRS 61.394 and 61.396, all employees of
the county, or of any department or agency thereof, who are members of the
National Guard or of any reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United
States, or of the reserve corps of the United States Public Health Service,
shall be entitled to leave of absence from their respective duties, without
loss of time, pay, regular leave, impairment of efficiency rating, or of any
other rights or benefits to which they are entitled, while in the performance
of duty or training in the service of the state or of the United States under
competent orders as specified in this section. In any one federal fiscal year,
officers or employees, while on military leave, shall be paid their salaries or
compensations for a period or periods not exceeding 21 calendar days. Any
unused military leave in a federal fiscal year shall be carried over to the
next year. Any unused military leave shall expire two years after it has
accrued. The employee shall give the county two weeks’ notice prior to the
scheduled leave if time permits.
   (I)   Civil leave; jury duty.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the order requiring the employee to report for jury
duty, the employee must show the order to his, her or their supervisor. There
will be no deduction from accumulated leave.
      (2)   The employee will be allowed to keep pay received for serving on a
jury without deduction from full regular salary.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021; Ord. 21-230-4, passed 12-9-2021 ; Ord. passed
7-13-2022; Ord. passed 7-13-2022; Ord. 23.230-1, passed 7-13-2023 )
§ 30.089 COURT APPEARANCES.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the order requiring the employee to make a court
appearance, the employee shall make arrangements with the employee’s supervisor
to comply with the order.
   (B)   If appearing in an official capacity in connection with the county,
the employee’s court time is considered working time and no charge is made
against leave time.
   (C)   If the employee is involved in a personal case, either as plaintiff,
defendant or as a witness in a suit not resulting from his or her duties with
the county, he or she may be granted leave, but the time off he or she takes
must be charged to his or her accrued vacation time, to leave of absence
without pay or the employee may be allowed to work alternative hours if
approved by the supervisor and County Judge, and if the alternative hours are
within the same week as the needed leave.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.090 OVERTIME AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The county’s work week begins Sunday and concludes on Saturday.
   (B)   Overtime will be authorized by documented approval by the Judge-
Executive. The supervisor or office holder shall not require overtime of their
employees, except in extraordinary situations. When emergency conditions such
as snow, storms or flooding exist in the county and the County Road Department
Supervisor and the County Judge Executive decide to work during these emergency
conditions, the County Road Department employees working during these
conditions will be considered as having worked overtime hours. These employees
are not required to work 40 hours in any work week to be eligible for such
emergency overtime hours.
   (C)   (1)   The salary of supervisors is “preadjusted” to anticipate
“overtime compensation during times of extraordinary or emergency situations
such as snow removal, storms and things of a similar nature. Therefore,
supervisors shall not be entitled to “overtime compensation” in addition to
their regular salary.
      (2)   A county employee who is authorized to work one or more hours in
excess of the prescribed hours per week may be granted compensatory leave on an
hour-for-hour basis. Upon the written request by a county employee, made freely
and without coercion, pressure or suggestion by the employer, and upon a
written agreement reached between the employer and the county employee before
the performance of the work, a county employee who is not exempt from the
provisions of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq.,
may be granted compensatory time in lieu of overtime pay, at the rate of not
less than one and one-half hours for each hour the county employee is
authorized to work in excess of 40 hours in a work week.
      (3)   As of 7-26-2019, a county employee engaged in work in excess of 37
and one-half hours, may accrue not more than 80 hours of compensatory time. A
county employee who has accrued 80 hours of compensatory time off, shall for
additional overtime hours of work, be paid overtime compensation.
      (4)   A county employee who has accrued compensatory time off, and who
has requested the use of compensatory time, shall be permitted to use the
compensatory time within a reasonable period after making the request if the
use of the compensatory time does not unduly disrupt the operations of the
county. Mere inconvenience to the county shall not constitute a sufficient
basis for denial of a county employee’s request for compensatory time off. No
salaried employee is eligible for comp time.
      (5)   Upon a county employee’s termination of employment, all unused
accrued compensatory time shall be paid at a rate of compensation not less
than:
         (a)   The average regular rate received by the county employee during
the last three years of the county employee’s employment; or
         (b)   The final regular rate received by the county, whichever is
higher.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021 ; Ord. passed 7-13-2022 )
§ 30.091 COUNTY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Anyone driving a county vehicle will be responsible for that vehicle
in case of an accident. A breathalyzer test, urinalysis or other testing, or
any combination of the three, will be required, with refusal resulting in
automatic dismissal of the county employee. Anyone driving a county vehicle
must maintain a valid operator’s license. Any accident, traffic citation or
driving arrest of an employee in a county vehicle must be reported immediately
to the supervisor or office holder.
   (B)   Any employee found to be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or
unauthorized drugs or controlled substances while operating a county vehicle or
equipment shall be the subject of immediate dismissal from employment.
   (C)   (1)   Any employee or volunteer authorized to use a county vehicle as
a part of his or her job duties including employees and volunteers that are on
call on a 24-hour basis and take a county vehicle home so they can respond for
emergency purposes, must adhere to the following requirements.
         (a)   Non employees and non-business passengers (i.e., family and
friends) are prohibited from riding in county vehicles.
         (b)   County vehicles are to be used only for county purposes. Any
employee found using a county vehicle for personal use shall be suspended for
not less than three days without pay. Any volunteer found using a county
vehicle for personal use shall be given one written notice warning on official
lettterhead. In the event that a second violation occurs, the volunteer will
then lose all rights and access to county vehicles.
         (c)   Employees and volunteers must use due diligence to drive safely
and to maintain the security of the vehicle and its contents. Employees and
volunteers are also responsible for any driving infractions or fines as a
result of the driving.
         (d)   Employees and volunteers must report any accident, theft or
malicious damage involving their county vehicle to their department head and
the Judge Executive, regardless of the extent of damage or lack of inquiries.
      (2)   Such reports must be made as soon as possible, but no later than 48
hours after the incident. Employees and volunteers are expected to cooperate
fully with authorities in the event of an accident. However, employees and
volunteers should make no voluntary statement other than a reply to questions
or investigating officers.
   (D)   County employees/departments shall keep accurate record of detailed
mileage logs of trips and usage of county vehicles. Electronic mileage logs may
be used at the discretion of Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021; Ord. 21-230-4, passed 12-9-2021)
§ 30.092 HEALTH INSURANCE.
   All full-time employees (which for purposes of this section only shall be
any employee who works a regular schedule of 100 hours per month pursuant to
the Affordable Care Act, being Pub. L. 111-148, 124 Stat. 119 et seq.) of the
county shall be provided with a single coverage health insurance plan as
provided by the Fiscal Court and subject to any cost sharing arrangement
adopted by the Fiscal Court. Insurance for a full-time employee or elected
official begins on the first day of a calendar month following one full month
of employment or subject to terms and conditions of the county’s elected group
health insurance policy in effect at the occasion of the employee’s hire date.
If the employee desires to have family plan coverage, the employee will be
required to pay the difference.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.093 RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
   The county shall conduct the retirement program in accordance with the
guidelines and directives of the County Employees Retirement System (CERS).
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.094 TRAINING AND CAREER DEVELOPMENT.
   The County Judge may permit or direct the attendance of employees at
meetings, conferences, workshops or seminars intended to improve the knowledge,
abilities and skills of county employees. The County Judge may release an
employee from his regular duties during work days to attend classes at a
recognized institution of learning if, in the supervisor’s judgment, such
classes contribute favorably to the county’s goals and objectives and the
career development of the employees.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.095 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.
   The County Judge and each supervisor are responsible for appraising the
performance and merit of personnel under their respective jurisdiction by the
use of the county performance review form to be kept on file for two years.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.096 DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
   (A)   Grounds for disciplinary action of county employees, ranging from
warnings to immediate discharge, depending upon the seriousness of the offense,
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Dishonesty or falsification of records;
      (2)   Use of alcoholic beverages or drugs which affect job performance,
including the consumption of alcoholic beverages or drugs during working hours
as well as the abuse of alcoholic beverages or drugs during non-working hours
which, as a result of said abuse, affect the job performance of the employee
during actual working hours;
      (3)   Conviction for the possession or sale of controlled substances or
narcotics or possession or sale of controlled substances on work premises;
      (4)   Unauthorized use or abuse of county equipment or property;
      (5)   Theft or destruction of county equipment or property;
      (6)   Habitual tardiness, unauthorized or excessive absence or abuse of
sick leave;
      (7)   Disregard or repeated violations of safety rules and regulations;
      (8)   Unsatisfactory performance of duties;
      (9)   Disobeying a supervisor;
      (10)   Performing outside work during working hours established by the
county;
      (11)   Displaying or distributing campaign material for a political
campaign during normal working hours; the placement of any campaign or
political material on a county vehicle; or participating in political
activities while on the job site or during normal working hours;
      (12)   Carrying firearms, unless part of job duty; or
      (13)   Gambling in or on county premises.
   (B)   The County Judge may place an employee on leave, with or without pay,
pending investigation of any alleged activity. Fiscal Court shall be notified
no later than the next regular meeting.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.097 DEMOTIONS, SUSPENSIONS AND SEPARATIONS; REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   Demotions.
      (1)   The County Judge may, with Fiscal Court approval, demote an
employee provided the employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the
position to which he or she is demoted. Reasons for demotion include, but are
not limited to:
         (a)   Inability to carry out duties in accordance with the standards
prescribed for the position or these rules;
         (b)   Disciplinary reasons; and
         (c)   In lieu of layoff.
      (2)   Written notice shall be given to the employee prior to, or at the
time of, the demotion.
   (B)   Suspension.
      (1)   (a)   The County Judge may suspend, with Fiscal Court approval, any
county employee, with or without pay, for not more than 30 calendar days for
disciplinary reasons. Fiscal Court approval may come after the suspension.
         (b)   Should an employee be suspended without pay prior to the
suspension being presented to Fiscal Court, and should Fiscal Court not approve
the suspension, the employee shall be compensated for lost wages during the
suspension period.
      (2)   Any suspended employee shall receive written notice of suspension.
The notice shall state:
         (a)   Reasons for the suspension; and
         (b)   Duration of the suspension.
      (4)   A suspended employee may appeal the suspension to the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Separation. An employee may be separated by:
      (1)   Dismissal;
      (2)   Resignation;
      (3)   Retirement; or
      (4)   Lay off due to lack of work, funds or termination of the position
which the employee holds.
   (D)   Dismissal.
      (1)   The County Judge, with Fiscal Court approval, may dismiss an
employee. Fiscal Court approval is not required for employees whose hire was
not approved by Fiscal Court.
      (2)   Written notice shall be given to the employee prior to, or at the
time of, dismissal.
      (3)   Upon dismissal, employees shall not receive compensation for any
accrued vacation time or unused sick time.
   (E)   Resignation.
      (1)   An employee shall, in order to resign in good standing, give the
County Judge written notice at least two weeks before the date the resignation
is to take effect. The County Judge may agree to a shorter notice because of
extenuating circumstances.
      (2)   A resignation made without two weeks’ written notice may be
regarded as cause for denying the resigning employee future employment with the
county.
      (3)   An employee’s resignation and the circumstances pertinent to it
shall be recorded in his or her personnel file.
      (4)   Upon resignation upon proper notice, an employee shall receive all
wages earned prior to separation. Said employee shall not be compensated for
accrued, but unused sick leave.
      (5)   The employment date of an employee who resigns and is reinstated or
is dismissed and is re-employed shall be the date of re-employment (wages,
accrued vacation, sick leave).
   (F)   Layoff.
      (1)   The County Judge shall submit in writing to the Fiscal Court
whenever the County Judge thinks a layoff of county workers is needed. If the
Court does not act in any manner within 30 days, the County Judge may proceed
with the layoff procedures as prescribed herein.
         (a)   The order of layoff shall be established by the Fiscal Court on
the basis of the needs of the county.
         (b)   Consideration shall be given to both the seniority and merit of
the persons considered for layoff.
         (c)   If time permits, the County Judge shall notify the employee(s)
two weeks prior to the effective date of the layoff.
         (d)   A copy of the notice shall be retained in the employee’s
personnel file.
      (2)   An employee who has given satisfactory service, and is laid off,
shall be eligible for re-employment in other positions for which the employee
qualifies.
   (G)   Reinstatement. The County Judge, with Fiscal Court’s approval:
      (1)   May re-employ any former employee:
         (a)   Who has resigned from county employment with a good record; or
         (b)   Who has been laid off because of lack of work or funds.
      (2)   Shall reinstate any employee who has been demoted or dismissed for
a reason prohibited by local, state or federal employment regulations.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021 ; Ord. passed 7-13-2022; Ord. 23.230-1, passed
7-13-2023 )
§ 30.098 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A Grievance Committee will be set up on request of a complaining
employee. The committee for a particular grievance will consist of one member
of Fiscal Court, the County Judge and a department supervisor who does not have
supervisory authorizing over the complainant.
      (2)   Any grievance or dispute which may arise from employment with the
county shall be settled in the following manner:
         (a)   The employee shall present the grievance to his or her
supervisor within three working days of its occurrence or within three working
days of knowledge of the occurrence by the employee. The supervisor should
attempt to respond to the employee within seven days of the receipt of the
complaint.
         (b)   If the grievance remains unadjusted, it may then be presented by
the employee to the County Judge for review by the Grievance Committee within a
reasonable period of time. The Grievance Committee may make a recommendation to
the County Judge after review.
   (B)   Grievance procedure for complaints relating to suspected or alleged
discrimination on basis of handicapped status.
      (1)   Any person (employee or citizen) who believes that he or she has
been subjected to discrimination as prohibited by § 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973, may personally or by representative, file a complaint with the
office of the County Judge. A person who has not personally been subjected to
discrimination may also file a complaint.
      (2)   When any person, (employee, citizen or applicant) who believes he
or she has been adversely affected by an act or decision by the county and that
such act or decision was based on handicapped status said person shall have the
right to process a complaint or grievance in accordance with the following
procedure.
         (a)   Step One. An aggrieved person must submit a written statement to
the County Judge setting forth the nature of the discrimination alleged and
facts upon which the allegation is based.
         (b)   Step Two. The County Judge shall contact the complainant no
later than 20 days after receiving the written statement to establish an
informal meeting with the objective of resolving the matter informally.
However, in no case shall the informal meeting be conducted sooner than five
days, nor more than 45 days, after receiving the written statement. The County
Judge and the County Attorney or the County Attorney’s designee shall represent
the county during the informal meeting. There shall be prepared written
documentation of the discussions at the informal meeting, which shall be
preserved in the records of the county.
         (c)   Step Three. Within 15 days of the informal meeting, the County
Judge shall present to the Fiscal Court a proposed remedy.
         (d)   Step Four. The Fiscal Court shall approve the proposed remedy,
approve a different remedy or choose to take no action. The Fiscal Court shall
issue a written decision on the matter within 15 days.
      (3)   In the discussion of the grievance, the complainant may designate
any person of his choice to appear with him or her and participate in the
discussion. The Fiscal Court shall require the County Judge and the County
Attorney, or the County Attorney’s designee, to participate in the discussion
of the grievance, when it is brought before Fiscal Court. The decision shall be
the final procedure for the complainant at the local level. However, should the
complainant not be satisfied with the remedy, the complainant may offer an
alternate remedy within 15 days of receipt of the Fiscal Court’s written
decision. The Fiscal Court has 15 days to act upon the complainant’s alternate
remedy or the earlier written decision shall be considered final.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.099 PERSONNEL FILE.
   (A)   For each county employee, a personnel file shall be maintained in the
office of the County Judge or such other office as designated by the Judge
Executive.
   (B)   The file shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   The employee’s name;
      (2)   The title of his or her position;
      (3)   The department or office to which he or she is assigned;
      (4)   Salary;
      (5)   Past changes in his or her status as a county employee;
      (6)   Additional information deemed relevant or required by this chapter;
      (7)   Employee’s application for employment; and
      (8)   Performance reviews.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.100 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   Employees, while in the service of the county, are not required to
contribute to any political fund or be denied the rights of political activity.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.101 SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   To advise employees that sexual harassment is a violation of law;
      (2)   To clearly state that employees or employee applicants should not
be subjected to unwelcome sexual conduct, on or off the job, regardless of
whether such action results from conduct of co-employees, supervisory staff,
department heads, the public or others; and
      (3)   To provide for disciplinary action in the event this policy is not
followed.
   (B)   Policy.
      (1)   SEXUAL HARASSMENT is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests
for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of any such conduct by an individual
is used as the basis for employment decisions; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the result of unreasonably interfering with an
individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating or offensive work
environment.
      (2)   Examples of specific conduct include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Visual displays of sexually explicit or suggestive materials;
         (b)   Sexually explicit or suggestive comments or jokes;
         (c)   Sexually explicit or suggestive gestures;
         (d)   Sexually explicit or suggestive email;
         (e)   Using the internet to view sexually explicit or suggestive
material; and
         (f)   Touching co-workers in sexually suggestive or explicit manners.
      (3)   The activities described above are prohibited on the part of all
employees and elected county officials. It is not necessary that there be a
supervisory relationship between the involved persons for the activity to be in
violation of county policies.
      (4)   Any employee or employee applicant who feels that he or she has
been subjected to any prohibited activity described above, should report the
incident immediately to his or her immediate supervisor or the County Judge. If
the immediate supervisor is involved in the activity, the violation should be
reported immediately to the County Judge. In the event the County Judge is the
subject of the problem, the employees should notify the County Attorney. All
resulting investigations shall be kept confidential to the extent possible.
      (5)   Any employee violating this policy will be subjected immediately to
disciplinary action ranging from a written warning to discharge, depending upon
the nature and severity of the violation in this case.
      (6)   In addition, capricious and unfounded charges of sexual harassment
by an employee may be cause for disciplinary action. Refusal by a supervisor to
act in legitimate cases of harassment may be cause for disciplinary action.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.102 EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Prior to arranging for overnight travel, a travel request form shall
be submitted to the County Finance Officer and the Judge-Executive for written
approval one month prior to the travel. Budgetary restriction will apply and
determine final approval. Subject to budgetary limitations, any officer or
employee of the county incurring expenses for approved travel on behalf of the
county shall be reimbursed for allowable out-of-county travel expenses as
follows:
      (1)   Room costs: reimbursement for actual amount on receipt. No taxes
will be reimbursed;
      (2)   Meal costs: for overnight travel  only,  per diem will be $30/day;
      (3)   Mileage: rate paid by the commonwealth if travel by personal
vehicle is required. No mileage will be paid for county vehicles;
      (4)   No receipts required only conference/training agenda. If a meal is
provided by conference/training, then there is no reimbursement for that meal;
      (5)   Air fare: lowest coach fare. County Judge approval required;
      (6)   Other expenses: tolls, parking and similar expenses. Expenses shall
be necessary and reasonable. No expenses shall be reimbursed which are not
directly related to job-related purposes or other county business purpose.
Receipts or notarized statements are required; and
      (7)   Higher reimbursement rates may be authorized due to travel site
(i.e., high rate areas). commonwealth regulations shall be utilized for
guidance.
   (B)   Any out of town travel other than by an elected official shall be
approved by the court prior to the travel. Meeting notices supporting travel
shall be submitted with the travel request, when available.
   (C)   (1)   The request for reimbursement form must be completed (including
required receipts) and submitted to the County Judge within 30 days after
returning from travel.
      (2)   The request for reimbursement form must be signed by the employee
requesting reimbursement, the department director, and the County Judge.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021; Ord. passed 7-13-2022; Ord. 23.230-1, passed
7-13-2023)
DRUG- AND ALCOHOL-FREE WORKPLACE; SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY
§ 30.115 PURPOSE AND GOAL.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court (CFC) is committed to protecting the safety,
health and well-being of all employees and other individuals in our workplace.
CFC recognizes that alcohol abuse and drug use pose a significant threat to
county goals. In the interest of assuring the safety of the general public by
employing persons in safety sensitive positions that do not abuse illicit
substances, illegal drugs and alcohol, this drug-free workplace policy
establishes the balance of respect for individuals with the need to maintain an
alcohol and drug-free environment.
   (B)   Likewise, it is CFC’s additional purpose(s) and intent to accomplish
the following with the establishment of this policy:
      (1)   To comply with all requirements of 803 KAR 25:280 regarding the
establishment and maintenance of a drug-free workplace for the purposes of
obtaining certification from the Department of Worker’s Claims;
      (2)   As a recipient of federal funds, to comply with the Drug Free
Workplace Act of 1988 (Pub. Law No. 100-690, Title V, Schedule D), being 41
U.S.C. §§ 8101 et seq.;
      (3)   To comply with the Federal Department of Transportation regulations
regarding employees holding commercial driver’s licenses (CDL);
      (4)   To reduce the number of accidents and injuries to employees, other
persons and property;
      (5)   To reduce absenteeism and tardiness, and to increase the
productivity of all employees of the county;
      (6)   To help ensure that the reputation of CFC as a whole and of the
employees throughout the community; and
      (7)   In line with CFC’s stated goals and objectives, to provide
leadership in helping to stem the tide of the abuse of alcohol, illicit
substances and illegal drugs throughout county and the commonwealth as a whole.
   (C)   It is with these stated goals in mind that the County Fiscal Court
issues this policy, declaring itself a Drug- and alcohol-free Workplace and
hereby issues these accompanying rules regarding drug and alcohol use in the
workplace for County Fiscal Court.
   (D)   The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or
use of alcohol or a controlled or illicit substance is prohibited in the
workplace.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.116 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENT. An unexpected and undesirable event resulting in damage or harm.
For the purposes of this policy, the resulting damage or harm may constitute an
injury which requires off-site medical attention be given to a person or damage
to a vehicle or other property. Any such incident resulting in the need for a
reasonable person to file a police report shall be considered cause for post-
accident drug/alcohol testing of the involved employee.
   ALCOHOL. Any intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or other
low molecular weight alcohols, including methyl or isopropyl alcohol. This
includes over-the-counter and prescribed medications which contain more than
0.5% of alcohol by volume.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in terms
of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as indicated by an evidential
breath test.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles
used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle:
      (1)   Has a gross combination weight of 26,001 or more pounds inclusive
of a towed unite with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Has a gross vehicle weight of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the
driver; or
      (4)   Is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials found
to be hazardous for the purposes of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
and which require the motor vehicle to be placarded under the Hazardous
Materials Regulations (49 C.F.R. part 172(f)).
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the meaning as assigned by 21 U.S.C. § 802 and
includes all substances listed on Schedule I through V as they may be revised
from time to time (21 C.F.R. part 1308). See also DRUG.
   DRIVER. Any person who operates a commercial motor vehicle. This includes,
but is not limited to: full-time, regularly employed drivers; casual,
intermittent or occasional drivers; leased drivers and independent, owner-
operator contractors who are either directly employed by or under lease to any
employer or who operate a commercial motor vehicle at the direction of or with
the consent of an employer.
   DRUG. A controlled substance as defined in KRS 218A.010(5) and as
established in 902 KAR Ch. 55, including:
      (1)   Amphetamines;
      (2)   Cannabinoids (THS);
      (3)   Cocaine;
      (4)   Opiates;
      (5)   Phencyclidine (PCP);
      (6)   Benzodiazepines;
      (7)   Propoxyphene;
      (8)   Methaqualone;
      (9)   Methadone;
      (10)   Barbiturates;
      (11)   Synthetic narcotics;
      (12)   Illicit substances, as defined in KRS 351.010; and
      (13)   Volatile substances, as defined in KRS 217.900(1).
   DRUG OR ALCOHOL REHABILITATION PROGRAM. A service provider that provides
confidential, timely and expert identification, assessment, treatment and
resolution of employee drug or alcohol abuse.
   DRUG TEST. A chemical, biological or physical instrumental analysis
administered by a qualified laboratory, for the purpose of determining the
presence or absence of a drug or its metabolites or alcohol pursuant to
standards, procedures and protocols established by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA).
   EMPLOYEE. An individual employed by the county.
   ILLICIT SUBSTANCE. Those prescription drugs used illegally or in excess of
therapeutic levels as well as illegal drugs.
   MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER (MRO). A licensed physician with knowledge of
substance abuse disorders, laboratory testing and chain of custody collection
procedures, and who has the ability to verify positive, confirmed test results.
The MRO shall possess the necessary medical training to interpret and evaluate
a positive test result in relation to the person’s medical history or any other
relevant biomedical information.
   QUALIFIED LABORATORY. A laboratory certified in accordance with the National
Laboratory Certification Program (NLCP) by the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA).
   RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS. That alcohol and drug tests are unannounced. Tests
conducted annually for employees who are CDL drivers shall equal or exceed 25%
for alcohol tests and 50% for drug tests of the total number of drivers subject
to testing.
   REASONABLE SUSPICION.
      (1)   A belief that an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in
violation of this policy, drawn from specific, objective and articulable facts
and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts in light of experience,
training or education.
      (2)   REASONABLE SUSPICION may be determined by two or more supervisory
personnel who will attest to their observations. The executive authority will
make the final determination.
   REFUSAL TO SUBMIT. The failure to provide adequate breath for testing
without a valid medical explanation after the employee has received notice of
the requirement for breath testing; refusal to take the required test(s) or the
failure to provide adequate urine for controlled substances testing without a
valid medical explanation after the employee receives notice of the requirement
of urine testing; and/or engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing
process.
   SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITION(S). Those jobs that would involve exceptional care
and due diligence in the area of public safety to the county’s citizenry and to
all employees of the County Fiscal Court. This includes any employee who
performs a duty(s) that requires a CDL or any employee that holds a CDL or
other classifications identified within the random selection section of this
policy.
   SUBSTANCE ABUSE PROFESSIONAL. A licensed or certified psychologist, social
worker, employee assistance professional or addition counselor with knowledge
of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol and
controlled substance-related disorders.
   VOLATILE SUBSTANCE. Any glue, cement, paint or other substance, as described
in KRS 217.900(1).
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.117 COVERED WORKERS.
   Any individual who conducts business for CFC, is applying for a position or
is conducting business on the CFC’s property is covered by our drug-free
workplace policy. This policy includes, but is not limited to, supervisors,
full-time employees, part-time employees, off-site employees, contractors and
applicants.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.118 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The drug-free workplace policy is intended to apply whenever anyone is
representing or conducting business for CFC. Therefore, this policy applies
whenever conducting business or representing CFC. This policy applies during
all working hours, while on call or paid standby and while performing work on
behalf of CFC while on or off CFC property. Additionally, applicants for such
county employment are subject to pre-employment drug testing. It also applies
to all CFC employees with special provisions designated to those employees
identified as holding safety sensitive positions. These positions are ones in
which their performance requires an extra degree of care and diligence in the
area of safety to the community.
   (B)   Those positions identified as “safety sensitive” include, but not
limited to:
      (1)   County Sheriff’s Department employees;
      (2)   Employees of the County Jailer;
      (3)   Heavy equipment operators;
      (4)   Personnel driving CDL-regulated vehicles;
      (5)   Mechanics who work on these regulated vehicles; and
      (6)   Any personnel operating CFC-owned vehicles.
   (C)   Note: the positions identified above as being “safety sensitive “
include, but are not limited to, those regulated under 49 C.F.R. part 40. While
this program includes those federally mandated employees, this subchapter is
not intended to replace and shall be separate from any drug- and alcohol- free
workplace policy previously adopted and implemented by CFC which may have
included only federally regulated employees.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.119 POLICY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Training.
      (1)   The County Fiscal Court shall conduct substance abuse awareness
training for all employees.
      (2)   This substance abuse awareness training shall consist of the
following minimum requirements.
         (a)   Upon a conditional offer of employment from the Court, each
applicant shall be provided a copy of and will be asked to read the Court’s
drug- and alcohol-free workplace policy. All current employees will also be
asked to read and sign the certification of acknowledgment/drug- and alcohol-
free workplace policies and procedures form (Appendix A, attached to the
ordinance codified herein).
         (b)   Initial training shall consist of at least one-hour for all
employees.
         (c)   Annual refresher training shall be conducted for all employees
in substance abuse awareness and shall consist of no less than 30 minutes.
         (d)   All alcohol and substance abuse awareness training shall
include, at a minimum, information concerning:
            1.   Alcohol and drug testing policy and procedures;
            2.   The effects of alcohol and drug use on an individual’s health,
work and personal life;
            3.   The disease of alcohol or drug addiction;
            4.   Signs and symptoms of an alcohol and drug problem;
            5.   The role of coworkers and supervisors in addressing alcohol or
substance abuse; and
            6.   Referrals to an employee assistance program.
         (e)   In addition to all of the above training, all supervisory
personnel shall receive an additional 30 minutes each year of alcohol and
substance abuse education and awareness training. This additional supervisory
training will be documented using, the supervisory training certification
certificate. This additional supervisory training shall consist of at least,
all of the following:
            1.   Recognizing the signs of alcohol and substance abuse in the
workplace;
            2.   How to document signs of employee alcohol or substance abuse;
            3.   How to refer employees to an employee assistance program or
other alcohol and substance abuse treatment program; and
            4.   Legal and practical aspects of reasonable suspicion testing
for the presence of drugs and alcohol.
      (3)   Note: the county’s drug- and alcohol-free workplace policy shall
include controlled-access maintenance in the office of the County Judge
Executive, of business records including the names and position titles of all
employees and supervisory personnel trained under the program as described
above, and the names of all persons who presented alcohol and substance abuse
awareness training, for review by the Office of Worker’s Claims.
      (4)   Note: should any portion of this policy dealing with the actual
administration of this policy be amended, employees shall be provided with
copies of any administrative change or modification and given an opportunity to
ask questions and obtain answers regarding any administrative change(s) in this
policy. However, changes may not be made to the policy that would circumvent
any requirements associated with 803 KAR 25:280.
      (5)   (a)   The county currently utilizes Ensite Laboratory as its
laboratory of choice for the collection of urine samples in the case of testing
for controlled substances, and for the administration of breathalyzer tests for
alcohol concentration. Ensite Laboratory is also the Court’s third-party
administrator of choice for the random selection category of testing. Employees
are selected by Ensite Laboratory using a statistically valid method of
selection of specific employee codes. This random testing will be reasonably
spaced over a 12-month period. Because of the random nature of the selection
process, any employee may be tested more than once, or not at all. Once
collected, all urine samples are forwarded for analysis to Ensite Laboratory,
which is a laboratory approved by the National Laboratory Certification Program
(NLCP) under the United States Department of Health and Mental Services
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
         (b)   The county shall administer alcohol and drug tests in
circumstances which include, but may not be limited to, the following.
            1.   Pre-employment testing.
               a.   Breath alcohol and urine drug testing shall be required of
all new hire applicants after their receipt of a conditional offer of
employment. After receiving the conditional offer of employment, applicants
will have 24 hours in which to submit to testing at a testing facility of CFC’s
choosing. The CFC requires that every newly hired employee test free of
controlled substances and have a breath alcohol concentration of not more than
0.00. Each offer of employment by CFC shall be conditional upon the passing of
controlled substance and alcohol tests.
               b.   Refusal by any applicant for employment with CFC to take
the controlled substance test will result in the conditional offer of
employment being withdrawn. All testing under this policy will be in accordance
with testing protocols described elsewhere in this policy.
               c.   An applicant with a confirmed positive test for controlled
substances and/or breath alcohol in a concentration of or greater than 0.00
which is not legitimately explained to and accepted by a medical review
officer, will not be considered for employment.
               d.   Any applicant who fails a controlled substance or breath
alcohol test may not be considered for future employment with CFC.
               e.   Any applicant who refuses to take a controlled substance or
breath alcohol test will be disqualified from future consideration for
employment.
               f.   Any applicant who tampers with, or attempts to tamper with,
a urine specimen in any manner shall be disqualified from current and future
consideration of employment with the CFC.
               g.   An applicant whose positive test is confirmed and upheld by
the medical review officer (MRO) may request that the same sample be retested
at her or his own expense at a CFC approved laboratory.
               h.   Individuals undergoing pre-employment testing shall not
begin official employment with the CFC until after all test results are
received and shown to be negative. Upon receipt of the test result, positive or
negative, the County Judge Executive or his or her designee shall inform the
appropriate department head of the results.
            2.   Random testing.
               a.   Employees in a safety sensitive position will be required
to participate in a statistically valid, unannounced random selection process,
which will subject them to mandatory drug and/or alcohol testing. This category
of testing will conduct random tests for alcohol at a rate of no more than 10%
for non-federally regulated Safety Sensitive positions. Employees holding
positions in which a commercial driver’s license (CDL) is required, must also
be tested at a minimum rate of 10% for alcohol annually to satisfy Department
of Transportation (DOT) requirements. In the ease of random testing for drug
use, non-federally regulated safety sensitive positions will be tested at a
rate of no more than 10%. Employees holding positions in which a CDL is
required, must be tested for drugs at a rate 50% annually to satisfy DOT
requirements. All employees in federally regulated safety sensitive positions
shall be selected from a pool that is separate from the random selection pool
for other non-federally regulated safety sensitive positions. The County Judge
Executive shall utilize a third party to conduct the random selection of safety
sensitive employees, including employees holding a CDL, to be tested. This
random testing shall be unannounced and will take place throughout each
calendar year. Safety sensitive employees are selected by a third party
administrator using a statistically valid, random method of selection using
specific employee codes. Because of the random nature of this testing process,
safety sensitive employees may be selected for testing more than once or not at
all. Once an employee is notified that he or she has been selected for testing,
the employee must proceed immediately to the testing site of CFC’s choosing.
               b.   Note: employees in non-safety sensitive positions will not
be included in the random selection pool. However, non-safety sensitive
employees will be subject to testing for other reasons. Procedures and
protocols for “reasonable suspicion”, “post accident”, “return-to-duty” and
“follow-up” testing all of which testing types are described elsewhere in this
policy will apply in their case.
            3.   Reasonable suspicion testing.
               a.   A reasonable suspicion test shall be based on a belief that
an employee is using or has used drugs or alcohol in violation of this policy,
drawn from specific objective facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those
facts in light of experience, training or education. The reasonable suspicion
testing shall be based upon:
                  i.   While at work, direct observation of drug or alcohol use
or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the influence of a
drug or alcohol;
                  ii.   While at work, abnormal conduct, erratic behavior or a
significant deterioration in work performance;
                  iii.   A report of drug or alcohol use provided by a reliable
and credible source;
                  iv.   Evidence that an individual has tampered with a drug or
alcohol test during employment with the CFC;
                  v.   Information that an employee has caused, contributed to
or been involved in an accident while at work;
                  vi.   Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold,
solicited or transferred illegal or illicit drugs or used alcohol while on
CFC’s premises or while operating CFC’s vehicle, machinery or equipment.
               b.   The County Judge Executive or his or her designee shall be
notified immediately of any indication of reasonable suspicion. Both the
observing department supervisor and the County Judge Executive or his or her
representative will review the policies and procedures herein and if necessary
make arrangements with a testing facility of CFC’s choosing to conduct
reasonable suspicion drug and/or alcohol testing as soon as possible. If a
representative from the office of the County Judge Executive is not available,
the observing supervisor shall obtain the assistance of another CFC supervisor
or other credible and reliable source and together they shall complete the
reasonable suspicion form, and forward it to the County Judge Executive. If
after completing the form, it is determined that there is in fact, reasonable
suspicion that the employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, the
observing supervisor or his or her designee will notify the employee and
accompany him or her to the testing site.
               c.   When a reasonable suspicion test is ordered, the employee
must submit to testing within 45 minutes of being notified that he or she will
be tested. The observing supervisor and/or designee shall remain at the testing
site with the employee being tested, until the collection process is completed.
Any employee who is tested for reasonable suspicion shall be placed on leave
with pay until the results of the test are known. After submitting to the drug/
alcohol test, the employee may not return to work until the results of the test
are known and only then if the results are negative. Only the County Judge
Executive or his or her authorized designee may order a reasonable suspicion
test.
            4.   Post-accident testing.
               a.   Drug and alcohol testing will be conducted following an
employee’s involvement in an accident in which property damage occurs, on or
off CFC’s premises while on duty, or in the course of employment for CFC, or
which requires off-site medical attention be administered to a person.
               b.   Qualifying event exception: due to varying types of
accident cause, all accidents categorized as a “qualifying event” may not
require post-accident testing. Exceptions to the “qualifying event” for
requiring post-accident drug and alcohol testing will include, but may not be
limited to, the following types of accidents:
                  i.   Injuries whose onset is cumulative or gradual - such as
carpel tunnel syndrome, progressive hearing loss, mental disorders, dermatitis,
respiratory diseases, skin disorders and the like;
                  ii.   Injuries where the employee can be completely
discounted as the contributing factor (i.e., injuries caused by a third party
or some other uncontrollable force or event such as weather, insects, toxic
plants and the like); and
                  iii.   Injuries where the employee can be completely
discounted as the major contributing factor or those injuries occurring during
physical fitness or a training event, in which the employee did everything
within reason to avoid the injury accident, (i.e., was performing training as
instructed).
               c.   In each case, the County Judge Executive or his or her
designee shall determine the necessity of drug and alcohol testing and shall
communicate such testing with the involved employee and the employee’s
respective department head. The County Judge Executive or his or her designee
shall coordinate all required tests with the appropriate medical facilities.
               d.   An employee involved in an accident while on an out-of-town
assignment, shall notify their department director or the director’s designee
as soon as possible but no later than two hours after the accident occurred.
The department director shall notify the County Judge Executive or her or his
designee to discuss possible drug/alcohol testing requirements.
               e.   Other qualifying event: the department director or his or
her designee shall request controlled substance/breath alcohol testing when an
employee caused or cannot be completely discounted from causing a vehicular or
any other type of accident in which death, serious bodily injury or major
property damage did result or could have resulted. If a post-accident
controlled substance/breath alcohol test is required, a confirmed positive test
result will result in the employee’s immediate termination.
            5.   Return-to-duty testing.
               a.   The County Fiscal Court maintains a “no tolerance” policy
for drugs and/or alcohol.
               b.   “No tolerance” means that once you are selected for a drug
or alcohol test, should your test be positive, without a valid medical or bio-
medical reason as confirmed by a medical review officer, you will be
immediately terminated from your employment with CFC.
               c.   Only in circumstances in which the employee voluntarily
elects to seek assistance for a substance abuse problem through the employee
assistance program prior to being selected for a test, completes whatever form
of treatment a substance abuse professional recommends and is willing to sign a
return to work/treatment plan agreement, will CFC consider allowing the
employee to return to work after treatment is successfully completed as
confirmed by a substance abuse professional.
               d.   In all cases, it shall be at the discretion of the CFC,
subject to all applicable laws and regulations, as to whether to allow an
employee to return to work. In the event that an employee who has voluntarily
sought assistance, prior to being selected for a controlled substance or breath
alcohol test is allowed to enter a controlled substance/alcohol abuse
rehabilitation program, the employee may be allowed to return to work only
under the following circumstances.
                  i.   The employee may resume regular duties only after the
employee tests negative in an alcohol and/or controlled substance test
administered by the CFC-approved laboratory and can provide a release to return
to work from an appropriate substance abuse treatment facility or confirmation
of continued and on-going participation in a CFC recognized substance abuse
assistance program. An employee must test negative within a reasonable period
of time from receipt of the initial test results not to exceed 45 days. Any
repeat occurrence of substance abuse or violation of any other aspect of the
CFC’s drug free workplace policy will result in immediate termination.
                  ii.   Prior to returning to work, the employee shall be
required to meet with the County Judge Executive or his or her authorized
designee to receive an explanation of the terms of continued employment; and to
sign a written return-to- work/treatment plan agreement, detailing the terms
under which the employee will be allowed to return to work. Such agreement
shall stipulate that the employee, at the Court’s request, may be required at
any time, to submit to interviews and/or evaluation by the professional staff
at an appropriate chemical dependency treatment facility approved by the CFC’s
employee assistance program (EAP). The return-to-work agreement will also
stipulate that the employee be required to submit to unannounced controlled
substance and/or alcohol testing for up to 12 months after resuming duties.
            6.   Follow-up testing. Any employee returning to work from
successful completion of an employee assistance program for drug- and/or
alcohol-related problems, or a drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation program,
shall be required to undergo one year of quarterly drug and alcohol testing.
The frequency of the follow-up testing shall consider recommendations of any
involved substance abuse professional (SAP) but shall be not less than once per
quarter (every three months) for at least one year. All follow-up testing may
be requested at any time and shall be unannounced.
   (B)   Testing protocol.
      (1)   The collection of samples and administration or drug and alcohol
tests shall follow all standards, procedures and protocols set forth by the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Administration (SAMHSA). Test results will be obtained by a qualified
laboratory, as defined elsewhere in this policy, and results shall undergo a
medical review as follows.
         (a)   All test results shall be submitted for medical review by a
medical review officer (MRO) of the county’s choosing, who shall consider the
medical history of the employee or applicant, as well as relevant biomedical
information.
         (b)   If there is a positive test result, the employee or applicant
will be given an opportunity to report to the MRO the use of any prescription
or over-the-counter medication.
         (c)   If the MRO determines that there is a legitimate medical
explanation for a positive test result, the MRO may certify that the test
results do not indicate the unauthorized use of alcohol or a controlled
substance.
         (d)   If the MRO determines, after appropriate review, that there is
not a medical explanation for the positive test result other than the
unauthorized use of alcohol or a prohibited drug, the MRO shall refer the
individual tested to the County Judge Executive or his or her authorized
representative for further proceedings in accordance with CFC’s drug-free
workplace policy.
      (2)   Note: MRO determinations concerning the use of alcohol or a
controlled or illicit substance shall comply with all procedures outlined in
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (SAMHSA) Medical Review
Officer Manual for Federal Drug Testing Programs.
   (C)   Testing process.
      (1)   Employees shall report to the collection site of CFC’s choosing
immediately after being provided the notification to test. In the case of
reasonable suspicion testing, a supervisor or designee shall escort the
employee to the collection site. Drug testing will be conducted by urine sample
while alcohol testing will be analyzed using a breath alcohol testing/screening
device. Drug and alcohol analysis will be performed by a trained technician.
      (2)   To ensure that the test specimen is actually that of the donor,
collection site staff will require positive identification of the test subject.
      (3)   To ensure the accuracy and fairness of our testing program, all
testing will be conducted according to Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA) guidelines where applicable and will include a
screening test; a confirmation test; the opportunity for a split sample; review
by a medical review officer, including the opportunity for employees who test
positive to provide a legitimate medical explanation, such as a physician’s
prescription, for the positive result; and a documented chain of custody.
      (4)   All drug-testing information will be maintained in separate
confidential records.
      (5)   The County Fiscal Court shall require all tests for alcohol to be
performed by a certified breath alcohol technician (BAT). An 11-panel urine
test will be conducted and shall include analysis for the following substances:
         (a)   Amphetamines;
         (b)   Cannabinoids (THC);
         (c)   Cocaine;
         (d)   Opiates;
         (e)   Phencyclidine (PCP);
         (f)   Benzodiazepines;
         (g)   Propoxyphene;
         (h)   Methaqualone;
         (i)   Methadone;
         (j)   Barbiturates; and
         (k)   Synthetic Narcotics.
      (6)   Each employee, as a condition of employment, will be required to
participate in pre- employment, random, post-accident, reasonable suspicion,
return-to-duty and follow-up testing upon selection or request of management.
      (7)   Any employee who tests positive will be immediately removed from
duty, referred to a substance abuse professional for assessment and
recommendations, required to pass a return-to-duty test and sign a return-to-
work agreement, subject to ongoing, unannounced, follow-up testing for a period
of five years and terminated immediately if he or she tests positive a second
time or violates the return-to-work agreement.
      (8)   An employee will be subject to the immediate termination of
employment if he or she refuses the screening or the test, adulterates or
dilutes the specimen, substitutes the specimen with that from another person or
sends an imposter, fails or declines to take a second drug test when directed,
will not sign the required forms or refuses to cooperate in the testing process
in such a way that prevents completion of the test.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.120 PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   It is a violation of the drug-free workplace policy to use, possess,
sell, trade and/or offer for sale alcohol, illegal drugs or intoxicants.
   (B)   Prescription and over-the-counter drugs are not prohibited when taken
in standard dosage and/or according to a physician’s prescription. Any employee
taking prescribed or over-the-counter medications will be responsible for
consulting the prescribing physician and/or pharmacist to ascertain whether the
medication may interfere with safe performance of his or her job. If the use of
a medication could compromise the safety of the employee, fellow employees or
the public, it is the employee’s responsibility to use appropriate personnel
procedures (e.g., call in sick, use leave, request change of duty, notify
supervisor, notify company doctor) to avoid unsafe workplace practices.
   (C)   The illegal or unauthorized use of prescription drugs is prohibited.
It is a violation of the CFC’s drug-free workplace policy to intentionally
misuse and/or abuse prescription medications. Appropriate disciplinary action
will be taken if job performance deterioration and/or other accidents occur.
   (D)   The County Fiscal Court reserves the right to define and interpret
prohibited activities that specifically include, but may not be limited to:
      (1)   Alcohol.
         (a)   Prohibited conduct involving the use of alcohol includes the
following:
            1.   The performance of or being immediately available to perform
work duties while having an alcohol concentration greater than 0.00;
            2.   The consumption of alcohol or products containing alcohol
during the performance of or being immediately available to perform work
responsibilities;
            3.   In the case of safety sensitive employees, containing alcohol
during the performance of or being immediately able to perform safety sensitive
work responsibilities. This includes the possession of medicines containing
alcohol (prescription or over-the-counter) unless the seal is unbroken and/or
the medication is prescribed by a licensed physician, and said physician has
confirmed the necessity of the safety sensitive employees’ said possession of
the prescribed substance containing alcohol and has confirmed that the use of
such substance will not deter from the employees ability to safely perform
assigned safety sensitive responsibilities. In the latter case, a prescription
drug notification form must be on file with the County Judge Executive;
            4.   The performance of, or being immediately available to perform
those responsibilities designated as safety sensitive, within four hours after
using alcohol;
            5.   The transportation and/or possession of alcoholic beverages
(open or closed containers) within CFC-owned vehicles or equipment. Note: law
enforcement personnel functioning within the scope of their assigned duties
shall be considered exempt from this prohibition as deemed necessary by their
respective department head(s);
            6.   The use of alcohol for eight hours immediately following an
accident requiring a post-accident alcohol test or until a post-accident test
is administered, whichever occurs first;
            7.   Refusal to submit or cooperate with any of the required
testing types; and
            8.   The operation of a CFC-owned vehicle following consumption of
alcoholic beverages shall be considered a violation of this policy and shall
result in disciplinary action.
         (b)   Note: employees attending training programs and/or conferences
related to their employment with CFC may participate in social functions
associated with the program or conference. If alcoholic beverages are present
at the social function and the employee chooses to engage in consumption of
said beverage(s), he, she or they shall do so at his, her or their own
discretion. Employees who choose to engage in the consumption of alcoholic
beverages as part of a work related social function shall do so in a
responsible manner, maintaining a conduct that would not reflect adversely upon
the CFC. Any unbecoming conduct by an employee who has chosen to consume
alcohol at such conference or training program that has an adverse effect upon
the CFC will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination
of employment.
         (c)   Note: alcohol includes any intoxicating agent in beverage
alcohol, methyl and isopropyl alcohol whether used for medicinal purposes or
not. Many over-the-counter and prescription medications contain high
percentages of alcohol.
      (2)   Notification of convictions. Employees are hereby notified that
they shall inform the County Judge Executive or his or her authorized designee,
of any criminal charge or conviction within five days of said charge or
conviction. The County Judge Executive shall take appropriate action within 30
days.
      (3)   Drugs or controlled substances. Prohibited conduct involving the
use of drugs or controlled substances includes, but may not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   1.   Prescription and over-the-counter drugs are not prohibited
when taken in standard dosage and/or according to a physician’s prescription.
However, any safety sensitive employee taking prescribed or over-the-counter
medications will, in all cases, be responsible for consulting the prescribing
physician and/or pharmacist to ascertain whether the medication may interfere
with the safe performance of his or her safety sensitive job duties. Prior to
initiating usage after such medications are prescribed, the safety sensitive
employee shall submit a prescription drug notification form to his, her or
their immediate supervisor who shall, in turn, submit it to the County Judge
Executive or his or her designee as soon as possible.
            2.   After receiving such form, the County Judge Executive or his
or her authorized designee may request written medical authorization showing
the safety sensitive employee may possess/use such medication, that it was used
in the prescribed manner and showing the safety sensitive employee is fit to
safely perform safety sensitive assigned duties. If the use of such medication
could compromise the safety of the safety sensitive employee, fellow employees,
or the public at large, it is the safety sensitive employee’s responsibility to
use appropriate personnel procedures (e.g., call in sick, use leave, request
change of duty and notify his or her supervisor) to avoid unsafe workplace
practices. No prescription drugs shall be brought onto CFC property, or
consumed on Court property by anyone other than the individual for whom the
drugs have been prescribed by a licensed medical practitioner. The illegal or
unauthorized use of prescription drugs is strictly prohibited. It is a
violation of the CFC’s drug-free workplace policy to intentionally misuse and/
or abuse prescription medications.
            3.   Appropriate disciplinary action will be taken if job
performance deterioration and/or other accidents occur as the result of the
intentional misuse and/or abuse of prescription medication.
            4.   The CFC reserves the right to have a designated physician of
its choosing to determine if a prescription drug or medication produces effects
that would be considered unacceptable in the performance of assigned safety
sensitive work duties. The designated physician has final determination on
whether the medication will have or is having an unacceptable effect on the
safety sensitive employee’s performance of duties. In such instances of
temporary impediment to safe performance of regular safety sensitive duties,
the safety sensitive employee may be temporarily reassigned to duties requiring
a lesser safety awareness level if such duties are available.
            5.   All doctor’s statements and related medical information shall
be confidential and maintained in a separate medical file in the office of the
County Judge Executive.
         (b)   Testing positive for any of the prohibited substances during the
performance of or upon being immediately available to perform work
responsibilities;
         (c)   The performance of or being immediately available to perform
safety sensitive work responsibilities while using any controlled substance,
except when the use is under the instructions of a physician who has advised
that the use will not adversely affect the safety sensitive user’s ability to
safely perform safety sensitive responsibilities as assigned;
         (d)   1.   In the case of safety sensitive employees, having in
possession, drugs or controlled substances, except when the use is under the
instructions of a physician who has advised that the use will not adversely
affect the safety sensitive user’s ability to safely perform safety sensitive
responsibilities as assigned during the performance of or being immediately
available to perform safety sensitive work responsibilities.
            2.   Note: EMS and law enforcement personnel functioning within the
scope of their assigned duties shall be considered exempt from this prohibition
as deemed necessary by their respective department heads.
         (e)   Refusal (as defined elsewhere in this policy) to cooperate with
any of the requested testing types;
         (f)   Tampering with or attempting to alter, or actual altering of a
test specimen is strictly prohibited and is grounds for immediate termination
from employment with the CFC;
      (4)   Volatile substances. The intentional misuse, manufacture, sale,
distribution, dispensation or possession of a volatile substance as defined in
KRS 217.900 which includes any glue, cement, paint or other substance
containing a solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic vapors
or fumes which when intentionally inhaled may cause a condition of
intoxication, inebriation, stupefaction, dulling of the brain or nervous
system, or distortion or disturbance of auditory, visual or mental processes
while al work, while on CFC property, or while conducting CFC business while
off CFC property, is strictly prohibited and is considered cause for immediate
discipline, up to and including termination.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.121 CONSEQUENCES.
   (A)   One of the goals of our drug-free workplace program is to encourage
employees to voluntarily seek help with alcohol and/or drug problems. If,
however, an individual violates the policy, the consequences are serious.
   (B)   In the case of applicants, if he or she violates the drug-free
workplace policy, the offer of employment can be withdrawn. The applicant may
reapply after six months and must successfully pass a pre-employment drug test.
   (C)   If an employee violates the policy, he or she will be subject to
progressive disciplinary action up to immediate termination of employment and
may be required to enter rehabilitation. An employee required to enter
rehabilitation who fails to successfully complete it and/or repeatedly violates
the policy will be terminated from employment. Nothing in this policy prohibits
the employee from being disciplined or discharged for other violations and/or
performance problems.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.122 RETURN-TO-WORK AGREEMENTS.
   Following a violation of the drug-free workplace policy, an employee may be
offered an opportunity to participate in rehabilitation. In such cases, the
employee must sign and abide by the terms set forth in a return-to-work
agreement as a condition of continued employment.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.123 ASSISTANCE.
   (A)   Alcohol and drug abuse and addiction are recognized as diseases
responsive to proper treatment. The CFC provides a level of care through its
employee assistance program (EAP) provided. It also realizes that early
intervention and support improve the success of rehabilitation. To support the
employees, the CFC’s drug-free workplace policy:
      (1)   Encourages employees to seek help if they are concerned that they
or their family members may have a drug and/or alcohol problem; and
      (2)   Encourages employees to utilize the services of qualified
professionals in the community to assess the seriousness of suspected drug or
alcohol problems and identify appropriate sources of help.
Treatment for alcoholism and/or other drug use disorders may be covered by the
employee benefit plan. However, the ultimate financial responsibility for
recommended treatment belongs to the employee.
   (B)   Employees who voluntarily report a substance abuse problem prior to
being required to take a controlled substance or alcohol test as defined in
this policy, will not be subject to disciplinary action if they voluntarily and
conscientiously seek substance abuse assistance and agree to a treatment plan,
However, such an employee must understand that if the problem is not corrected
and satisfactory job performance is not maintained, he or she will be subject
to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. Failure
to seek such assistance, or failure to abide by the terms of the treatment
plan, shall be grounds for termination. Upon voluntarily reporting a substance
abuse problem, the employee will be required to sign a substance abuse
treatment plan return-to-work agreement form that will further define
conditions of continued employment.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.124 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   All information received by the CFC through the drug-free workplace
program is confidential communication. Access to this information is limited to
those who have a legitimate need to know in compliance with relevant laws and
management policies.
   (B)   (1)   The CFC shall maintain records and documents of all alcohol and
drug test results, schedules for follow-up tests and records relating to
evaluation and referrals. These records shall be maintained for a period of at
least five years.
      (2)   The CFC shall provide test result information or other pertinent
information relating to an applicant or existing employee’s alcohol or
controlled substance tests upon the applicant or existing employee’s written
request, and shall do so within five working days of being notified of the
request.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.125 POLICY ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the responsibility of the County Judge Executive to administer
and enforce this policy. This policy and its programs are not to be interpreted
or modified by any other Court supervisor or director.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.126 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   While it is ultimately the CFC’s legal, ethical and moral
responsibility to create and maintain a safe and productive drug-free workplace
for its employees, and the citizens of county, such safety is achieved through
cooperation and shared responsibility. Both employees and management have
important roles to play.
   (B)   All employees are required to not report to work or be subject to duty
while their ability to perform job duties is impaired due to on- or off-duty
use of alcohol or other drugs.
   (C)   In addition, employees are encouraged to:
      (1)   Be concerned about working in a safe environment; and
      (2)   Report dangerous behavior to their supervisor.
   (D)   It is the supervisor’s responsibility to:
      (1)   Inform employees of the drug-free workplace policy;
      (2)   Observe employee performance;
      (3)   Investigate reports of dangerous practices;
      (4)   Document negative changes and problems in performance;
      (5)   Counsel employees as to expected performance improvement; and
      (6)   Clearly state consequences of policy violations.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.127 COMMUNICATION.
   (A)   Communicating the drug-free workplace policy to both supervisors and
employees is critical to its success. To ensure all employees are aware of
their role in supporting the CFC’s drug-free workplace program:
      (1)   All employees will receive a written copy of the policy;
      (2)   The policy will be reviewed in orientation sessions with new
employees;
      (3)   The policy and assistance programs will be reviewed at safety
meetings; and
      (4)   Every supervisor will receive training to help him/her recognize
and manage employees with alcohol and other drug problems.
   (B)   Note: the County Fiscal Court may change, modify, amend or rescind any
part of this policy at any time that deals with the actual administration of
the policy itself. However, changes may not be made to the policy that would
circumvent any requirements associated with 803 KAR 25:280.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
COUNTY PROPERTY
§ 30.140 COUNTY ROAD DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment of Department.
      (1)   There is hereby created and established a County Road Department
consisting of a County Road Supervisor and such other employees of said
department as may from time to time be provided for by the County Judge and the
Fiscal Court.
      (2)   The County Road Supervisor shall be appointed by the County Judge
with the approval of Fiscal Court or as provided by KRS 179.020.
      (3)   All appointments of the Road Department, and removal therefrom,
shall be made by the County Judge Executive with approval of Fiscal Court in
accordance with the provisions of the state law and this chapter. The Fiscal
Court shall establish the number of Road Department employees and the amount of
compensation of all employees of the Road Department.
      (4)   Note: the position can be for two or four years. The terms are set
so that a new administration can choose its Engineer/Supervisor.
   (B)   Duties of Road Supervisor.
      (1)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall be the head of the Road
Department subject to the order and direction of the County Judge.
      (2)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall be responsible for the
performance of the Road Department and its functions, and all persons who are
employees of the Road Department shall be subject to the supervision and
direction of the County Road Supervisor.
      (3)   The Road Supervisor shall keep such records and make such reports
concerning the activities of his or her department as may be required by KRS
Ch. 179, this code or by the County Judge Executive.
   (C)   Road Department property.
      (1)   Employees of the Department shall be responsible for the proper
care of Department equipment and property and shall promptly report to their
supervisor the loss or damage to such property or the unserviceable condition
of such property.
      (2)   No Departmental property or equipment shall be used for private
purposes or on private property. School bus turnarounds and public cemetery
work must be approved, in advance, by the County Judge and only where the
turnaround or cemetery road has been placed in the county road system.
      (3)   Equipment and materials for the road department shall be acquired
in accordance with the provisions of this code.
      (4)   No departmental property or equipment shall be used on private
property without the prior written authorization of the County Judge.
      (5)   Uniforms are furnished to employees of the Road Department by the
county. Road Department employees shall wear said uniforms at all times during
regular working hours.
      (6)   Each employee shall be responsible for the proper use of road
department equipment. Any equipment problems or deficiencies should be reported
immediately to the County Road Engineer/ Supervisor. Trucks and equipment shall
be cleaned at least once a week or more often as such need arises.
      (7)   The County Road Department garage shall be used solely for the
repair, maintenance and storage of official vehicles “official” is defined as a
vehicle owned exclusively by the County Fiscal Court or an agency thereof
having an official registration receipt and license plate issued in accordance
with KRS 186.240. All equipment, vehicles and property owned and or operated by
the Fiscal Court shall be for the sole purpose of official business. No
official, employee or volunteer shall use or permit the use of any publicly
owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, material or service
for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or herself or
any other person unless such use has been formerly authorized by a resolution
of the County Fiscal Court.
   (D)   County road inventory/condition.
      (1)   The County Judge shall maintain a map(s) that clearly identifies
all county roads.
      (2)   The County Judge and County Road Supervisor shall inventory and
review all county roads for identification and condition at least annually.
      (3)   The inventory shall identify all roads by name and/or number; list
the number and location of all bridges; and any other information that may
identify county roads and the condition thereof.
      (4)   The County Road Supervisor shall contact all area utilities
relative to their planned activities prior to surfacing or resurfacing any
county road.
   (E)   Procedures for county road repairs and maintenance.
      (1)   Each magistrate shall inspect roads in his or her district
periodically to determine needs.
      (2)   Each magistrate shall file a road report with the County Judge,
including, but not limited to, the following information:
         (a)   Road name and number;
         (b)   Description of work to be performed; and
         (c)   Any additional information, which shall be deemed necessary.
      (3)   The County Judge shall compile all reports from magistrates and
present a final report to the Fiscal Court for its action.
      (4)   When the Fiscal Court approves county road work, the County Judge
shall direct the Road Supervisor to perform these activities subject to
budgetary constraints.
   (F)   Miscellaneous requirements.
      (1)   Any Road Department employee who notices any deficiencies in county
roads shall report them to the County Road Supervisor as soon as possible and
no later than the end of the same workday.
      (2)   Any problems noticed during off duty hours shall be reported to the
County Road Supervisor the following workday.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.141 COUNTY PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any employee found to have damaged county property may be subject to
discipline, up to and including dismissal.
   (B)   The County Judge and elected officials are responsible for the
equipment that is used in their office. A list of each office’s equipment is to
be kept current. A copy of the list shall be sent to the County Judge’s office
at least annually.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
§ 30.155 AUTHORIZATION OF COUNTY CONTRACTS.
   Every contract, change or amendment thereto, shall be authorized or approved
by the Fiscal Court before being executed by the County Judge, except for small
purchases. The County Attorney shall review every contract of the county, as to
form and legality, except for contracts for small purchases.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.156 SELECTION OF VENDORS AND CONTRACTORS (PROCEDURES FOR SEALED BIDDING).
   (A)   The agency, department or person requiring supplies, services or
construction shall submit to the County Judge a request containing
specifications and quantities desired.
   (B)   The County Judge shall determine the need for each item requested, the
approximate cost and whether or not the expenditure is provided for in the
budget.
   (C)   Any expenditure or contract for materials, supplies (except perishable
meat, fish and vegetables), equipment or for contractual services other than
professional, involving an expenditure of more than $40,000 shall be subject to
competitive bidding.
   (D)   The County Judge shall place an advertisement in the newspaper of the
largest circulation in the county at least once, not less than seven, nor more
than 21 days, before bid opening. The advertisement shall include the time and
place where the specifications may be obtained. If the durability of the
product, the quality of service or other factors are to be considered in bid
selection, such factors shall be stated in the advertisement.
   (E)   The County Judge shall open all bids publicly at the time and place
stated in the advertisements and shall select the lowest and/or best bid by
qualified bidder to be recommended to the Fiscal Court for approval. If the
lowest bid is not selected, the reasons for the selection shall be stated in
writing.
   (F)   The county may opt to allow bidders to submit their bids
electronically if specified in the advertisement. The email subject line shall
acknowledge that the email contains a sealed bid responsive to the particular
advertisement. The email shall be opened in accordance with division (E) above.
Any bid submitted via email that does not include in the subject line
information sufficient for the recipient to know that the email contains a
sealed bid shall not be considered by the county.
   (G)   The county may utilize the reverse auction process in the selection
of, vendors and contractors.
   (H)   The County Judge shall submit the bids to Fiscal Court, noting the
County Judge’s recommended bid. Fiscal Court approval is required.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021; Ord. 23.230-1, passed 7-13-2023)
§ 30.157 DETERMINATION OF QUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS.
   The County Judge may require all bidders to provide sufficient information
to determine their qualification to provide the services or product that is the
subject of the competitive bidding. Contractors who have demonstrated, by past
performance, the ability to perform satisfactory in accordance with the
contracts on a timely basis and have shown a sound financial structure, may be
determined to be qualified and responsible bidders without additional
documentation otherwise required of other potential bidders.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.158 PREREQUISITE TO USE OF NEGOTIATED PROCESS.
   (A)   The negotiated process may be used instead of advertisement for bids
if the amount exceeds $30,000 in the following circumstances:
      (1)   An emergency exists;
      (2)   Bids exceed available funds; or
      (3)   The contract is for professional services.
   (B)   Before an emergency is declared, the County Judge shall determine
whether or not the delay in obtaining bids will result in danger to health,
safety or property.
   (C)   The County Judge shall certify the existence of any emergency and file
a copy of such certificate with the chief financial officer of the county (the
Treasurer).
   (D)   In the event all bids submitted are in excess of funds available, the
County Judge shall prepare a written determination that there are no additional
funds available as to permit an award to the responsible bidder with the lowest
and best bid and that delay in advertising for additional bids is not in the
best interest of the county.
   (E)   The Fiscal Court must approve all circumstances in which the
negotiation process is used.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.159 NEGOTIATED PROCESS.
   (A)   When the prerequisites have been met for use of the negotiated
process, the County Judge shall proceed to negotiate with one or more suppliers
in order to obtain the most advantageous terms for the county.
   (B)   The County Judge shall prepare a record of all negotiated contracts,
showing the items and quantities acquired, name of suppliers, costs and date of
contract.
   (C)   Professional services shall be negotiated with such persons as are
properly licensed to perform such services.
   (D)   Where more than one bid was received and all were in excess of the
amount available, the lowest three bidders shall be notified that the county
desires to negotiate a contract for a lesser amount based on revised quantities
or specifications, and fix a time limit for submission of proposals.
   (E)   The County Judge shall examine the proposals received and shall
negotiate with the suppliers for the terms most advantageous to the county.
   (F)   The best negotiated proposal shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court
for approval and award.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.160 SMALL PURCHASE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All expenditures of less than $30,000 shall be considered a “small
purchase” and are not subject to competitive bidding.
   (B)   The County Judge determines the need for any item requested, and
whether or not the contract is for less than $30,000 and the expenditure is
provided for in the budget.
   (C)   For all “small purchases” exceeding $500, the County Judge shall
require (at his or her discretion) three quotes from prospective suppliers or
vendors, prior to the purchase and then select a purchase most advantageous to
the county, in the judgment and discretion of the County Judge.
   (D)   Venders must be registered with the Fiscal Court before purchases are
made.
   (E)   Projects, which have a accumulative amount higher than $1,000 require
the submission of a project information form “PIF”. The PIF must be approved by
the County Judge Executive prior to the start of the project. Forms are
available in the County Judge Executive’s office.
   (F)   Department heads/fire chiefs and elected officials are responsible for
assuring the appropriation does not exceed the budgeted account. If the
expenditure exceeds the amount appropriated in the budgeted account, the
department head must submit a written request for a budget transfer to the
County Judge Executive. Upon approval by the County Fiscal Court, the County
Judge Executive will submit it to the County Treasurer prior to authorizing the
purchase order.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.161 HOLD HARMLESS CLAUSE.
   All contracts executed on behalf of the county concerning the purchase of
services or products may contain a “hold harmless clause,” whereby the vendor,
provider of services or seller agrees to hold the county harmless from any
liability concerning the use of their product or the receipt of their service.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.162 STORAGE AND INVENTORY CONTROL (PROCEDURES FOR RECEIVING, STORING AND
DISBURSING REPETITIVE USE ITEMS).
   The inventory file shall contain an item inventory number, item description,
date purchased, condition, purchase amount and office assigned for use.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.163 DISPOSITION OF COUNTY SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   (A)   Real property.
      (1)   (a)   In the event the County Judge determines that the county
retains surplus real property and that it will be in the best interest of the
county to dispose of said real property, the County Judge shall make a written
statement with the following information:
            1.   The real or personal property;
            2.   Its intended use at the time of acquisition;
            3.   The reasons why it is in the public interest to dispose of it;
and
            4.   The method of disposition to be used.
         (b)   The property may be transferred via the following method:
            1.   Transferred, with or without compensation, to another
governmental agency;
            2.   Sold at public auction following publication of the auction in
accordance with KRS 424.130(1)(b);
            3.   Sold by electronic auction following publication of the
auction, including the uniform resource link (URL) for the site of the
electronic auction, in accordance with KRS 424.130(1)(b); or
            4.   Sold by sealed bids.
      (2)   The aforementioned statement shall be submitted to the Fiscal Court
for its action.
      (3)   In the event there are no bids for the property, the property shall
be sold by the County Judge in the best interests of the county. No county real
property shall be sold on a negotiated basis for less than the appraised value.
   (B)   Tangible property.
      (1)   The county office, agency or person to which responsibility has
been assigned by the County Judge to use and take care of a particular tangible
item or items will notify the County Judge that a particular item is no longer
needed or serviceable. The County Judge shall inquire of other county offices
to determine if they have need of, or want to use, the item.
      (2)   If no use for the property can be found, the property shall be
disposed of in the same manner as real property; except that, no appraisal is
required.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 30.175 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (A)   All agencies which receive county funding shall file a copy of the
agency’s annual budget with the County Judge. It shall also file a copy of each
audit required by law with the County Judge and the County Clerk.
   (B)   All agencies which receive county funding shall maintain a financial
record of the agency activities containing the amount budgeted for the year,
the amount expended to date and the balance available. By the fifth business
day of each month, the head of each county agency and each county department
shall provide the County Judge with the following information:
      (1)   A statement which describes the agency’s or department’s activities
during the month;
      (2)   A financial statement containing the total amount of appropriations
for the agency, the amount spent and encumbered by the agency during the
preceding month, the total amount encumbered during the fiscal year and the
amount of the total appropriation, which is still available for spending; and
      (3)   A list of any citizen complaints made to the agency or department
during the preceding month and the steps taken to correct the situation.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.176 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   All meetings at which county business is discussed by an agency which
receives county funds, or any action taken by said agency, shall be open to the
public, unless exempt by KRS 61.810. A majority of the members of the agency
board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of official business. A record
of all motions on official actions taken by the agency shall be kept and made
available to the County Judge upon his or her request.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
§ 30.190 PROCEDURES FOR CREATION AND DISSOLUTION.
   (A)   A special district may be created in accordance with applicable
statutory law, including KRS Ch. 65A.
   (B)   A special district may be combined with another district or dissolved
in accordance with KRS Ch. 65A, KRS Ch. 67 or other applicable provision.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.191 APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVAL.
   Special district board members may be removed in accordance with applicable
statutory law.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
COUNTY SERVICES
§ 30.205 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (ROAD DEPARTMENT).
   (A)   The Public Works Department shall be responsible for the maintenance,
construction and upkeep of all roads and bridges in the County Road System, and
the construction, maintenance and upkeep of the county parks and recreational
areas.
   (B)   The County Road Engineer/Supervisor shall head this Department.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.206 COUNTY ROAD SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court shall designate by resolution which roads in the
county will be on the County Road System and maintained by the Public Works
Department.
   (B)   Those roads so designated shall include for county maintenance all
appurtenant bridges, side ditches, headwalls, culverts, guardrail systems and
traffic control devices unless specifically excluded by an agreement.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.207 CONTENTS OF PLANNING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The county shall provide for comprehensive planning and the
implementation of subdivision guidelines in accordance with a contract with the
County Joint Planning Commission.
   (B)   Building and electrical inspections, as required by state law, shall
be provided by the Fiscal Court through contract with duly appointed inspectors
and reviewed for quality of work/services yearly.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
INTERNET, EMAIL AND SOCIAL MEDIA
§ 30.220 ACCEPTABLE USE OF INTERNET AND EMAIL.
   (A)   The county-provided internet and email access is intended for business
purposes only. The county encourages the use of the internet and email because
it makes communication more efficient and effective. However, internet service
and email are county property, and their purpose is to facilitate county
business. Every staff member has a responsibility to maintain and enhance the
county’s public image and to use county email and access to the internet in a
productive manner. To ensure that all employees are responsible, the following
guidelines have been established for using email and the internet. Any improper
use of the internet or email is not acceptable and will result in appropriate
disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal.
   (B)   The county internet and email access may not be used for transmitting,
retrieving or storage of any communications of a discriminatory or harassing
nature or materials that are obscene or X-rated. Harassment of any kind is
prohibited. No messages with derogatory or inflammatory remarks about race,
age, disability, religion, national origin, physical attributes or sexual
preference shall be transmitted. No abusive, profane or offensive language is
allowed to be transmitted through the county’s email or Internet system.
Electronic media may not be used for any purpose which is illegal, deceptive or
against county policy or contrary to the county’s best interest. Solicitation
of non-county email or internet for personal gain is prohibited. Employees are
prohibited from chat room interchange unless established by government
agencies.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.221 COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Each employee is personally responsible for the content of all test,
audio or images that he, she or they place or send over the county’s email/
internet system. No email or other electronic communications may be sent which
hides the identity of the sender or represents the sender as someone else or
someone from another entity. All messages communicated on the county’s email/
internet system should contain the employee’s name. Excessive personal
communications are prohibited.
   (B)   Any messages or information sent by an employee to another individual
outside the county via an electronic network (e.g., bulletin board, online
service or Internet) are statements that reflect on the county. While some
users include personal “disclaimers” in electronic messages, there is still a
connection to the county and the statements may be tied to the county.
   (C)   All communications sent by employees via the county’s email/internet
system must comply with this and other county policies and may not disclose any
confidential or proprietary information.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.222 SOFTWARE.
   To prevent computer viruses from being transmitted through the county’s
email/internet system, there will be no unauthorized downloading of any
unauthorized software. All software downloaded must be registered to the
county. Employees should contact the County Judge Executive if they have any
questions.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.223 COPYRIGHT ISSUES.
   Copyrighted material belonging to entities other than the county may not be
transmitted by employees on the county’s email/internet system. All employees
obtaining access to other companies’ or individuals’ materials must respect all
copyrights and shall not copy, retrieve, modify or forward copyrighted
materials, except with permission, or as a single copy, to reference only.
Failure to observe copyright or license agreements may result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.224 SECURITY.
   (A)   The county routinely monitors usage patterns for its email/internet
communications. The reasons for this monitoring are many, including cost
analysis/allocation and the management of the county’s gateway to the internet.
All messages created, sent or retrieved over the county’s email/internet are
the property of the county and should be considered public information.
      (1)   The county reserves the right to access and monitor all messages
and files on the county’s email/internet system. Employees should not assume
electronic communications are totally private and should transmit highly
confidential data in other ways.
      (2)   Passwords and sign-on access codes shall not be shared with anyone
including coworkers, family members or other unauthorized personnel. A county
employee will be designated as system administrator for email/internet
purposes.
   (B)   The county shall abide by KRS Ch. 61, Personal Information Security
Procedures, and the commonwealth’s Department for Local Government guidelines
on reasonable security and breach investigation procedures and practices for
personal information whether in electronic or paper formats.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.225 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any employee who abuses the privilege of county-facilitated access to
email or the internet will be subject to corrective action up to and including
termination.
   (B)   If necessary, the county reserves the right to advise appropriate
officials of any suspected illegal violations.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.226 COMPUTER USE.
   This policy establishes guidelines for the appropriate use of computer
equipment, software and networks owned or operated by the County Fiscal Court.
Access to the Court’s information systems is granted to all court employees
with the stipulation that they follow these guidelines and abide by local,
state and federal laws.
   (A)   Using computer resources. The County Fiscal Court resources are
provided to employees for the purpose of research, service and other work-
related activities. All computer users are responsible for assuring that use of
computer resources is related to the purposes established herein.
      (1)   Computer accounts, passwords and equipment should be used only for
official county business.
      (2)   Computer accounts, passwords and equipment should be protected
against unauthorized use. Employees should never share accounts. They are
responsible for all activities initiated under their account. Under special
circumstances, accounts may be shared with employees working on the same
project. The employee’s direct supervisor or the information services
specialist will determine such exceptions.
      (3)   Employees should not share accounts with friends or family.
      (4)   Computer users should not acquire extra accounts or other resources
and should surrender any accounts or equipment when it no longer serves the
purpose for which it was originally assigned.
   (B)   Protecting computer resources and county data. All computer users
should assume the responsibility to keep the computing system running and its
resources unaltered and protected from damage and illegal use.
      (1)   No employee should use knowledge of the computer system to destroy
or alter accounts, files, software, hardware, obtain extra resources or deprive
others of computer resources.
      (2)   All computer users who possess this sort of knowledge or knowledge
of bugs or other flaws in the system have the responsibility to share that
knowledge with the information services specialist.
      (3)   No employee should make copies of software for which permission to
copy is not explicitly given. Employees who have been granted access to county
data, reports, and data screens must maintain the appropriate confidentiality
of the resulting information. Furthermore, the information should be obtained
only for activities directly related to the individual’s job assignments.
   (C)   Restrictions on privacy. There are legitimate restrictions on the
privacy of employee programs, data, text files and electronic mail. The
following are some legitimate reasons for accessing computer accounts and
computer equipment without the employee’s permission:
      (1)   Technical personnel may access accounts for the purpose of
maintaining computer systems;
      (2)   Accounts may be monitored for the purpose of detecting violations
of this chapter;
      (3)   Accounts may be monitored for the purpose of maintenance of the
network;
      (4)   Some electronic documents and data may be required by the public
record law to be accessible to the public;
      (5)   Other reasons as deemed appropriate by the information services
specialist, his or her supervisor or the Judge Executive.
   (D)   Sharing information and communication through computers. Employees
should not use the County Fiscal Court’s computer equipment or network to do
the following:
      (1)   Decode passwords or access-controlled information;
      (2)   Engage in any activity that might be harmful to systems or to any
information stored therein, such as creating or propagating viruses, disrupting
services or damaging files;
      (3)   Use mail or message services to harass, intimidate or otherwise
annoy another person;
      (4)   Use mail or message services to make racially or sexually harassing
remarks to groups or individuals;
      (5)   Use the everyone group or any other public email group for
socializing, personal comments, distributing chain letters and the like.
Individual addresses should be used for personal message and communications;
and/or
      (6)   Use email, message services or system resources to promote a
commercial enterprise or product.
   (E)   Disclaimers. The County Fiscal Court reserves the right to limit,
restrict or extend computing privileges and access to its information
resources. It also reserves the right to examine files allegedly related to
inappropriate use.
   (F)   Enforcement. Any violation of these guidelines may result in immediate
loss of email, network and computer access privileges and possible disciplinary
action as outlined herein. Reviews of usage patterns will be performed if
violations of this policy are suspected.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.227 SOCIAL MEDIA.
   (A)   Management guidelines.
      (1)   Social media includes all means of communicating or posting
information or content of any sort on the internet, including to your own or
someone else’s web log or blog journal or diary, personal web site, social
networking or affinity website, web bulletin board or a chat room, whether or
not associated or affiliated with County Fiscal Court, as well as any other
form of electronic communication.
      (2)   The principles contained in this chapter and policies apply to
employees’ activities online:
         (a)   Employees are responsible for what they post online;
         (b)   Before creating online content, consider the risks and rewards
involved; and
         (c)   Employee conduct adversely affecting job performance, the
performance of other County Fiscal Court employees or otherwise adversely
affecting the public or others who work on behalf of or for County Fiscal
Court’s legitimate business interests may result in disciplinary action up to
and including termination.
      (3)   Conduct adversely affecting job performance includes harassment, as
defined in this chapter and includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping or threatening,
intimidating or hostile acts relating to race, color, religion, gender,
national origin, age or disability; and/or
         (b)   Written or graphic material that denigrates or shows hostility
or aversion toward an individual or group because of race, color, religion,
gender, national origin, age or disability.
      (4)   Employees posting discriminatory remarks, harassment and threats of
violence or similar inappropriate or unlawful conduct are subject to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
      (5)   Employees shall treat other employees, the public, suppliers and
others fairly and courteously at all times including online postings.
      (6)   Posting complaints or criticisms of other County Fiscal Court
employees, using statements, photographs, videos or audios reasonably viewed as
malicious, obscene, threatening or intimidating, disparaging of other
employees, the general public using County Fiscal Court facilities or suppliers
may constitute harassment and subject the employee to disciplinary action up to
and including termination.
      (7)   Employees shall post only honest and accurate information or news
concerning County Fiscal Court, its employees, policies and business
activities.
      (8)   Employees shall correct any mistaken information concerning County
Fiscal Court employees, policies and business activities in an online posting
immediately upon discovery.
      (9)   Employees shall acknowledge their alteration of any previous posts.
      (10)   Employees shall not post false information or rumors about County
Fiscal Court employees, members of the public using County Fiscal Court
facilities, County Fiscal Court policies or business activities.
      (11)   Employees shall post only appropriate and respectful content.
      (12)   Employees shall maintain the confidentiality of private or
confidential information of other employees.
      (13)   Employees shall not post internal reports, policies, procedures or
other internal business-related confidential communication until and unless
permitted by an authorized County Fiscal Court employee.
      (14)   Employees shall not create a link from an employee’s blog, website
or other social networking site to a County Fiscal Court website.
      (15)   Employees may never represent themselves as a spokesperson for
County Fiscal Court.
      (16)   If County Fiscal Court is a subject of the content employee
creates, employee must clearly and openly state that they are an employee and
clearly state that the views stated do not represent those of the County Fiscal
Court, other employees, suppliers or people working on behalf of the County
Fiscal Court. If an employee publishes a blog or posts online content related
to the work or subjects associated with the County Fiscal Court, the employee
must state clearly that they are not speaking on behalf of the County Fiscal
Court. Employee shall include disclaimer such as “The postings on this site are
my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of McLean County Fiscal Court.”
   (B)   Using social media at work.
      (1)   Employees shall refrain from using social media while on work time
or on equipment provided by the County Fiscal Court, unless work-related and
authorized by the employee’s supervisor, manager or consistent with the
policies contained in this chapter.
      (2)   Employees shall not use the County Fiscal Court email addresses to
register on social networks, blogs or other online tools utilized for personal
use.
   (C)   Retaliation is prohibited.
      (1)   The County Fiscal Court employees shall not take negative action
against any other County Fiscal Court employee for reporting a possible
deviation from this policy or for cooperating in an investigation.
      (2)   Any employee who retaliates against another employee for reporting
a possible deviation from this policy or for cooperating in an investigation
will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   (D)   Media contacts.
      (1)   Employees should not speak to the media on the County Fiscal
Court’s behalf without contacting the County Judge Executive or designated
representative.
      (2)   If you have questions or need further guidance, please contact the
Human Resources Department.
(Ord. 21.230-1, passed 7-8-2021)
CHAPTER 31: CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Introduction; purpose and authority
   
31.02   Definitions
   
31.03   Nepotism
Standards of Conduct
   
31.15   Conflicts of interest in general
   
31.16   Conflicts of interest in contracts
   
31.17   Receipt of gifts
   
31.18   Use of county property, equipment and personnel
   
31.19   Representation of interests before county government
   
31.20   Misuse of confidential information
   
31.21   Post-employment restriction
   
31.22   Honoraria
Financial Disclosure
   
31.35   Who must file
   
31.36   When to file statements; amended statements
   
31.37   Form of the statement of financial interests
   
31.38   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial interests
   
31.39   Contents of the financial interests statement
   
31.40   Non-compliance with filing requirement
Enforcement
   
31.55   Board of Ethics created
   
31.56   Administrative official
   
31.57   Expenses of the Board of Ethics
   
31.58   Board of Ethics; powers and duties
   
31.59   Filing and investigation of complaints
   
31.60   Notice of hearings
   
31.61   Hearing procedures
   
31.62   Appeals
   
31.63   Limitation of actions
   
31.64   Advisory opinions
   
31.65   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited
 
   
31.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “County of
McLean Code of Ethics”.
   (B)   Findings. The legislative body of the county finds and declares that:
      (1)   Public office and employment with the city are public trusts;
      (2)   The vitality and stability of the government of the county depends
upon the public’s confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
officers and employees. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the
private interests and public duties of a city officer or employee, that
confidence is imperiled; and
      (3)   The government of the county has a duty to provide its citizens
with standards by which they may determine whether public duties are being
faithfully performed, and to make its officers and employees aware of the
standards which the citizenry rightfully expects them to comply with while
conducting their public duties.
   (C)   Purpose and authority.
      (1)   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring
that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the county shall be clearly established, uniform in
their application and enforceable, and to provide the officers and employees of
the county with advice and information concerning potential conflicts of
interest which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
      (2)   It is the further purpose of this chapter to meet the requirements
of H.B.238, as enacted by the 1994 State General Assembly.
      (3)   This chapter is enacted under the power vested in the county by KRS
82.082 and pursuant to requirements of HB 238.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF ETHICS. The joint City and County Board of Ethics which is created
and vested by this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing the
requirements of the county’s Code of Ethics.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation or any legal entity through which business is conducted for profit.
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a county
office. An individual is a CANDIDATE when the individual files a notification
and declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a declaration
of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State.
   COUNTY. Refers to the County of McLean, Kentucky.
   COUNTY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, non-stock corporation or
other entity created, either individually or jointly, by the county.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the county. EMPLOYEE shall
not include any contractor or subcontractor, or any of the (sub)contractor’s
employees.
   FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in the
officer’s or employee’s household, or a person claimed by the officer or
employee or the officer’s or employee’s spouse as a dependent for tax purposes.
   OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is one of the following:
   (1)   The Mayor;
   (2)   A legislative body member;
   (3)   The County Clerk;
   (4)   Any person who occupies a non-elected office created under KRS
83A.080; or
   (5)   A member of the governing body of any county agency who has been
appointed to the governing body of the agency by the county.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.03 NEPOTISM.
   (A)   No county government officer or county government employee shall act
in his or her official capacity to hire or cause to be hired any member of his
or her immediate family at an hourly pay rate or with benefits in excess of any
other employee with similar job duties, responsibilities and qualification
requirements.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to restrain or
prohibit any unit or sub-unit of the county or county government from adopting
rules and policies containing stricter nepotism standards.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 31.15 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.
   Every officer and employee of the county and every county agency shall
comply with the following standards of conduct.
   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any officer
or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any business,
transaction or activity which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of the officer’s or employee’s public duties.
   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to use his
or her official position with the county to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself or herself or others.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or refrain from taking
any discretionary action, or agree to take or refrain from taking any
discretionary action, or induce or attempt to induce any other officer or
employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary action, on any matter
before the county in order to obtain a financial benefit for any of the
following:
      (1)   The officer or employee;
      (2)   A family member;
      (3)   An outside employer;
      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or any family member
has a financial interest; or
      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any family
member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other business or
professional relationship.
   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any provision
in this section if, by reason of the officer’s or employee’s participation,
vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit accrues to the officer
or employee, a family member, an outside employer or a business as defined in
division (C)(4) and (C)(5) above, as a member of any business, occupation,
profession or other group, to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably
be expected to accrue to any other member of the business, occupation,
profession or other group.
   (E)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial interest
which the officer or employee believes or has reason to believe may be affected
by his or her participation, vote, decision or other action taken within the
scope of his or her public duties shall disclose the precise nature and value
of the interest to the governing body of the county or county agency served by
the officer or employee, and the disclosure shall be entered on the official
record of the proceedings of the governing body. The officer or employee shall
refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that is the subject
of the disclosure.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.16 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the county or any county agency shall
directly or through others undertake, execute, hold or enjoy, in whole or in
part, any contract made, entered into, awarded or granted by the county or a
county agency, except as follows.
      (1)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply to contracts
entered into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for county office
before an appointed officer was appointed to a county or county agency office,
or before an employee was hired by the county or a county agency. However, if
any contract entered into by a county or county agency officer or employee
before he or she became a candidate was appointed to office, was hired as an
employee, is renewable after he or she becomes a candidate, assumes the
appointed office or is hired as an employee, then the prohibition in this
division (A) shall apply to the renewal of the contract.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply in any case
where all of the following requirements are satisfied:
         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature
of the officer’s or employee’s interest in the contract are publicly disclosed
at a meeting of the governing body of the county or county agency;
         (b)   The disclosure is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the county or county agency before the contract is executed;
         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the county or county
agency that the contract with the officer or employee is in the best interests
of the public and the county or county agency because of price, limited supply,
emergency or other specific reasons; and
         (d)   The finding is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the county or county agency before the contract is executed.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor,
and, upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered into in violation
of this section. Additionally, a violation of this section shall be grounds for
removal from office or employment with the county in accordance with any
applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules or regulations of the
county.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.17 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
   No officer or employee of the county or any county agency shall directly, or
indirectly through any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift
having a fair market value of more than $100, whether in the form of money,
service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing, promise or any other
form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the
gift was intended to influence or could reasonably be expected to influence the
officer or employee in the performance of his or her public duties.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.18 USE OF COUNTY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.
   No officer or employee of the county shall use or permit the use of any
county time, funds, personnel, equipment or other personal or real property for
the private use of any person, unless:
   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated county policy; or
   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to the
extent and upon the terms that such use is available to the general public.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.19 REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE COUNTY GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the county or any county agency shall
represent any person or business, other than the county, in connection with any
cause, proceeding, application or other matter pending before the county or any
county agency.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from representing
another employee or employees where the representation is within the context of
official labor union or similar representational responsibilities.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee from
representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own interests.
   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from making any
inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no compensation, reward
or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer,
whether directly or indirectly, in return for the inquiry.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.20 MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No officer or employee of the county or any county agency shall
intentionally use or disclose information acquired in the course or his or her
official duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to further
his or her personal financial interest or that of another person or business.
Information shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to disclosure
pursuant to the State Open Records Act, being KRS 61.872 through 61.884, at the
time of its use or disclosure.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.21 POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.
   No officer or employee of the county or any county agency shall appear or
practice before the county or any county agency with respect to any specific
matter on which the officer or employee personally worked while in the service
of the county or county agency for a period of one year after the termination
of the officer’s or employee’s service with the county or county agency.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.22 HONORARIA.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the county or a county agency shall accept
any compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market value greater than $100
in consideration of an appearance, speech or article unless the appearance,
speech or article is both related to the officer’s or employee’s activities
outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the officer’s or employee’s
service with the county.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer or employee of the
county or any county agency from receiving and retaining from the county or on
behalf of the county actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the officer or employee in connection with an appearance, speech or article,
provided that the officer or employee can show by clear and convincing evidence
that the expenses were incurred or received on behalf of the county or county
agency and primarily for the benefit of the county or county agency and not
primarily for the benefit of the officer or employee or any other person.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 31.35 WHO MUST FILE.
   The following classes of officers and employees of the county and county
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the Board
of Ethics:
   (A)   Elected county officials;
   (B)   Candidates for elected county office;
   (C)   Members of the County Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Adjustment;
   (D)   Members of the Board of Ethics created by this chapter; and
   (E)   Non-elected officers and employees of the county or any county agency
who are authorized to make purchases of materials or services, or award
contracts, leases or agreements involving the expenditure of more than $500.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.36 WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this section
shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official
designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics, no later
than 4:30 p.m. on April 15, 1995. All subsequent statements of financial
interest shall be filed no later than 4:30 p.m. on February 15 each year,
provided that:
      (1)   An officer or employee newly-appointed to fill an office or
position of employment with the county or a county agency shall file his or her
initial statement no later than 30 days after the date of the appointment; and
      (2)   A candidate for county office shall file his or her initial
statement no later than 30 days after the date on which the person becomes a
candidate for elected county office.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time for
filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.
   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information contained
in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board of Ethics, the
officer or employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of the
material change, file an amended statement with the Board of Ethics.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.37 FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form prescribed by
the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official designated by the Board of
Ethics. The Board of Ethics or the designated administrative official shall
deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee required to file the
statement, by first class mail or hand-delivery, no later than March 15, 1995
the first year, and January 15 of each year thereafter. The failure of the
Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative official, to deliver a copy
of the form to any officer or employee shall not relieve the officer or
employee of the obligation to file the statement.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.38 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the “official custodian” of the
statements of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance
of the statements of financial interests. The statements of financial interests
shall be maintained by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official
designated by the Board of Ethics as the “custodian,” as public documents,
available for public inspection immediately upon filing.
   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the Board of
Ethics, or the designated administrative official, for a period of five years
after filing, provided that:
      (1)   Upon the expiration of three years after a person ceases to be an
officer or employee of the county or a county agency, the Board of Ethics shall
cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of those
statements filed by the person; or
      (2)   Upon the expiration of three years after any election at which a
candidate for elected county office was not elected or nominated, the Board of
Ethics shall cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or
copies of those statements filed by the person.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.39 CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the following
information for the preceding calendar year:
      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone number and
home address of the filer;
      (2)   The title of the filer’s office, office sought or position of
employment;
      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the filer’s spouse.
      (4)   Information that identifies each source of income of the filer and
the filer’s immediate family members exceeding $5,000 during the preceding
calendar year, and the nature of the income (e.g., salary, commission,
dividends, retirement fund distribution and the like);
      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the state in
which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had at any time
during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 at fair market value
or 5% ownership interest or more;
      (6)   The name and address of any business located outside of the state,
if the business has engaged in any business transactions with the county during
the past three years, or which is anticipated to engage in any business
transactions with the county, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s
immediate family had at any time during the preceding calendar year an interest
of $10,000 at fair market value or 5% ownership interest or more; and
      (7)   A designation as commercial, residential or rural, and the location
of all real property within the county, other than the filer’s primary
residence, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had
during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 or more.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer or
employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of individual
clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.40 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative official,
shall notify by certified mail each person required to file a statement of
financial interests who fails to file the statement by the due date, files an
incomplete statement or files a statement in a form other than that prescribed
by the Board of Ethics.
      (2)   The notice shall specify the type of failure or delinquency, shall
establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall be remedied and
shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.
   (B)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial interests
which he or she knows to contain false information or intentionally omits
required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 31.55 BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Board of Ethics shall be composed
of representatives appointed by each of the parties to interlocal agreement to
wit: the City of Calhoun, the City of Island, the City of Livermore, the City
of Sacramento and McLean County, each of whom shall appoint one member. The
Board of Ethics shall consist of five members which shall be appointed by the
executive authority of each participating unit of government subject to the
approval of the legislative body. Each appointment shall be subject to the
approval of the legislative body of the respective governmental unit making the
nomination. The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed
within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, which was immediately
upon publication, as required by KRS 83A.060.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of five members who shall be
appointed by the executive authority of the county, subject to the approval of
the legislative body. The initial members of the Board of Ethics shall be
appointed within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, which was
immediately upon publication, as required by KRS 83A. No member of the Board of
Ethics shall hold any elected or appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or
any position of employment with the county or any county agency. The members
shall serve for a term of three years, except that with respect to the members
initially appointed, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two
members shall be appointed for a term of two years and two members shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for
a term of three years. Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a
resident of the county for at least one year prior to the date of the
appointment and shall reside in the county throughout the term in office. The
members of the Board of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and
consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government
affairs. The members may be re-appointed for any number of consecutive terms.
No member shall hold any appointed office.
   (C)   In order to provide for the staggered terms in the preceding paragraph
the member of the Board appointed by the City of Saccramento shall initially be
appointed for a one year term. The representatives appointed from the City of
Island and County of McLean shall initially be appointed for a two-year term.
The remaining two members representing the City of Livermore and the City of
Calhoun shall be appointed for a three-year term.
   (D)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the executive
authority of the governmental subdivision appointing that member, subject to
the approval of the legislative body for misconduct, inability or willful
neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed from
office under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a
hearing before the executive authority and the legislative body. A hearing
before the executive authority and legislative body of the governmental
authority appointing said member.
   (E)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the
executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative body. If a
vacancy is not filled by the executive authority within 60 days, the remaining
members of the Board of Ethics shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (F)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation,
unless compensation is provided by the legislative body appointing each member.
   (G)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter, elect a Chairperson from among the
membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board of Ethics.
   (H)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held as necessary, upon the
call of the Chairperson or at the written request of a majority of the members.
   (I)   The presence of three or more members shall constitute a quorum and
the affirmative vote of three or more members shall be necessary for any
official action to be taken. Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a
conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board
of Ethics shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself
or herself from voting on the matter and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.
   (J)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics and
the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board of Ethics shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.56 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL.
   The County Court Clerk shall serve as the administrative official
responsible for receiving, filing and maintaining all disclosure matters
required under this chapter, together with the minutes and other records of the
Board of Ethics. All such records shall be maintained as specified in this
chapter or as required by the Board of Ethics, whichever is longer.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.57 EXPENSES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.
   (A)   All agencies participating in the interlocal agreement in adopting
this chapter shall jointly provide for the actual expenses of the Board of
Ethics. Each agency shall contribute an amount not to exceed $100 per year.
   (B)   Upon receipt of notification by the Board of Ethics that said funds
are needed in a particular fiscal year, amounts in addition to said $100 may be
requested by the Board of Ethics, but contributions and the amounts thereof
must be approved by each governmental agency participating in the interlocal
agreement.
   (C)   The participating agencies may, by separate agreement, provide for one
or more of said agencies to directly pay expenses of the Board of Ethics and
bill equal amounts to the remaining participating agencies.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.58 BOARD OF ETHICS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate complaints,
hold hearings and make findings of fact and determinations with regard to
alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings
requiring persons to submit, in writing and under oath, reports and answers to
questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order testimony to be
taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Board of Ethics who
has the power to administer oaths;
   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating to
an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board of Ethics;
   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter to the
executive authority of the county, the county legislative body, the governing
body of any county agency, the County Attorney or other appropriate person or
body, as necessary;
   (E)   To render advisory opinions to county and county agency officers and
employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this chapter;
   (F)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all officers
and employees of the county and county agencies who are subject to its terms by
issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this chapter;
   (G)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests that are
required to be filed by this chapter and to insure that the statements are
available for public inspection in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the State Open Records Act;
   (H)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or legislative body of
the county; and
   (I)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
rules, regulations and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter or any state or federal law.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.59 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant and shall meet any other requirements established by
the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge receipt of a
complaint to the complainant within 20 working days from the date of receipt.
The Board of Ethics shall forward within 20 working days to each officer or
employee of the county or county agency who is the subject of the complaint, a
copy of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Within 45 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board of
Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations contained
in the complaint. The Board of Ethics shall afford a person who is the subject
of the complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the complaint.
The person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear and be
heard under oath and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.
   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being
conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board of Ethics, except:
      (1)   The Board of Ethics may turn over to the Commonwealth Attorney or
County Attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings; and
      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly disclose the
existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board of Ethics may publicly confirm
the existence of the inquiry, and, at its discretion, make public any documents
which were issued to either party.
   (D)   The Board of Ethics shall make a determination based on its
preliminary inquiry whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if
so, whether it alleges a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of
this chapter. If the Board of Ethics concludes that the complaint is outside of
its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, the Board of Ethics shall
immediately terminate the inquiry, reduce the conclusion to writing and
transmit a copy of its decision to the complainant and to all officers or
employees against whom the complaint was filed.
   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry,
that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains allegations
sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation, the
Board of Ethics shall notify the officer or employee who is the subject of the
complaint and may:
      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances, such as lack of significant
economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee, lack of economic loss to
the county and its taxpayers or lack of significant impact on public confidence
in county government, issue, in writing, a confidential reprimand to the
officer or employee concerning the alleged violation and provide a copy of the
confidential reprimand to the executive authority and governing body of the
county or county agency; or
      (2)   Initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation.
   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board of Ethics a false
complaint alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer
or employee of the county or any county agency shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.60 NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board of Ethics shall issue an
order setting the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the order is
issued, unless the alleged violator petitions for and the Board of Ethics
consents to a later date. The order setting the matter for hearing, along with
a copy of any pertinent regulations of the Board of Ethics relating to the
hearing shall be sent to the alleged violator within 24 hours of the time the
order setting a hearing is issued.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.61 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The State Rules of Civil Procedure and the State Rules of Evidence
shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics; however, the
hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in accordance
with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Ethics so as
to afford all parties the full range of due process rights required by the
nature of the proceedings.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged violator or his
or her representative shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine all
documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board of Ethics in connection
with the matter to be heard. The Board of Ethics shall inform the alleged
violator or his or her representative of any exculpatory evidence it its
possession.
   (C)   All testimony in a Board of Ethics hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to call
and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses, to
submit evidence and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall have the
right to be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who may be
adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the Board of Ethics,
with or without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention, or
may file a written statement regarding the adverse mention for incorporation
into the record of the proceeding.
   (E)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless the
members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.
   (F)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall, as
soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for the purpose
of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination whether a
violation of this chapter has been proven. Within 30 days after completion of
the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall issue a written report of its findings
and conclusions.
   (G)   If the Board of Ethics concludes in its report that no violation of
this chapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint
and to the party who filed the complaint.
   (H)   If the Board of Ethics concludes in its report that in consideration
of the evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of
a violation of this chapter, the Board of Ethics may take one or more of the
following actions:
      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the
violation;
      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the violations and
provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and governing body
of the county or county agency with which the violator serves;
      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the governing
body (if different than the executive authority) that the violator be
sanctioned as recommended by the Board of Ethics, which may include a
recommendation for discipline or dismissal, or removal from office;
      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty,
further described in §
31.99; and/or
      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or state laws
to the County Attorney or Commonwealth Attorney of the jurisdiction for
prosecution.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.62 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court of
the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall transmit to the Court Clerk all evidence
considered by the Board of Ethics at the public hearing.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.63 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law,
an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one year after
the violation is discovered.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.64 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning matters
under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer or
employee of the county or a county agency who is covered by this chapter.
   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state
relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory opinion
shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in writing, by the
requestor.
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Ethics may adopt regulations consistent with the
State Open Records Law to establish criteria under which it will issue
confidential advisory opinions.
      (2)   All other advisory opinions shall be public documents, except that
before an advisory opinion is made public, it shall be modified so that the
identity of any person associated with the opinion shall not be revealed.
   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived, either:
      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion; or
      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Board of Ethics, if a person
makes or purports to make public the substance or any portion of an advisory
opinion requested by or on behalf of the person. The Board of Ethics may vote
to make public the advisory opinion request and related materials.
   (E)   (1)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board of Ethics shall
be binding on the Board of Ethics in any subsequent proceeding concerning the
facts and circumstances of the particular case if no intervening facts or
circumstances arise which would change the opinion of the Board of Ethics if
they had existed at the time the opinion was rendered.
      (2)   However, if any fact determined by the Board of Ethics to be
material was omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the Board of
Ethics shall not be bound by the opinion.
   (F)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board of Ethics shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 31.65 REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the county or any county agency shall
subject to reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any
official authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to
discourage, restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce or discriminate
against any person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges or otherwise
brings to the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency or official
of the county or the commonwealth any facts or information relative to an
actual or suspected violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting disciplinary or
punitive action if an officer or employee of the county or any county agency
discloses information which he or she knows:
      (1)   To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless disregard
for its truth or falsity;
      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of the
State Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884; or
      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this chapter,
any officer or employee of the county or any county agency who is found by the
Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine imposed by the
Board of Ethics not to exceed $1,000, which may be recovered by the cities and
the county who are then participating in an ongoing joint Ethics Board, being
the Board of Ethics, created by this chapter and interlocal agreement. Any
civil fine shall be divided equally between the participating parties.
   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, any officer or employee of the county or any county agency who is
found by the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter
shall forfeit to the county or the county agency an amount equal to the
economic benefit or gain which the officer or employee is determined by the
Board of Ethics to have realized as a result of the violation. The amount of
any forfeiture may be recovered by the county and county that are then
participating in an ongoing joint Ethics Board, being the Board of Ethics, in a
civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender fails to pay the amount of
the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.
   (C)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer or employee of the
county or any county agency is guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action
by the executive authority of the county or county agency, or by any other
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline. Any action to
remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of this chapter
shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the county and all applicable laws of the commonwealth.
   (D)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who fails or
refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the notice under §
31.40 within the time period established in the notice shall be guilty of a
civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board of
Ethics in an amount not to exceed $25 per day, up to a maximum total civil fine
of $500. Any civil fine imposed by the Board of Ethics under §
31.40 may be recovered by the county in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender fails or refuses to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of
time.
   (E)   Based on the violation described §
31.56(H)(4), the Board of Ethics may issue an order requiring the violator to
pay a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.
(Ord. 94-130.1, passed 12-12-1994)
CHAPTER 32: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Cemetery Board
   
32.02   Emergency Management Agency
   
32.03   Electrical Inspector
Code Enforcement Board
   
32.15   Creation and membership
   
32.16   Powers
   
32.17   Board members
   
32.18   Organization of Board; quorum
   
32.19   Conflict of interest
   
32.20   Jurisdiction
   
32.21   Powers of the Code Enforcement Board
   
32.22   Enforcement proceedings
   
32.23   Hearing; notice; final order
   
32.24   Legal counsel
   
32.25   Appeals; final judgment
   
32.26   Ordinance fine schedule
   
32.27   Liens; fines; charges; fees
   
32.28   Code Enforcement officer
 
   
32.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 CEMETERY BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created the County Cemetery Board.
   (B)   The County Cemetery Board shall meet at least three times annually
with meeting places being provided by the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   The Board shall have five volunteer members, who shall have lived in
the county for at least one year prior to their appointment. Each member shall
have demonstrated an interest in cemetery preservation, genealogy, local
history or a related area.
   (D)   The Cemetery Board shall have no more than three of its members
representing the same political party.
   (E)   Each appointment shall be for a term of four years, except for the
initial appointment terms. With respect to the initial appointments, two
members shall be appointed to a one-year term, two members shall be appointed
to two-year terms and one member shall be appointed to a three-year term. The
expiration of each of the listed terms, the appointments shall be for a four-
year term.
   (F)   Members may serve more than one term.
   (G)   The membership shall elect a Chairperson who shall conduct meetings.
   (H)   All meetings of the Cemetery Board shall be subject to the
commonwealth’s Open Meetings laws, being KRS 61.825 et seq.
   (I)   Any grant application proposed by the Board shall be subject to Fiscal
Court approval.
(Ord. 04-610.1, passed 2-10-2004)
§ 32.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created the County Emergency Management Agency,
in accordance with the provisions of KRS Ch. 39A to 39F, which shall serve in
the interest of public safety within the territorial boundaries of the county.
      (2)   The County Emergency Management Agency shall develop, implement and
maintain the local comprehensive emergency management program for the county in
accordance with the provisions of KRS Ch. 39A to 39F, the comprehensive
emergency management program requirements of the state’s Division of Emergency
Management, the provisions of the state’s Emergency Operations Plan,
administrative regulations promulgated by the state’s Division of Emergency
Management, and the resolutions, orders or ordinances of the Fiscal Court of
the county.
      (3)   The County Emergency Management Agency shall be an organizational
unit of county government attached to the office of County Judge Executive and
shall have primary jurisdiction, responsibility, and authority for all matters
pertaining to the comprehensive emergency management program and disaster and
emergency response of the county.
      (4)   The County Emergency Management Agency shall meet all requirements
of a local emergency management agency, as defined in KRS Ch. 39A to 39F, and
shall be the administrative branch of the County Disaster and Emergency
Services organization established pursuant to KRS Ch. 39A to 39F.
      (5)   The County Judge Executive shall designate and include a separate
Emergency Management Agency budget unit classification within each annual
county budget, and all financial matters of the County Emergency Management
Agency shall be handled through the county treasury and uniform budget system.
   (B)   (1)   The County Judge Executive, within 30 days of assuming office,
shall appoint a County Emergency Management Director in accordance with the
provisions of KRS 39B.020, and shall immediately notify the state’s Division of
Emergency Management of the appointment.
      (2)   The County Emergency Management Director, appointed pursuant to
this section, shall be sworn by oath to the Emergency Management Agency
Director immediately upon appointment, and shall serve at the pleasure of the
County Judge Executive, but shall serve no longer than four consecutive years
without reappointment and, as a minimum, shall meet all the qualification
requirements specified in KRS Ch. 39A to 39F.
   (C)   The County Emergency Management Director shall have and exercise all
the powers, authorities, rights and duties as specified in KRS Ch. 39A to 39F,
and in the orders or ordinances of the Fiscal Court of the county, to include
the following:
      (1)   To represent the County Judge Executive on all matters pertaining
to the comprehensive emergency management program and the disaster and
emergency response of the county;
      (2)   To be the executive head and chief administrative officer of the
County Emergency Management Agency and direct, control, supervise and manage
the development, preparation, organization, administration, operation,
implementation and maintenance of the comprehensive emergency management
program of the county, and to coordinate all disaster and emergency response of
the county;
      (3)   To develop, update and maintain the county emergency operations
plan in compliance with the provisions of KRS Ch. 39A to 39F;
      (4)   To establish, maintain and coordinate or direct the County Disaster
and Emergency Services Organization in accordance with the provisions of the
County Emergency Operations Plan, the Kentucky Emergency Operations Plan, and
the provisions of KRS Ch. 39A to 39F;
      (5)   To notify the County Judge Executive and the state’s Division of
Emergency Management immediately of the occurrence, or threatened or impending
occurrence, of any emergency, disaster or catastrophic incident or situation,
and provide in such notice an assessment of possible or actual damages or
threats to life, health, safety, property or the environment, and recommend any
emergency actions or orders which should be executed;
      (6)   To be the chief advisor to, and the primary on-scene representative
of, the County Judge Executive in the event of any emergency, declared
emergency, disaster or catastrophe within the county;
      (7)   To respond and have full access to the scenes of an emergency,
declared emergency, disaster or catastrophe and immediately investigate,
analyze or access the nature, scope or seriousness of all situations;
coordinate the establishment and operation of an incident command or management
system; execute the provisions of the County Emergency Operations Plan;
activate the County Emergency Operations Center or on-scene command post;
convene meetings, gather information and conduct briefings; notify the County
Judge Executive and the state’s Division of Emergency Management immediately of
the nature, scope or seriousness of any emergency situation and provide
information on all on-going response actions being taken in association with
the incident; provide any assistance requested, as deemed necessary or
appropriate; and take any actions to fully expedite and coordinate the disaster
and emergency response of all local public or private agencies, departments,
units or individuals;
      (8)   To take or direct immediate actions to protect public safety at the
direction of the County Judge Executive during any declared emergency or
disaster;
      (9)   To act as an official representative of the state’s Division of
Emergency Management when specifically requested by the State Director;
      (10)   To report directly to the County Judge Executive and act in an
official policy-making capacity when carrying out all duties of the Emergency
Management Agency director;
      (11)   To have full signatory authority, in accordance with Ch. 30 of
this code of ordinances, for execution of all contracts, agreements or other
official documents pertaining to the administration, organization and operation
of the County Emergency Management Agency and the local comprehensive emergency
management program;
      (12)   To direct all paid or volunteer employees, staff assistants or
other workers of the County Emergency Management Agency, and supervise any
operating units and personnel associated with it which are officially appointed
and affiliated with the County Disaster and Emergency Services organization
pursuant to the provisions of KRS Ch. 39A to 39F;
      (13)   To prepare and submit regular or scheduled program activity
reports to the area manager of the state’s Division of Emergency Management and
the County Judge Executive;
      (14)   To execute bond in the amount as determined by the County Judge
Executive, when directed by the County Judge Executive;
      (15)   To prepare and submit to the County Judge Executive, on an annual
basis by March 1March, a program and agency budget request for the County
Emergency Management Agency;
      (16)   To prepare and submit to the state’s Division of Emergency
Management, on an annual basis by July 15, a fiscal year program paper and
budget request for the County Emergency Management Agency;
      (17)   To enroll and be a registered member of the commonwealth’s
Emergency Management Association;
      (18)   To perform the duties of, or appoint with the approval of the
Fiscal Court of the county, the County Search and Rescue Coordinator pursuant
to the provisions of KRS Ch. 39F; and
      (19)   To perform all administrative, organizational or operational tasks
required pursuant to KRS Ch. 39A to 39F, commonwealth administrative
regulations, the commonwealth’s Emergency Operations Plan or program guidance
issued by the state’s Division of Emergency Management; and to carry out all
other emergency management-related duties as required by the resolutions,
orders or ordinances of the Fiscal Court of the county, the executive orders of
the County Judge Executive, and the provisions of the County Emergency
Operations Plan.
(Ord. 99.330-1, passed 6-29-1999) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.03 ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS Ch. 198B, the office of the County Electrical
Inspector and Deputy County Electrical Inspector are hereby created.
   (B)   The County Electrical Inspector shall inspect the installation of all
electrical service equipment, distribution circuits and associated apparatus
connected thereto, including, but not limited to: all residential, commercial
and industrial facilities whether temporary or permanent; temporary pole for
construction purposes and electrical service entrance changes; service
equipment for all mobile homes and recreational vehicles; feeder assemblies on
all direct-wired mobile homes and recreational vehicles; and outside fixed-
wired accessory buildings or structures or additional electrical equipment. No
inspection shall be required for:
      (1)   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles as covered by the Federal
Housing and Urban Development Administration (HUD) and 815 KAR 25:010; and
      (2)   Farm structures not used in the business of retail trade or as a
place of regular employment for ten or more people and not located in a
municipality. A FARM is a tract of land (ten acres or more) used principally
for the raising of crops and/or livestock, but outside the corporate limits of
the cities of Calhoun, Livermore, Island and Sacramento.
      (3)   All main service to mobile homes, recreational vehicles and farm
structures shall be inspected.
   (C)   For inspection services rendered by the County Electrical Inspector,
the owner and/or builder shall pay directly to the County Electrical Inspector
the following fees:
 
                          Inspection fees for houses of a minimum of $75. For
                          the fee so charged, the electrical inspector will
Residential               perform a rough-in inspection. Any final or
                          additional inspection will be at the rate of $25 per
                          inspection.
                          Inspection fees for commercial industrial and public
                          buildings, and all apartment with 3 or more units,
                          shall be 1-1/4% of the total electrical contract,
Commercial                including the electrical equipment furnished by
                          others. This fee shall cover all electrical
                          inspections made and inspections shall be made at
                          least every 30 days.
                          Inspection fees for service and miscellaneous
Miscellaneous inspections inspections will be at the rate of $75, for the first
                          inspection and $25 for each additional inspection.
 
   (D)   The County Electrical Inspector and deputy shall submit an annual
audit to the County Fiscal Court by June of each year.
   (E)   The County Electrical Inspector and deputy, once appointed by the
court order, shall serve at the pleasure of the Court.
(Ord. 12.340-01, passed 9-28-2012)
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 32.15 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby created, pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to KRS 65.8839, a
Code Enforcement Board, which shall be composed of nine members, all of whom
shall be residents of the county for a period of at least one year prior to
their appointment to the Code Enforcement Board, and shall reside in the county
throughout their term of office.
   (B)   A violation of this subchapter shall constitute a civil offense. The
maximum civil fine may be imposed for each violation as set forth herein below.
Likewise, the specific fine, of less than the maximum civil fine, which will be
imposed for each offense of the person charged does not contest the citation is
also set forth herein below.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.16 POWERS.
   (A)   Issue remedial orders and impose civil fines. The Code Enforcement
Board shall have the power to issue remedial orders and impose civil fines as a
method of enforcing county ordinances when a violation of an ordinance has been
classified as a civil offense.
   (B)   No enforcement of statutory offenses. The Code Enforcement Board shall
not have the authority to enforce any ordinance if the violation constitutes an
offense under any provision of the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including
specifically, any provision of the Kentucky Penal Code and any moving motor
vehicle offense.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.17 BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   Appointment of members. Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be
appointed by the Judge Executive subject to approval by the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Term of office.
      (1)   Board members will be appointed for a term of three years, however
the initial appointments to the Code Enforcement Board shall be as follows:
         (a)   One-third of the membership for one year.
         (b)   One-third of the membership for two years.
         (c)   One-third of the membership for three years.
      (2)   All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years. A
member may be re-appointed, subject to the approval of the Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Alternate members. The Judge Executive may appoint, subject to the
approval of the Fiscal Court, two alternate members to serve in the absence of
regular members. Alternate members shall meet all the qualifications and shall
be subject to all of the requirements that apply to regular members of the
Board.
   (D)   Board vacancy. Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the Judge
Executive, subject to approval of the Fiscal Court, within 60 days of the
vacancy.
   (E)   Removal of Board member. A Board member may be removed from office by
the Judge Executive, with Fiscal Court approval, for misconduct inefficient or
willful neglect of duty. A Board member may also be removed if absent for three
consecutive meetings. Upon exercising its power to remove a member, Fiscal
Court shall submit a written statement setting forth the reasons for removal.
The member shall have the right to appeal to the McLean Circuit Court.
   (F)   Oath of office. All members of the Board must, before beginning their
term, take the oath, prescribed by Section 228 of the Kentucky Constitution.
Said oath shall be administered by the Judge Executive or his or her designee.
   (G)   County government. No member of the Board may hold any elected or non-
elected office, paid or unpaid, or any other position of employment with the
county.
   (H)   There shall be a minimum of one Board member from each of the four
districts in the county.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.18 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; QUORUM.
   (A)   Chairperson. The Board shall annually elect a chair from among its
members. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.
   (B)   Meetings. The Board shall hold regular meetings of the Board each
month. Meetings, other than established regular meetings, shall be special
meetings held in accordance with the Kentucky Open Meetings Act and KRS 65.8815
(5).
   (C)   Quorum required for action. A quorum shall constitute a majority of
the Board’s membership. The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the
Board shall be necessary for any official action to be taken.
   (D)   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board and
the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in
the minutes.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.19 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Board who has any direct or indirect financial interest or
personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the nature of the
interest and shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on the matter in
which he or she has an interest and shall not be counted for purposes of
establishing a quorum.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.20 JURISDICTION.
   The Board shall have jurisdiction to enforce and shall enforce this
subchapter and any other county ordinance which specifically provide for the
Code Enforcement Board.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.21 POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD.
   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the following powers and duties.
   (A)   To adopt rules and regulations to govern its operations and conduct
its hearings.
   (B)   To conduct hearings to determine if there has been a violation of an
ordinance, over which it has jurisdiction.
   (C)   To subpoena allege violators, witnesses, and evidence to its hearing.
Subpoenas issued by the Board may be served by the county code enforcement
officer.
   (D)   To take testimony, under oath. The Chairperson, or his or her
designee, shall have the authority to administer oaths for the purpose of
taking testimony.
   (E)   To make findings of fact and issue orders necessary to remedy any
violation of a county ordinance, which the Board is authorized to enforce.
   (F)   To impose civil fines as authorized on any person found to have
violated an ordinance, over which the Board has jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.22 ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
   The following requirements shall govern all enforcement proceedings before
the Board.
   (A)   Enforcement proceedings shall only be initiated by the issuance of a
citation or notice of violation by a code enforcement officer.
   (B)   When a code enforcement officer believes, based on his or her personal
observation or investigation, has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated a county ordinance, the code enforcement officer is authorized to
issue a citation. A code enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately
issuing a citation, issue a notice of violation to the offender allowing the
offender a specified period of time to remedy the violation without fine. The
time allowed by the code enforcement officer shall depend on the nature of the
violation and the time to remedy the violation. If the offender fails, or
refuses, to remedy the violation within the time specified, the code
enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the county from taking
immediate action to remedy a violation of its ordinances when there is reason
to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health,
safety and welfare, or if in the absence of immediate action, the effects of
the violation will be irreparable or irreversible. Also, nothing in this
subchapter shall prohibit the county from correcting the violation through self
help and to file liens on premises, whether real or personal, to recover the
costs incurred by the county.
   (D)   The citation issued by the code enforcement officer shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The date and time of issuance;
      (2)   The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued;
      (3)   The date and time the offense was committed;
      (4)   The facts constituting the offense;
      (5)   The section of the ordinance or other code violated;
      (6)   The name of the code enforcement officer;
      (7)   The civil fine that will be imposed for the violation if the person
does not contest the citation;
      (8)   The maximum civil fine that may be imposed if the person elects to
contest the citation;
      (9)   The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil
fine or to contest the citation; and
      (10)   A statement that if the person pays the civil fine set forth in
the citation or fails to contest the citation within the time allowed. the
person shall be deemed as having waived the right to a hearing before the Code
Enforcement Board and the determination that a violation was committed shall be
final.
   (E)   After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code enforcement
officer shall physically deliver an identical copy of the citation to the Clerk
designated by the Board.
   (F)   The alleged violator to whom the citation is issued shall respond to
the citation within seven days of the date of issuance by either paying the
civil fine or requesting, in writing to the Board Clerk, a hearing before the
Code Enforcement Board to contest the citation. If the alleged violator fails
to respond to the citation within seven days, the alleged violator shall be
deemed to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a
violation was committed shall be considered final.
   (G)   If the alleged violator does not contest the citation within the time
prescribed, the Code Enforcement Board shall enter a final order determining
that the violation was committed and impose the civil fine set forth in the
citation. A copy of the final order shall be served on the person guilty of the
violation.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.23 HEARING; NOTICE; FINAL ORDER.
   (A)   Hearing. When a hearing has been requested, the Board shall schedule a
hearing for the next regular meeting of the Board that will permit adequate
notification to all parties.
   (B)   Notice. Not less than seven days before the date of the hearing, the
Board shall notify the requester of the date, time and place of the hearing.
The notice may be given by certified mail, return receipt requested, by
personal delivery or by leaving the notice at the person’s usual place of
residence with any individual residing therein who is 18 years of age or older
and who is informed of the contents of the notice.
   (C)   Failure to appear. Any person requesting a hearing before the Board
who fails to appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to
a hearing to contest the citation and the determination that a violation was
committed shall be final. The Board shall enter a final order determining the
violation was committed and shall impose the civil fine set forth in the
citation. A copy of the final order shall be served on the person guilty of the
violation.
   (D)   Testimony. All testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded.
Testimony shall be taken under oath and recorded. Testimony shall be taken from
the code enforcement officer, the alleged violator and any witnesses to the
violation offered by the code enforcement officer or alleged violator. Formal
rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be
observed and shall govern the proceedings.
   (E)   Board determination. The Board shall, based on the evidence, determine
whether a violation was committed. If it determines that no violation was
committed, an order dismissing the citation shall be entered. If it determines
that a violation was committed, an order shall be issued upholding the citation
and either imposing a fine up to the maximum authorized or requiring the
offender to remedy a continuing violation, or both.
   (F)   Final order. Every final order of the Board shall be reduced to
writing, which shall include the date the order was issued. A copy shall be
furnished to the person named in the citation. If the person named is not
present when the final order is issued, the order shall be delivered in
accordance with the procedures set faith above.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.24 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   Each case before the Board shall be presented by an attorney selected by the
county or by the code enforcement officer for the county. If the Board
determines that it needs the County Attorney present at the hearing, the County
Attorney may either be counsel to the Board or may present cases before the
Board, but in no case shall the County Attorney serve in both capacities.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.25 APPEALS; FINAL JUDGEMENT.
   An appeal from any final order of the Board may be made to the County
District Court within 30 days of the date the order is issued. The appeal shall
be initiated by the filing of a complaint and a copy of the Board’s order in
the same manner as any civil action under Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure.
The appeal shall be limited to a review of the record created before the Code
Enforcement Board. If no appeal of the final order of the Board is filed within
the time allowed, the Board’s order shall be deemed final for all purposes.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.26 ORDINANCE FINE SCHEDULE.
   Violations of ordinances that are enforced by the Code Enforcement Board
shall be subject to the following schedule of civil fines.
   (A)   Non-contested citations. If a citation for a violation of an ordinance
is not contested by the person charged with the violation, the penalties
section, as set forth below, shall apply; however, the Board may waive any or
all of a penalty for an uncontested violation if in its discretion, the Board
determines that such waiver will promote compliance with the ordinance in
issue. The penalties listed below are for each day a violation continues
beginning on the fourteenth day after the date the citation was issued. A
second offense is an offense that occurs within five years of the determination
by the Code Enforcement Board of a prior offense. All others are those that
occur within five years of the determination by the Code Enforcement Board of
two or more prior offenses.
   (B)   Contested citations. If the citation is contested and a hearing before
the Board is required, the following maximum penalties may be imposed at the
discretion of the Board.
 
First offense Second offense Others
$500          $500           $1,000
***All fines listed above are maximum daily fines. The Code Board, at their
discretion, may waive and/or issue a lesser fine, on each offense.
***Violators may be shut down, have their permit revoked or other remedies
allowed.
 
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.27 LIENS; FINES; CHARGES; FEES.
   (A)   The county shall possess a lien on property, whether real or personal,
owned by the person found by a final, non-appealable order of the Board, or by
final judgment of the Court to have committed a violation of a county ordinance
for all fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred
by the county in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance.
   (B)   The lien shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk and shall
be notice to all persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest
until paid persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest until
paid. The interest shall accrue at a rate of 12%.
   (C)   The lien shall take precedence over all other subsequent liens except
state, county, School Board and city taxes and may be enforced by judicial
proceedings.
   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed above, the person found to have
committed the violation shall be personally responsible for the amount of all
fines assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the
county in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance. The county may
bring a civil action against the person and shall have the same remedies as
provided for the recovery of a debt.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.28 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   The code enforcement officer shall not have the powers of peace
officers to make arrests or carry deadly weapons, but may issue citations as
authorized upon observation of violations of county ordinances.
   (B)   The procedures for citations issued by a citation officer shall be as
provided in KRS 431.015 and by the Code Enforcement Board. The code enforcement
officer shall carry identification identifying themselves immediately to any
member of the public while enforcing any ordinance of the county.
   (C)   This section shall not be a limitation on the power of a code
enforcement officer to make an arrest as a private person as provided in KRS
431.005. This subchapter shall not be the exclusive means for enforcement of
county ordinances and code enforcement officer(s) are not limited to use of a
criminal citation, but may swear to a complaint in lieu of citation and may
issue citations for civil violations of county ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
32.02 of this chapter, or any lawful orders, rules or regulations promulgated
pursuant to it, upon conviction shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
Violators of §
32.02 of this chapter may be issued a citation by the Sheriff of the county or
by a duly authorized official.
(Ord. 99.330-1, passed 6-29-1999)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   911 service fee
   
33.02   Magisterial/Justice of the Peace Districts
   
33.03   Wrecker service
§ 33.01 911 SERVICE FEE.
   The county imposes a $5 911 service fee on each water customer that receives
active billing for water service in the county. Said fee will be added to each
resident’s water bill and collected by their water service provider, which said
water service provided shall remit on a monthly bases the 911 service fee less
its actual cost of administration and collection of this fee, up to but not
exceeding, 2% of the fees collected. In addition, if any resident has more than
one meter that receives active billing for water service and that said resident
is paying a monthly bill, said resident may file an appeal to the County Fiscal
Court for reimbursement.
(Ord. passed 11-24-2020)
§ 33.02 MAGISTERIAL/JUSTICE OF THE PEACE DISTRICTS.
   The four magisterial districts of the county shall have the boundaries set
out in the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 11-110.2, passed 8-16-2011)
§ 33.03 WRECKER SERVICE.
   (A)   The County Dispatch Center shall maintain a list of approved wrecker
service providers providing towing services to the county.
   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of a call from any police or emergency service
personnel for wrecker service, the call shall be referred to the next wrecker
agency on the rotating list, except, however, in the event the nature of the
vehicle to be towed, e.g. semi-tractor trailer, is such that the next service
does not have necessary equipment, then the dispatch operator may proceed down
the list to an operator maintaining such equipment. If the dispatched wrecker
service accepts the call request, said wrecker service shall perform service,
if unable to do so, the service shall immediately advise dispatch, the wrecker
service shall not assign or substitute another wrecker service. Assignment or
substitution of wrecker service by the accepting wrecker service will result in
said service removal.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the owner of a
disabled vehicle from specifying the wrecker service whom the owner desires to
transport his or her vehicle and upon the receipt of such request said request
shall be honored unless the requested service is unavailable.
      (3)   In the event no local agency can provide the necessary towing
services then the dispatch can seek assistance from a not otherwise authorized
towing service on the county rotating list.
      (4)   All towing services seeking inclusion to the wrecker service list
shall meet the following qualifications:
         (a)   Pay an annual regulatory service fee of $50, payable on or
before July 1 of every year;
         (b)   Maintain a place of business, and a qualified wrecker, in the
county that provides 24-hour service, seven days per week and have a local
telephone number (use of an answering machine is prohibited);
         (c)   Maintain a current registration with the State Police for
providing towing services within the county and comply with all requirements
associated with such registration;
         (d)   Respond in a lawful manner to all emergency calls within 20
minutes or less;
         (e)   Be independently owned and operated from one location within the
county at which one wrecker is permanently based. Independently owned and
operated means that no body shop, repair or auto storage facility shall have an
ownership interest in more than one wrecker service on the county’s list;
         (f)   Notify the Judge Executive of any changes in the information on
this application;
         (g)   Have a minimum weight limit of one ton;
         (h)   Be equipped with a motor driven wrench, wheel lifts and dollies;
         (i)   Be capable of towing imported vehicles, and be familiar with
manufacturer’s recommendations regarding towing;
         (j)   Be equipped with one ABC fire extinguisher, safety chain, dolly,
broom and shovel;
         (k)   Clean all debris from public rights-of-way and properly dispose
of same;
         (l)   Have DOT approved material to absorb spillage of liquids from
wrecked vehicles on public rights-of-way;
         (m)   Provide a copy of their “fore hire” I.D. card;
         (n)   Name and DOT must be permanently printed on wrecked vehicles;
         (o)   Not charge for services rendered under the list than would
otherwise be charged to private customers and furnish the Judge Executive with
a list of all charges;
         (p)   Notify the Judge Executive of any increase in wrecker service
charges 30 days prior to implementation;
         (q)   Wreckers shall not be parked in any residential zone within the
county;
         (r)   Be responsible for all losses, theft or damage to vehicles from
the time they are towed until released to the owner, dealership, auto repair or
storage facility;
         (s)   Furnish adequate record system for all vehicles and property
towed and stored, and for all personal property removed therefrom;
         (t)   Employ only operators with a valid Kentucky license, unless the
vehicle utilized has a gross operating weight of over 26,000 pounds, then only
operators with a valid Kentucky CDL license.
         (u)   Show proof of commercial, auto, general liability and on-off
hook extended coverage insurance:
            1.   General liability: $1,000,000, single limit; and
            2.   Garage keepers insurance: $100,000.
         (v)   Furnish the Judge Executive with a current itemized list of all
charges for wrecker service, including basic tow and ad-on charges;
         (w)   The owner or lawful operator of a damaged or disabled vehicle
shall have the right to determine the destination of said vehicle; and
         (x)   Wreckers are not required to transport vehicles to any requested
destination other than an approved facility unless satisfactory arrangements
have been made for payment.
(Ord. 01-340.1a, passed 1-2-2002; Ord. 25-340.1, passed 10-23-2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
      
51.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Title
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Recommended disposal site
   
50.04   Storage of solid waste
   
50.05   Collection of solid waste
   
50.06   Transportation of solid waste
   
50.07   Disposal of solid waste
   
50.08   Litter control and collection boxes
   
50.09   Collection of solid waste: convenience centers
   
50.10   Prohibited practices
   
50.11   Commercial industries
   
50.12   Notices
Permits
   
50.25   Permit requirements
   
50.26   Permit applications
   
50.27   Permit issuance
   
50.28   Application denial
   
50.29   Annual fee
   
50.30   Permit suspension
   
50.31   Injunctive relief
   
50.32   Permit display
   
50.33   Site approval permit
   
50.34   Hazardous wastes prohibited
   
50.35   Site approval process
   
50.36   Fiscal Court determination as to facility site approval
   
50.37   Facility impact report
   
50.38   Fees
   
50.39   Public health hazard
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the McLean County Solid Waste Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be deemed to have the
meaning indicated below.
   AGRICULTURAL OPERATION. Includes, but is not limited to, any facility for
the production of crops, livestock, equine, poultry, livestock products,
poultry products, horticultural products, and any generally accepted,
reasonable, and prudent method for the operation of a farm to obtain a monetary
profit that complies with applicable laws and administrative regulations, and
is performed in a reasonable and prudent manner customary among farm operators.
Agricultural practices shall include, but not be limited to, fertilizer
application, the application of pesticides or herbicides that have been
approved by public authority, planting, cultivating, mowing, harvesting, land
clearing, and constructing farm buildings, roads, lakes and ponds associated
with a farming operation.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any non-hazardous waste resulting from agricultural
operations.
   BULKY WASTE. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and/or
noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units, commercial, industrial,
institutional, or agricultural establishments which are either too large or too
heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded into solid waste transportation
vehicles.
   CABINET. The Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under the
authority of the Fiscal Court.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A safety officer, citation officer or other public
law enforcement officer with authority to issue a citation.
   COLLECTION. The removal of solid waste from the designated pick-up location
to the transfer vehicle. Acceptable COLLECTION practices shall consist of the
following: (1) door-to-door household collection; (2) direct access to a
staffed convenience center or transfer facility; or (3) collection boxes.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from operation of any
commercial, industrial or institutional establishment, not to include, however,
any hazardous waste.
   CONVENIENCE CENTER. A self-contained facility that is staffed during
operating hours for the collection and subsequent transportation of municipal
solid waste.
   DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Materials resulting from the construction
or destruction of residential, industrial or commercial structures.
   DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. Disposable plastic or paper sacks with a
capacity of ten to 55 gallons.
   DISPOSAL. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so
that such solid waste or hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter
the environment, be emitted into the air or be discharged into any water,
including ground waters.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a structure and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or are intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste or combination of wastes which are determined by
the Cabinet because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics that may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A housing facility containing more than one
dwelling unit under one roof.
   OCCUPANT. Any person alone, or jointly with others living, sleeping or
having possession of any dwelling unit or any other improvement to real
property, as either an owner or a tenant.
   OPEN BURNING. Burning of any matter in such manner that the combustion
resulting from burning are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere without
passing through a stack or chimney.
   OPEN DUMP. Any facility or site for the disposal of solid waste which does
not have a valid permit issued by the Cabinet and/or code enforcement officer.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, estate, joint stock company, corporation
(including a government corporation), partnership, association, federal agency,
state agency, city, commission, political subdivision of the state or any
interstate body or their legal representative, agent or assigns.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
   PROCESSING. Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging,
compacting or other processes whereby solid waste containers are modified or
solid waste quantity is reduced.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Illegal waste disposal practices that include but are not
limited to open burning, open dumps or littering which are deemed to be a
nuisance under applicable law. It shall also include any condition or the use
of a premises, building or structure which is or tends to render such
properties as dangerous or detrimental or adverse to the health and welfare of
others or which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or
tends to cause substantial diminishing of the value of other properties in the
area in which such premises are located. This includes the keeping, depositing
on or scattering over the premises of any of the following:
      (1)   Lumber, junk, trash or debris;
      (2)   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as mobile
or manufactured homes, campers, automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers, cans or containers;
      (3)   Partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise non-
operating motor vehicles without current registration; or
      (4)   Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any
person to keep, or permit another to keep upon any residential or commercial
property septic material, unless such material is retained in containers or
vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents or animals. This
section shall not apply to overflowing septic tanks and lateral lines as those
items are subject to existing Health Department regulations.
      (5)   Any agricultural operations and silvicultural operations as defined
herein shall not be deemed a PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid waste resulting from the maintenance of
dwelling and multi-family dwelling units.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A permitted facility for the disposal of solid waste
which complies with the “environmental performance standards” specified in 401
KAR 47:030.
   SILVICULTURAL OPERATIONS. Includes timber harvest, site preparation, slash
disposal including controlled burning, tree planting, pre-commercial thinning,
release, fertilization, animal damage control, reasonable water resource
management, insect and disease control in forest land, and any other generally
accepted, reasonable and prudent practice normally employed in the management
of the timber resource for monetary profit. A SILVICULTURAL OPERATION
inherently includes lengthy periods between harvests and shall be deemed
continuously operating so long as the property supports an actual or developing
forest.
   SLUDGE. Any solid waste, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a
municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant or air pollution control facility exclusive of the treated
effluent from a wastewater treatment plant or any other such waste having
similar characteristics and effects.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, litter, refuse, sludge and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining (excluding coal mining wastes,
coal mining byproducts, refuse and overburden), and agricultural operations and
from community activities, but does not include those materials including but
not limited to sand, soil, rock, gravel or bridge debris extracted as part of a
public road construction project funded wholly or in part with state funds,
recovered material, post-use polymers or recovered feedstocks as those terms
are defined in KRS 244.1-020, special wastes as designated by KRS 224.50-760,
solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, manure, crops, crop residue, or
a combination thereof which are placed on the soil for return to the soil as
fertilizers or soil conditions, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation
return flows or industrial discharges which are a point sources subject to
permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended (86 Stat. 880), or source special nuclear, or by-product material as
defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923).
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. The administration of solid waste activities: source
reduction, collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer,
processing, treatment and disposal, which shall be in accordance with a county
or multi-county area solid waste management plan approved by the Cabinet.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AREA OR “AREA”. Any county or group of counties so
designated by the Cabinet upon approval of the local solid waste management
plan.
   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN. The document submitted by a county or multi-
county district as required under KRS 224.43-340.
   SOLID WASTE SITE OR FACILITY. Any place at which solid waste is managed,
stored, treated, processed or disposed.
   SOLID WASTE STORAGE/CONTAINER. Receptacle used by any person to store solid
waste during the interval between solid waste generation and collection. A
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER is made out of plastic, vinyl or metal, ranging in size
from about ten gallons to 42 cubic yards.
   STORAGE. Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its
production until the time of its collection.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built, constructed or a portion thereof.
   TRANSFER. The placement of solid waste from smaller collection vehicles into
larger vehicles for transportation to intermediate or final disposal
facilities.
   TRANSFER SITE. Any transportation related facility including loading docks,
compacting equipment, parking areas and other similar facilities where
shipments of solid waste are held or transferred during the normal course of
transportation.
   TRANSPORTATION. The transporting of solid waste from the place of collection
or processing to a solid waste processing facility or permitted solid waste
disposal site.
   UNIVERSAL COLLECTION. A municipal solid waste collection system which is
established by ordinance and approved by the Cabinet and requires access for
each household or solid waste generator in a county.
   UNSAFE PREMISES. In addition to including unsafe structures, UNSAFE PREMISES
means any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances
considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited to,
abandoned wells, abandoned shafts, abandoned swimming pools, abandoned ponds,
abandoned basements, abandoned excavations, and any abandoned mobile homes,
abandoned manufactured homes, abandoned refrigerators, abandoned iceboxes,
abandoned ice chests or other similar abandoned devices or abandoned appliances
accessible by children or adults.
   UNSAFE STRUCTURES. A structure that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure
because the structure is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay,
faulty construction or damaged by fire to the extent so as not to provide
shelter, or is in danger of partial or complete collapse.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, leaves, or tree trimmings.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.03 RECOMMENDED DISPOSAL SITE.
   The permitted site for residential, commercial and agricultural waste in the
county is at the transfer site at the McLean County Road Department at 1508 Hwy
136, Calhoun, KY 42327. Any other permitted sites must be designated and
approved by the Fiscal Court. Additionally on or before July 1, of each year,
the Fiscal Court will establish four dates in the upcoming fiscal year as solid
waste amnesty days, wherein residents of the county only shall be able to
dispose of their residential, commercial or agricultural waste at no fee.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.04 STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   Solid waste to be stored in a manner prescribed by ordinance. The
occupant or owner of every premise shall place all solid waste to be collected
in proper solid waste containers, disposable or otherwise, and shall maintain
such solid waste containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and
sanitary condition at all times. Solid waste shall be stored in a manner that
will be kept free from insect and rodent infestation and will not create a fire
hazard.
   (B)   Standards for residential and commercial use storage containers. All
uses which will generate more than a volume of two cubic yards (i.e.,
approximately equivalent to 500 pounds, a quarter ton or 400 gallons volume) of
solid waste per week shall be required to provide bulk containers for storage
as approved by the code enforcement officer. The containers shall be
waterproof, leakproof and shall be covered at all times except when depositing
waste therein or removing the contents thereof; and shall meet all the
requirements herein under prohibited practices.
   (C)   Air tight containers. No owner or occupant of any structure may leave
outside the structure, in a place accessible particularly to children,
abandoned or unattended white goods (i.e., icebox, freezer, ice chests,
refrigerator or other receptacle that has an airtight door) without first
removing the door.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.05 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   County responsibility defined. The county shall provide for the
collection of residential, commercial and agricultural solid waste by means of
a convenience center which is the transfer site at the McLean County Road
Department.
   (B)   Collection points. Points of collection of solid waste shall be from
the roadside or curbside within public rights of way or other locations near
buildings, parking lots, etc., on private property. In general, solid waste
generated by residential or agricultural operations shall be placed along the
roadside or curbside fronting the subject property no more than 12 hours before
collection. All reusable storage containers shall be removed from the roadside
or curbside by the owner occupant within 12 hours after collection. Residential
waste, commercial and agricultural waste that require bulk storage containers
shall be located on private property in areas accessible to collection
vehicles.
   (C)   Bulky rubbish. The code enforcement officer shall establish the
procedures for disposal of bulky rubbish and yard waste generated by
residential dwelling units and multi-family residential dwelling units.
   (D)   Ownership of solid waste. All solid waste placed in the convenience
center shall become the property of the county or its duly authorized agent and
no person shall be allowed to separate, carry off or dispose of same without
written permission of the code enforcement officer.
   (E)   Collector’s responsibility defined. Solid waste collectors operating
within the county shall be responsible for the collection of solid waste from
collection points to a transportation vehicle. Spillage or blowing solid waste
caused as a result of the duties of the solid waste collector shall be
collected and placed in the transportation vehicle by the collector.
   (F)   Collection frequency. Any person providing solid waste collection and
transportation services and operating under a permit issued under the authority
of this chapter shall provide said services at a minimum frequency of once per
week.
   (G)   Acceptable collection practices. Collection practices which are deemed
acceptable by the county are as follows:
      (1)   Door-to-door residential collection. Collection service may be
provided by the private sector with proper permit.
      (2)   Direct access to a convenience center or transfer facility within
the solid waste management planning area. Citizens of the county may transport
their residential, commercial or agricultural waste directly to permitted
convenience centers or the transfer site with the boundaries of the planning
area which meet the environmental performance standards of 401 KAR 47:030.
   (H)   Prohibitions. The following wastes may not be deposited in the
convenience center or transfer site.
      (1)   Hazardous waste;
      (2)   Liquid waste;
      (3)   Dead animals;
      (4)   Any burning or smoldering materials or any other materials that
will create a fire hazard.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.06 TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE.
   Collection vehicle standards. All transportation vehicles shall be
maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. They shall be so
constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste
therefrom. They shall be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent nuisance and
insect breeding. They shall be maintained in good repair.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.07 DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   Disposal sites. All solid waste, including bulky waste, shall be
disposed of within a sanitary landfill having a valid permit issued by the
Cabinet in compliance with KRS 224.43-010, 224.40-100, 224.40-310 and this
chapter.
   (B)   Hazardous waste. As defined within this chapter, hazardous waste will
require special handling and shall be disposed of only in a manner authorized
by state and/or federal regulations.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.08 LITTER CONTROL AND COLLECTION BOXES.
   (A)   Control of litter. The county shall regulate control in public places,
private residences and property and shall prohibit the following types of
littering, including but not limited to: throwing of litter from vehicles,
removal or sorting from litter receptacles or throwing near litter receptacles.
   (B)   Dump sites. The county ordains that there shall be no legal or
designated dump sites in the county other than the officially designated
convenience center(s) in the county.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.09 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE: CONVENIENCE CENTERS.
   (A)   Use of county-provided solid waste containers and container sites.
Solid wastes may be deposited in the solid waste receptacles only in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. All solid wastes shall be deposited inside
the receptacle, solid wastes may not be left at the disposal site outside the
receptacle. The county may use the name of persons found on any letter,
magazine, correspondence, and the like, as evidence to determine the
responsible party for waste left at the disposal site outside the receptacle.
Commercial solid wastes may be deposited in solid waste receptacles only with
the permission of the code enforcement officer.
   (B)   Bagging and binding solid waste. To the extent possible, solid waste
material placed into a container should be bagged or otherwise bound in order
to prevent blowing or scattering of such material.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.10 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall store,
collect, dispose, maintain or display on any property any solid waste
materials. This storage, collection, disposal, maintenance or display in
violation of this section shall be punishable by the provisions set out herein
and also shall be considered as a public nuisance, which may be abated as
provided in this chapter. Further, it shall be prohibited and a violation of
this chapter for any person to:
   (A)   Dispose of any solid waste as defined herein by dumping same on any
premises within the county, with or without the consent of the owner of the
premises; and
   (B)   Dump or permit the dumping of solid waste on public right of ways of
county roads or streams; and
   (C)   Deposit solid waste in any container not his or her own, or add to
another person’s waste with the intent of avoiding payment of service charges
or collection by an authorized collector of solid waste; and
   (D)   Fail to have solid waste collected as provided in this chapter; and
   (E)   Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation
equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their
duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors shall be those of the
county or those of a solid waste collection agency operating under a permit
from the county; and
   (F)   Own or operate a dump except under permit from the Cabinet for Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection; and
   (G)   Dispose of dead animals except as provided by state law; and
   (H)   Dispose of solid waste at any facility or location which is not
approved by the county and permitted by the Cabinet for Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection; and
   (I)   Collecting, processing or disposing of solid waste within the county
without a permit from the county; and
   (J)   Allow any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or
otherwise non-operating motor vehicle to remain on such property longer than 30
days other than zoned commercial businesses built around recycling and motor
vehicle mechanical or body repair; and
   (K)   Allow any abandoned, junked, discarded or otherwise non-inhabitable
mobile/manufactured home or camper to remain on such property longer than 30
days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to any camper that
is being stored on residential or commercial property when not being used for
recreational use; and
   (L)   Leave any abandoned, unattended or unlocked white goods (i.e., ice
box, refrigerator or other receptacle that has an air tight door) without first
removing the door; and
   (M)   Permit any structure upon the property to become unfit and unsafe for
human habitation, occupancy, or use or to permit conditions to exist in the
structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of the structure, the occupants of neighboring structures or other
residents of the unincorporated areas of the county.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.11 COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIES.
   Premises zoned commercial and engaging in commercial business of recycling,
motor vehicle mechanical or body repair will be asked to put fencing around the
business.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.12 NOTICES.
   (A)   Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that there has been a
violation of this chapter, excepting, however, the provisions as set out in the
permit suspension section of this chapter, or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the persons,
occupants or operators responsible in the manner hereinafter prescribed herein
in division (B) and (C).
   (B)   Such notice described in division (A) above shall:
      (1)   Be in writing; and
      (2)   Include a description of the premises or structures sufficient for
identification; and
      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is
being issued; and
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time, generally
not to exceed 14 days, for repairs and improvements required to make the
structure or premises safe. If, however, the violation constitutes an immediate
danger to the health and well-being of the community, said notice shall demand
abatement within 72 hours.
   (C)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof,
is: a) delivered to the owner, person, occupant, or operator personally; b)
sent by mail addressed to the owner, person, occupant or operator at their
address listed with the County PVA or the County Tax Administrator; c) leaving
a copy of the citation with any person 18 years of age or older who is on the
premises, if the allege violator is not on the premises at the time the
citation is issued; or d) if, in the exercise of due diligence, the issuance of
a citation using the methods set out in divisions a) through c) of this
division (C) is not possible, by being posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure or premises affected by such notice.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer of the county to
serve or cause to be served upon the alleged violator the notice set out
herein.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
PERMITS
§ 50.25 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall engage in the business of collection or transporting of
solid waste within the county without a permit secured from the code
enforcement officer. In the event any one person engages in the collection or
transportation of solid waste, or any combination thereof, there shall be
required of said person only one permit. No person shall construct or operate a
solid waste site or facility prior to the issuance of a site approval permit by
the Fiscal Court, as provided in this chapter. No such permit for the
collection or transporting solid waste shall be issued until and unless the
applicant therefore, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall
file and maintain with the code enforcement officer evidence of a satisfactory
public liability insurance policy including uninsured and underinsured
motorists, covering all operation of such applicant pertaining to such business
and all vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof, in that amount of not
less than $100,000 for each person injured or killed, and in the amount of not
less than $300,000 in the event of injury or death of two or more persons in
any single accident, and in the amount of not less than $250,000 for damage of
property. Such policy may be written to allow the first $1,000 of liability for
damage to property to be deductible. Workmen’s compensation and employee’s
liability insurance shall be provided to cover injury or death to any of the
employees or workmen in compliance with the Workmen’s Compensation Act. Should
any such policy be cancelled, the code enforcement officer shall be notified of
such cancellation by the insurance carrier in writing not less than ten days
prior to the effective date of such cancellation, and provisions to that effect
shall be incorporated in such policy, which shall also place upon the company
writing such policy the duty to give such notice.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.26 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Each applicant for any such permit shall state in his or her application the
following:
   (A)   The nature of the permit desired, to collect and transport solid waste
or any combination thereof;
   (B)   Name and address or applicant and whether a sole proprietorship,
corporation, or partnership with disclosure of the ownership interests;
   (C)   The number of employees and solid waste collection vehicles to be
operated thereunder;
   (D)   Rates the applicant plans to charge customers;
   (E)   Location or locations of solid waste processing or disposal facilities
to be used;
   (F)   Service routes and boundaries of collection area; and
   (G)   Other such information as required by the code enforcement officer.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.27 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   If the application shows that the applicant will collect and transport solid
waste without hazard to the public health or damage to the environment and in
conformity with the laws of the state and this chapter, the code enforcement
officer may issue the permit authorized by this chapter. The code enforcement
officer shall have the authority to limit the number of permits issued under
safety and welfare of the residents to promote energy conservation, and to
provide for collection and disposal consistent with good solid waste management
practices. The permit shall be issued for a period of one year and each
applicant shall pay a fee of $250. If modifications can be made to the
application regarding service, equipment or mode of operation so as to bring
the application within the intent of this chapter, the code enforcement officer
shall notify the applicant in writing setting forth the modification to be made
and the time in which it shall be done.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.28 APPLICATION DENIAL.
   If the applicant does not make the modifications pursuant to the notice set
out in §
50.27 within the time limit specified therein or if the application does not
clearly show that the collection or transportation of solid waste will not
create a public health hazard or be without harmful effects on the environment,
the application will be denied and the applicant notified by the Director, in
writing, stating the reason for such denial. Nothing in this section shall
prejudice the right of the applicant to reapply after the rejection of his or
her application provided that all aspects of the reapplication comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prevent the denial of
a permit should the total number of annual permits have already been issued.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.29 ANNUAL FEE.
   The permit may be renewed upon payment of the fee as required herein if the
business has not been modified and the collection vehicles meet the
requirements of this chapter, and the renewal is approved by the code
enforcement officer. If modifications have been made, the applicant shall
reapply for a permit as set forth herein. No permits authorized by this chapter
shall be transferable from company to company or person to person.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.30 PERMIT SUSPENSION.
   In the event the code enforcement officer determines that a permitted person
is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall in writing notify that person
and give him or her a reasonable time to take corrective measures. In all cases
when corrective measures have not been taken withing the time specified, the
code enforcement officer shall suspend or revoke the permit or permits involved
in the violations. However, in those cases, where an extension of time will
permit correction and there is not public health hazard created by the delay,
one extension of time not to exceed the original time period may be given.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.31 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In the event a permit for the collection and transporting of solid waste is
revoked and the person continues to operate, the code enforcement officer may
request that Fiscal Court request an action of a court of law to enjoin and the
acts and to enforce compliance with this chapter or any rule or regulation
promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.32 PERMIT DISPLAY.
   All motor vehicles operating under any permit for the collection and
transporting of solid waste required by this chapter shall display the number
or numbers on each side in colors which contrast with that of the vehicle, such
numbers to be clearly legible and not less than three inches high. A copy of
said permit shall be maintained in the vehicle. Each permit for processing or
disposal facilities shall be prominently displayed at the facility.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.33 SITE APPROVAL PERMIT.
   The site approval permit required by this chapter is required in addition to
any other approvals of permits required by federal or state regulatory
authority.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.34 HAZARDOUS WASTES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall dispose of hazardous wastes in the county, other than the
small quantities allowed pursuant to 401 KAR Chapter 47.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.35 SITE APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   After compliance with all applicable zoning requirements of the
county, the owner or operator of a proposed solid waste management facility
shall file an application for a site approval permit with the Fiscal Court at
the office of the Judge Executive.
   (B)   The application for a site approval permit shall include:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or operator and the location of
the proposed site of the facility;
      (2)   A copy of the deed or other document establishing the right, title
and interest of the owner or operator in the proposed site of the facility;
      (3)   A current USGS map showing the location of the proposed site, at
scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet, with said map showing the entire
boundaries of the site or proposed site;
      (4)   A description of the type of solid waste and the source of
generation of the solid waste involved in the solid waste activity to be
conducted on the site together with a description of the technology and the
procedures the owner/operator proposes to utilize in its solid waste management
activities at this site;
      (5)   A complete history of the owner or operator’s prior experience in
the ownership and/or operation of any and all solid waste facilities or
activities, wherever located. The description shall include a record of
compliance with federal, state and local laws and regulations applicable to the
operation or solid or hazardous waste management facilities and with respect to
the owner or operator, such description shall disclose:
         (a)   Any administrative, criminal or civil action pending against the
owner or operator of the proposed site alleging a violation of any federal,
state, local law or regulation concerning solid waste, the protection of public
health and safety, or environmental protection; and
         (b)   For the five year period immediately preceding the date of
filing of the petition for site approval, whether the owner or operator has
been convicted of a crime, entered a plea of guilty or such other plea of no
contest to a felony or misdemeanor charge, been held liable in a civil or
administrative action, or agreed to the payment of any civil penalties or
monies as a part of the final disposition of any civil, administrative or
criminal proceeding, involving the violation of any federal, state, local law
or regulation applicable to the management of solid waste and the protection of
the public health and safety of the environment.
      (6)   The petition for site approval shall identify the following persons
or entities, and provide the compliance information required by division (B)(5)
herein, for each person or entity so identified:
         (a)   The owner or operator applying for site approval;
         (b)   If the owner or operator is a proprietorship, each proprietor
and the interest held;
         (c)   If the owner or operator is a partnership, each of the partners
and their respective interest and any corporation, joint venture, partnership
in which any of the partners comprising the applicant holds a 25% or greater
interest; and
         (d)   If the owner or operator is a corporation, a detailed listing of
the officers, directors and stockholders; any corporation of which the
applicant is a subsidiary or which hold a 10% or greater interest; and any
proprietorship, partnership, or joint venture in which the applicant holds a
10% or greater interest. For purposes of this section, “interest” includes
ownership or other interest reflected in stocks, assets or other beneficial
interest.
      (7)   Financial data including:
         (a)   An estimate of the total cost of the facility and an estimate of
the cost of each of the major components of the facility;
         (b)   Audited statements of income and balance sheets of the owner or
operator for each of the three years immediately preceding the date of
application;
         (c)   A statement as to the extent of liability insurance in effect or
proposed, with respect to the facility, together with true copies of any
policies of insurance in effect and a listing of any claims made or threatened
under any policies of liability insurance.
         (d)   A statement as to whether the owner or operator has been
designated as a potentially responsible party under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (“CERCLA”), as
amended, and, if so, the location of the site or sites involved, an estimate of
the owners or operator’s share, if any, of the cost to clean up the site and a
description of site and superfund listing.
      (8)   A statement as to the present suitability of the site for the
conduct of the proposed activity as the facility and of any additional measures
that would be required to make the site suitable for such activity;
      (9)   A set of drawings prepared by a licensed engineer depicting the
proposed facility, which drawings impart sufficient detail and information for
the analysis required under this chapter;
      (10)   A Facility Impact Report (FIR) in accordance with division (B)(16)
hereof;
      (11)   A copy of the public notice of the right to submit comments to the
Fiscal Court pursuant to §
50.27 herein;
      (12)   Evidence of notification to adjoining property owners by certified
mail of the intention to submit to the Fiscal Court and application for a site
approval for a solid waste management facility;
      (13)   A list of the names and addresses of all persons to whom the
application for site approval was submitted pursuant to the provisions of §
50.27(B) hereinafter set out;
      (14)   The following certification:
            “I certify under the penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction and supervision is accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based upon my inquiry of the person or
persons directly responsible for gathering and evaluating the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations.”
            Which shall be signed:
            (a)   If the owner or operator is a corporation, by an authorized
executive officer; or
            (b)   If the owner or operator is a partnership, by an authorized
general partner; or
            (c)   If the owner or operator is a sole proprietor, by the
proprietor; or
            (d)   If the owner or operator is a governmental agency, by the
head of that agency.
      (15)   Any information submitted to the Fiscal Court pursuant to this
chapter may be claimed confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be
asserted at the time of submission by stamping the words “Confidential Business
Information” on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at
the time of submission, the Fiscal Court may make the information available to
the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information will
be treated in accordance with the procedure in KRS 224.10-210, which are
adopted herein by reference. Claims that name and address of any owner or
operator is confidential, and will be denied;
      (16)   A true copy of any permit application required by the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Cabinet, if such application is
available;
      (17)   A closure plan for the landfill as required by Title 401, Chapter
47 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations with estimates of closure costs.
   (C)   Submission and distribution.
      (1)   The application for site approval shall be submitted to the Judge
Executive within 45 days of the receipt of the application for site approval,
the owner/operator shall be notified in writing if such application is
administratively complete. For the purposes of this chapter, “administratively
complete application” means an application for site approval with the Judge
Executive, or a designated agent thereof, determines it contains information
addressing each application requirement of this chapter and all information
necessary to initiate technical processing and public review. Additional
information may be required after determination that the application is
administratively complete.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the notification from the Judge Executive of
administrative completeness, the owner/operator shall forthwith deliver the
application for the site approval to the following persons:
         (a)   Members of the Fiscal Court and the County Attorney at those
addresses set out in the list to be provided to the owner/operator of the
proposed facility by the Judge Executive;
         (b)   The Fire Department Chief over the jurisdiction of the site or
facility, such Fire Department shall be within the boundaries of the county;
         (c)   The County Disaster and Emergency Services Coordinator (“DES”);
and
         (d)   The Director of the FIVCO District Health Department- Public
Comment and Public Hearing.
   (D)   Each application for site approval shall be subject to a public
comment period and a public hearing. After the owner or operator has been
notified that the application for a site approval permit is administratively
complete and has submitted such application to the persons or agency, the owner
or operator shall cause a public notice to be published weekly for six
consecutive weeks in the newspaper of the greatest circulation serving the
county.
   (E)   The notice shall be in a form that advises the public that an
application for a site approval permit has been filed. The beginning date of
the public comment period shall commence as of the date of the first public
notice and date on which the public hearing is conducted. The public hearing
shall be held within 45 days after the date of the publication of the last of
the six weekly public notices required herein. Such public hearing shall be
held in the county at a location readily accessible to the public.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.36 FISCAL COURT DETERMINATION AS TO FACILITY SITE APPROVAL.
   (A)   Within 60 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the
appropriate Fire Department Chief, the County D.E.S. Coordinator and the
Director of the FIVCO District Health Department shall review the application
for a site approval permit together with any comments or information received
during the public comment period, and any other information deemed appropriate,
and each such agency shall make a recommendation to the Fiscal Court regarding
the issuance or denial of the site approval facility.
   (B)   Within 30 days following receipt of the agency recommendations, the
Fiscal Court of the county shall make final determination whether to issue or
deny the site approval permit.
   (C)   The Fiscal Court shall issue the application for site approval if it
finds on the basis of the information available to it that:
      (1)   The nature of the solid waste management activity conducted as the
facility site will not present an unreasonable risk to public health or safety;
and
      (2)   The nature of the solid waste management activity conducted at the
facility site would not significantly impede or adversely impact the provision
of fire, health and other emergency services to the public both in the vicinity
of the proposed site and throughout the county; and
      (3)   The nature of the solid waste activity conducted as the facility
site would not result in a significant reduction in the public use and
enjoyment of parks, recreational waters, historic structures, cultural and
natural resources located in the vicinity of the proposed site; and
      (4)   That the facility and the solid waste activity occurring on the
site will not have a significant adverse impact on the establishment of
businesses, residential developments, churches, schools or other types of
activities related to the social, economic, and cultural development of the
county; and
      (5)   The owner/operators prior experience and history in solid waste
activities indicates reasonably satisfactory record of compliance with
applicable federal, state, local laws and regulations and based upon such prior
record it can be reasonably expected that the owner/operator will, in
constructing, expanding, maintaining or operating the facility at the proposed
site, maintain a corresponding satisfactory record of compliance with
applicable laws and regulations; and
      (6)   The owner or operator has sufficient financial resources to
complete construction of the new or expanded facility, to maintain and operate
the facility in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, to respond
immediately in the event of emergency by reason of accident or upset at the
site and to complete closure of the facility in accordance with federal and
state laws and regulations; and
      (7)   The owner or operator has complied with all solid waste management
laws and regulations concerning solid waste facility permits, filings and/or
notifications required by the state or federal regulatory authority; and
      (8)   The application is consistent with the goals and objectives of the
five county solid waste plan adopted; and
      (9)   The required financial responsibility for closure has been
established by posting a bond or establishing an escrow account in a minimum
amount of $10,000 or greater if so determined by an approved closure plan and
cost estimate. The approved cost estimate for closure and will be adjusted at
least once every five years.
   (D)   Notification. The Fiscal Court shall send written notification of its
determination with respect to the site approval permit application to the owner
or operator and to all persons who submitted written or oral comments during
the public comment period. Such notifications shall include a written summary
of the basis for the determination.
   (E)   Coordination with other laws. The Fiscal Court shall, to the extent
possible or as may be required, coordinate its review of applications for site
approval under this chapter with the exercise of authority conferred upon it
pursuant to any state or federal laws.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.37 FACILITY IMPACT REPORT.
   (A)   Procedure. The owner or operator shall file with its application for
site approval a facility impact report which shall include the following: An
environmental impact report, a socioeconomic report and a risk assessment. The
owner or operator shall publish notice of the availability of the facility
impact report for examination and review at the office of the Judge Executive,
such notice to be included in the public notice required in this subchapter
hereof with respect to the application for site approval.
   (B)   Contents of facility impact report. The facility impact report shall
contain a socioeconomic report which shall include a comprehensive community
inventory which shall identify the following:
      (1)   The historic land use of the facility site; and
      (2)   Proximity of the proposed site to residence, schools, churches,
public parks, agricultural land, nursing homes, hospitals, cemeteries, historic
structures and infant care facilities; and
      (3)   A general profile of the business community located in the vicinity
of the facility site including any sites planned for future industrial parks or
sites being considered for any business or manufacturing facility; and
      (4)   A description of any streets, highways, railroads or waterways
which may be used to transport solid waste to the proposed site, including
information on capacity, usage, and routes; and
      (5)   Cultural resources; and
      (6)   Population data and projected population in the vicinity of the
facility site; and
      (7)   A statement as to the impact on the community, including community
perception, direct and indirect impact on the local economy and economic growth
and an analysis of the impact on land values in the vicinity of the facility
site.
   (C)   The facility impact report shall contain an environmental impact
report which shall identify existing environmental conditions in the vicinity
of the facility site. To the extent that this data may be provided in the
permit application required by state regulations, a verified copy of such
permit application may be substituted for the environmental impact report
required by this section. Nonetheless, such report is to include a minimum:
      (1)   A geological report with a description of the soil types to include
soil permeability, stability and drainage and the geology down through and
including the aquifer zones in the area; and
      (2)   A hydrological report describing the hydrology and surface and
groundwater quality and quantity in the area, including proximity to any
aquifers and recharge areas and sensitive areas such as wetlands; and
      (3)   Proximity to public and private surface or groundwater supplies,
including current and potential future uses; and
      (4)   A biological report indicating the presence of significant,
threatened or endangered species; and
      (5)   An air quality survey, including the characteristics (stability) of
the atmosphere which affects the site and the population, present and
projected, in relation to the facility and the prevailing wind; and
      (6)   Flood plain identification; and
      (7)   Historic, archaeological and natural sites and landmarks,
outstanding resource waters, public forest areas, dedicated or designated open
space, public recreational areas, wildfire refuges, game lands and fishing
waters.
   (D)   The facility impact report shall include a risk assessment which shall
quantitatively define the public health, safety and environmental risk
associated with routine operations and upset conditions at the facility site.
The scope and context of the impacts on the community will vary depending upon
the nature, size, duration and extent of the activity to be conducted at the
facility site. The risk assessment shall analyze those items as identified by
the Fiscal Court, which shall include the following:
      (1)   Risks associated with accidents in transportation, such analysis to
include mode of transportation, route and the characteristics of structures,
and population, residential and nonresidential, within the reasonably predicted
impact area;
      (2)   Nature, extent, quantity and impacts of routine release to air,
water, and land from all sources at the facility site, including storm water
runoff;
      (3)   Adequacy of emergency services (police, fire, medical) to protect
public health safety and environment from fire, explosion, flood, chemical
releases or any natural disaster, including emergency response capability and
the owner/operator emergency implementation plan;
      (4)   Projections of possible health effects with particular emphasis on
occupational health, public health, chronic and acute exposure for both at the
facility site and the surrounding area;
      (5)   Adequacy of transportation system in the event of emergency,
including an evacuation plan.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.38 FEES.
   The owner or operator shall, by certified check made payable to the Fiscal
Court, submit fees in accordance with the following schedule.
   (A)   At the time of submission of the application for site approval, the
owner or operator shall pay the Fiscal Court an application fee of $25,000,
which is to be held in escrow for payment of the reasonable expense of
reviewing and evaluating the application. Fees are required for new facilities
and also for any modified or expanded existing facilities.
   (B)   At the conclusion of the review process, the Judge Executive shall
tender to the owner or operator a statement setting out the actual cost
incurred by the Fiscal Court for the use of qualified consultants for
technical, accounting or legal assistance and any other expenses incurred in
the evaluation of the application and the facility impact report, which shall
be payable upon receipt;
   (C)   The Fiscal Court may not recover costs in excess of the actual cost of
consultants and any other necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by the
Fiscal Court.
   (D)   An additional fee of $5,000 per year is due and payable each year on
the anniversary of the issuance of the permit. Such fee shall be used to defray
the costs of enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.39 PUBLIC HEALTH HAZARD.
   Nothing in this chapter or a site approval permit issued hereunder shall
confer the right upon the owner/operator of any solid waste management facility
to maintain a public health hazard or nuisance.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In the event that an owner, occupant or operator is notified by the
county code enforcement officer that there is an unsafe structure, unsafe
premises or solid waste, as previously defined in this chapter, must be removed
from the property, the person, owner, occupant or operator shall be responsible
for the cost of removal.
   (B)   In the event the person, owner, occupant or operator fails to remove
unsafe structure(s), unsafe premise(s) or solid waste, as previously defined in
this chapter, following receipt of notice as provided herein, in such event,
the county, its employees or contractors may enter upon the property, remove
the violation or violations and further dispose of same. In such event, Fiscal
Court shall retain a lien against the real property/premises, upon which the
violation was located for those costs incurred in the removal and disposition
of the nuisance plus interest at the rate of 12% per annum. A copy of the lien
shall be filed in the office of the Court Clerk.
   (C)   If the person, owner, occupant or operator having charge of any
residential or commercial property shall maintain or keep a nuisance thereon
longer than 14 days after the notice from the county code enforcement officer,
then each of them shall be fined not less than $100 but no more than $200 for
each citation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   The correction of the unsafe condition in the structure or on the
premises prior to the time for correction as set forth in the notice herein
shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this chapter and no
further action shall be taken.
   (E)   The timeline for fines, citations and liens shall be as follows:
      (1)   On day one, the nuisance is identified and notice is given.
      (2)   On day 14, if the nuisance has been corrected, then no further
action is necessary however, if the nuisance has not been corrected, then the
county code enforcement officer shall issue a fine of not less than $100 but no
more than $200 for each day of violation.
      (3)   On day 60, if the person, owner, occupant or operator has not come
to an agreement with the Code Enforcement Board by correcting the nuisance,
paying fines, or establishing a payment program for the existing fines, the
nuisance on the premises will be corrected at the direction/authorization of
the code enforcement officer and a lien will be filed against the premises.
      (4)   At six months, the Fiscal Court will initiate the lien judicially
through the courts if the person, owner, occupant or operator has not made
arrangements to pay the county for the work completed to correct the nuisance
and satisfy any liens or additional costs. Repayment amount due will include
the cost to correct the nuisance and fines imposed.
      (5)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the authority to negotiate on
a case by case basis how to address fines, payments and corrective action
plans.
(Ord. 2024-830.1, passed 5-23-2024)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Scope
   
51.03   Wastewater discharge
   
51.04   Wastewater disposal
   
51.05   Connection to sewer required
   
51.06   Connection fees
§ 51.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum possible
beneficial public use of the county, or any other public entity servicing
residents of the county, wastewater facilities.
(Ord. 00-610.1, passed 8-18-2000)
§ 51.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all waste water facilities located within
the county and outside the city limits of any incorporated city.
   (B)   To the extent that a city ordinance regulating the use of that city’s
wastewater facilities is applicable to residents outside of the city limits,
then that ordinance shall prevail and be applicable to any wastewater system
located outside the incorporated city’s limits.
(Ord. 00-610.1, passed 8-18-2000)
§ 51.03 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.
   Wastewater discharged to a city’s wastewater facilities is not authorized
unless approved by the appropriate manager of the facility receiving such
discharge.
(Ord. 00-610.1, passed 8-18-2000)
§ 51.04 WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   To the extent that a wastewater sewer is available as described in §
51.05 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of waste water.
(Ord. 00-610.1, passed 8-18-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.05 CONNECTION TO SEWER REQUIRED.
   The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes and abutting on any street, alley or
rights-of-way in which there is or may be located a wastewater sewer connected
to any treatment facility, is required, at the owner expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and connect such facilities directly to the
proper sewer in accordance with the laws and regulations applicable to the
sewer connections, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so;
provided, the proper wastewater sewer is within 100 feet of the property lines;
provided further that, the owner of any such house, building or property upon
which is situated a septic tank that has been constructed within three years
prior to the adoption of this chapter and which is functioning properly and
from which wastewater is not leaking and which is not creating any health
hazard, may delay for a period of 12 months connecting to the sewer facility.
(Ord. 00-610.1, passed 8-18-2000)
§ 51.06 CONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   At such time as the sewer facilities are available to the owners of
property as described in §
51.05 of this chapter, the owner shall pay a connection fee in an amount as the
Fiscal Court approves by of the Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Said connection fee shall be immediately due and payable 90 days after
the date of the official notice specified in §
51.05 of this chapter, regardless if the connection is actually made.
(Ord. 00-610.1, passed 8-18-2000)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Regulations
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions
   
70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department
   
70.04   Authority for enforcement
   
70.05   Temporary regulations
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Signal legends
   
70.21   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
   
70.22   Obedience to signals
   
70.23   Interference with signals
   
70.24   Unauthorized signals or markings
   
70.25   Device to be legible and in proper position
   
70.26   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers
License Fee
   
70.40   Definitions
   
70.41   License fee
   
70.42   License and motor vehicle sticker
   
70.43   Procurement, description and placement of sticker
   
70.44   Transfer of license or sticker prohibited; exception
   
70.45   Expenditure of license fee
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or Police
Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney’s office when on official
business, and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
   BOULEVARD. Any legally designated street at which cross-traffic is required
to stop before entering or crossing the BOULEVARD.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between two consecutive
intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the street
is used for business purposes.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of the roadway included within the extension of the
sidewalk across any intersection, and other portions of the roadway between two
intersections that may be legally designated as crossing places and marked by
stanchions, paint lines or otherwise.
   CURB. The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles, whether
marked by curbstones or not.
   INTERSECTION. The part of the public way embraced within the extensions of
the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not
one street crosses the other.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, warnings, directions,
markings and devices placed or erected or maintained by authority of the County
Fiscal Court.
   ONE-WAY STREET. A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in one
direction only.
   OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance,
starting and stopping of a vehicle.
   PARK. When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PLAY STREET. Any street or portion thereof so designated by the County
Fiscal Court and reserved as a play area for children, from which all traffic
is barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of §
70.03 of this chapter or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this
traffic code.
   PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between property lines of every way, dedicated
passway or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths and
footpaths.
   REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed
in the opposite direction.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the
street.
   ROADWAY. The portion of any street, improved, designated or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb and the property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is actually
necessary to receive or discharge passengers.
   STREET. Every public way, including alleys.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses and other
conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for the
purpose of travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on any street, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction given by a uniformed police officer, or
to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations of this traffic
code.
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States Government, the state
or the county, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in this traffic
code or by state statute.
   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of
this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this traffic code which, by their very nature, can have no
application.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the county in the
administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of the county in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle or any other signal.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to
alleviate unusual traffic problems, the County Fiscal Court or any authorized
county official shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to impose
traffic regulations as he or she may deem necessary for temporary periods not
to exceed two weeks.
   (B)   If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer than
two weeks, the County Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended order.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control
sign or signs exhibiting the words “Go”, “Caution” or “Stop”, or exhibiting
different colored lights for purposes of traffic control, the following colors
only shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be obeyed as
follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go”. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at that place prohibits
either turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the
signal is exhibited.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or
“Go” signal. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal may enter and
clear the intersection.
   (C)   Red alone or double red or “Stop”. Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at
another point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain
standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
   (D)   Flashing red alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at another point as
may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not again proceed until
it can do so without danger.
   (E)   Flashing amber alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce
its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection controlled by the
signal.
   (F)   “Yield Right-of-Way”. Vehicular traffic facing the “Yield Right-of-
Way” sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle facing a “Yield Right-of-Way”
sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess
of 15 mph; except that, this speed limit shall not apply to vehicles entering
an expressway.
   (G)   Lane lights.
      (1)   When lane lights are installed over any street for the purpose of
controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular traffic shall move only
in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear.
      (2)   However, when flashing amber lights appear above a lane, all left
turns shall be made from that lane.
      (3)   Where red arrows appear above the lanes, vehicles shall not move
against them.
      (4)   If flashing amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be used
only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at that place prohibits the
turn.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338
§ 70.21 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The county shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control devices
necessary within the county. All traffic-control devices, including signs,
shall be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation, shall be
uniform and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control
devices and signs shall conform to required state specifications.
§ 70.22 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
signal of any official traffic- control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any
of the public departments or public utilities of the county, or any electric
signal, gate or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity for the barrier
or sign must be approved by the county.
   (B)   The sign, signal, marking or barrier shall have the same authority as
the personal direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official control device or any railroad sign
or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
Penalty see §
70.99
§ 70.24 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display on
or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device or
railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the movement of
traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. No
person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit on any
street, any traffic sign or signal or any commercial advertising. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as restricting any public department or public
utility of the county in any emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting
any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been approved by the county.
   (B)   Every prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public
nuisance and the county is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to be
removed.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.
   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other traffic-
control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator if
at the time and place of the alleged violation the required device was not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person.
§ 70.26 TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   In an emergency any police officer may at his or her discretion disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.
LICENSE FEE
§ 70.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. The entire geographical area of McLean County.
   COUNTY ROADS. Those road accepted by the County Fiscal Court as a part of
the county road system and those state or federal roads and highways patrolled
at the expense of the county, and so filed for record in the office of the
County Judge, the Secretary of State or Bureau of Highways, as public roads.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor driven vehicle required to be registered or
licensed pursuant to the provisions of KRS Ch. 186 of the home state of the
owner thereof before being operated upon the public highways, except those
motor vehicles used and operated exclusively in the service of the federal,
state, county or city governments.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998)
§ 70.41 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   For the privilege of operating motor vehicles on county roads, an
annual fee of $15 per motor vehicle pro-rated monthly is hereby imposed upon
all persons, firms, corporations or organizations including non-residents of
the county owning and operating or causing to be operated motor vehicles upon
the county roads for pleasure, hire or business, including motor vehicles
operated upon and over the business, including motor vehicles operated upon and
over the streets and public ways of the county in connection with a business
conducted or regular profession followed within the county limits, or as a
means of conveyance to and from a position, job or employment for which
remuneration’s is received in said county. This division (A) shall not be
construed to apply to non-residents who operate motor vehicles upon the county
roads only occasionally or temporarily, or for shopping only.
   (B)   The county license fee shall become due and payable at the same time a
persons’s state motor vehicle registration plates become due, and shall be
collected by the County Clerk at the time the plate is issued. The Clerk shall
not issue the plate, nor shall any renewal be made of same if the fee is not
paid.
   (C)   Non-residents of the county who are required by this subchapter to pay
the license fee herein imposed shall, within 30 days of purchasing their motor
vehicle plates, pay the required fee to the County Clerk who shall issue to the
non-resident the license and sticker hereinafter provided for.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998; Ord. 98-220.8a, passed 12-14-1998; Ord. 98-
220.8B, passed 3-25-2002)
§ 70.42 LICENSE AND MOTOR VEHICLE STICKER.
   (A)   Upon payment of the license fee, a license and motor vehicle sticker
shall be issued by the County Court Clerk for each motor vehicle required to be
licensed under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The license and motor vehicle sticker shall be effective for one year,
or until the license is to be renewed, commencing with the calendar date of
state motor vehicle registration.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998)
§ 70.43 PROCUREMENT, DESCRIPTION AND PLACEMENT OF STICKER.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court shall provide, out of the county’s General
Fund, the County Clerk with sufficient funds to purchase the licenses and motor
vehicle stickers to be issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall order licenses and motor vehicle stickers with
corresponding numbers and shall order motor vehicle stickers in a bold color
and in a size not to exceed one inch by one and one-half inches.
   (C)   Motor vehicle stickers shall be at all times conspicuously displayed
upon the extreme lower left side of the front windshield of any motor vehicle
required to be licensed under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998)
§ 70.44 TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR STICKER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
subchapter to transfer or cause to be transferred from one motor vehicle to
another, any motor vehicle sticker issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter; provided, however, should a vehicle be sold or transferred, the
sticker shall remain with the vehicle and shall be valid until the vehicle is
required by law to be re-registered.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.45 EXPENDITURE OF LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   By the tenth day of each month, the County Court Clerk shall remit
license fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, for the
past month to the County Treasurer who shall credit the fees to the General
Fund of the county.
   (B)   License fees collected shall be expended to reimburse the county for
any costs associated with this subchapter, including, but not limited to, the
administrative cost, the costs associated with enforcement by county agencies,
including, but not limited to, the County Sheriff’s office. In addition, the
funds shall be expended on the construction, alteration, maintenance or repair
of county roads, signs, sidewalks or bridges, or any other structures or
mechanism required in the regulation and control of motor vehicle and
pedestrian traffic within the county. Any funds generated in excess of the
above items in any given year shall be utilized in such manner as may be
directed by Fiscal Court.
   (C)   Provided, however, the Clerk shall retain 4% of each license fee
collected by him or her as compensation for issuing the license and sticker.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this traffic code where no
other penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§
70.40 through
70.45 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $15, and
each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The fines and court
costs shall be accounted for and directed by state statute.
(Ord. 98-220.8, passed 10-12-1998)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
   
71.01   Obstructing traffic
   
71.02   Reverse or U-turns
   
71.03   Backing vehicles
   
71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks
Accidents
   
71.15   Duty of operator
   
71.16   Accident report
Prohibitions
   
71.30   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully
   
71.31   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency vehicles;
driving over fire hose
   
71.32   Smoke emission or other nuisance
Parades
   
71.45   Definitions
   
71.46   Permit required
   
71.47   Application for permit
   
71.48   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.49   Notice of rejection of permit
   
71.50   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.51   Alternative permit
   
71.52   Notice to county and other officials when permit issued
   
71.53   Contents of permit
   
71.54   Duties of permittee
   
71.55   Public conduct during parades
   
71.56   Revocation of permit
 
   
71.99   Penalty
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain
standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of
any traffic-control signal which may be located at the intersection or
crosswalk.
   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the county to be of special or critical
importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in a distinctive manner
in order to indicate its importance. Should the operator of any vehicle enter
any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other side of
the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-
control signal notwithstanding, he or she shall be deemed to have violated this
division rather than division (B) above.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 REVERSE OR U-TURNS.
   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety without
interfering with other traffic.
(KRS 189.330(8)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 BACKING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the vehicle at
any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning movement. A vehicle
from any parking position shall be backed by the operator in such manner as to
proceed on the same side of the roadway in the lawful direction of travel.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within
any sidewalk space, except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special
permit from the County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive
the vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building or lot and across a sidewalk,
or its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension.
      (2)   On entering the roadway from the alley, driveway or building the
operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
      (3)   The operator of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn
into an alley from the roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Penalty, see §
71.99
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.15 DUTY OF OPERATOR.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of or passenger in any motor
vehicle which is involved in an accident, in which any person is injured or
property damaged, to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the injury or
damage and render any assistance as may be needed.
Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Accident involving death or serious injury; penalty for not reporting, see
KRS 189.990
   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580
§ 71.16 ACCIDENT REPORT.
   The operator, owner or passenger involved in an accident resulting in the
injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is damaged,
shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the Police
Department.
Penalty, see §
71.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.30 OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the vehicle
in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of pedestrians
and other vehicles upon the highway.
   (B)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure the highway.
   (C)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure vehicles or equipment located in or near a highway
work zone.
   (D)   A person shall not operate any vehicle in a reckless or negligent
manner as to endanger persons or property in or near a highway, or in or near a
highway work zone.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty, an operator who violates division
(C) or (D) of this section shall be subject to revocation of his or her
operator's license under KRS 186.560.
(KRS 189.290) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with and operating
one or more flashing, rotating or oscillating red or blue lights visible under
normal conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the emergency
vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle
or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way,
immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the
edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and stop and remain
stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed
by a police officer or firefighter.
   (B)   Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in conformity with
the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every vehicle shall
immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall remain stopped until the
emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by a police officer or
firefighter.
   (C)   No operator of any vehicle, unless he or she is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than 500 feet, nor shall he or she
drive into, park the vehicle into or park the vehicle within the block where
the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm, unless he or
she is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.
   (D)   No vehicle, train or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any street,
private driveway, or track for use at any fire alarm unless the Fire Department
official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
   (E)   The provision of division (F) of this section shall apply to any
driver approaching a stationary:
      (1)   Emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately
flashing yellow, red, red and white, red and blue, or blue lights;
      (2)   Disabled vehicle, when the disabled vehicle is displaying some type
of warning signal, such as emergency flashers, flares, or retroreflective
signals.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle that is approaching a vehicle described in
division (E) of this section shall, while proceeding with due caution:
      (1)   Yield the right-of-way by moving to a lane not adjacent to that of
the vehicle, if:
         (a)   The person is driving on a highway having at least four lanes
with at least two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching
vehicle; and
         (b)   It is possible to make the lane change with due regard to safety
and traffic conditions.
      (2)   Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed to road
conditions, if the road has less than four lanes or if changing lanes would be
impossible or unsafe.
   (G)   This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an
emergency vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.
(KRS 189.930) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.32 SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.
   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a minimum of
noise, smoke or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other traffic, and to
promote the public safety.
(KRS 189.020) Penalty, see §
71.99
PARADES
§ 71.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any PARADE, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park or
other public place in the county.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
§ 71.46 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the County
Fiscal Court or any authorized county official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions; or
      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.47 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official on forms provided by
the Fiscal Court member or the official.
   (A)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   Application. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any assembly area or areas;
      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his or her behalf; and
      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.
   (C)   Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit a fee in an amount as established by the County Fiscal Court.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.48 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official shall issue a
permit when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the county to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
county;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
county other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire; and
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.49 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official shall act on
the application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof.
   (B)   If the County Fiscal Court or authorized county official disapproves
the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within the three days,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, after the date on which the
application was filed, a notice of his or her action stating the reasons for
the denial of the permit.
§ 71.50 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the County Fiscal Court. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days
after notice of denial. The County Fiscal Court shall act on the appeal within
30 days after its receipt.
§ 71.51 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit
under this subchapter.
§ 71.52 NOTICE TO COUNTY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the following persons:
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court;
   (B)   The County Attorney;
   (C)   The Police Chief and the Fire Chief; and
   (D)   The general manager or responsible head of each public utility, the
regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed
parade.
§ 71.53 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public place to be
traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
   (G)   Other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement of
this subchapter.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.54 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his or
her person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.55 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, except a police car
or other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
§ 71.56 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The county shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $20, nor more than $500.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
71.31 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $60 nor more than $500, or be imprisoned in the county jail for not
more than 30 days, or both.
(KRS 189.993(8))
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
   
72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking
   
72.02   Manner of parking
   
72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking
   
72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
   
72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
   
72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing
authorized
   
72.07   Parking on parade route
   
72.08   Parking on off-street facility
   
72.09   Owner responsibility
   
72.10   Parking in parks
   
72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale
   
72.12   Parking with handicapped permits
Impounding
   
72.25   Impoundment of vehicles authorized; redemption
   
72.26   Required notice to owner; sale of vehicle
Snow Emergency
   
72.40   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.41   Termination of emergency
   
72.42   Snow emergency routes
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Revenues from fees, fines and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS 65.120
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other
thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction or hindrance in or on any street,
alley or sidewalk within the county either during the day or night.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the
roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward and parallel
with the curb; except that, where parking is permitted on the left side of a
one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and except for
commercial loading and unloading on one-way streets.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless its
two right wheels are within six inches of and parallel with the curb; except
that, on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side, the two
left wheels are to be within six inches of and parallel with the curb.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street; except that,
wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading; provided that, the
loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not consume
more than 30 minutes. This backing of trucks or wagons is prohibited at all
times and on all streets in the county where any truck or wagon so backed
interferes with the use of the roadway by moving vehicles or occupies road
space within ten feet of the centerline of the street.
   (D)   The county may establish diagonal parking at certain places, requiring
the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a certain
portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking shall not be
established where the roadway space required therefor would be within ten feet
of the centerline of any street. The diagonal parking places shall be
designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement
the required angle and the width of the roadway space within which the vehicle
shall park.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park the
vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the side or
the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with disabilities;
      (3)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (4)   Within an intersection or on a crosswalk;
      (5)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking;
      (6)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (7)   On any controlled access highway;
      (8)   Within a highway tunnel;
      (9)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; or
      (10)   On an area between the roadways of a divided highway.
(KRS 189.450(5))
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area.
(KRS 189.450(6))
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from his or her duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.
   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time on
any street so marked by official signs.
   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent
to any curb so marked.
   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified by official signs on any day, except Sundays on any
street so marked.
   (F)   (1)   The county shall determine on what streets or portions thereof
stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever under authority
of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any parking limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are restricted
to handicapped parking, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice
thereof. However, in lieu of erecting the signs or in conjunction therewith,
the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to which parking is
prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.
      (2)   No regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the signs
have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted yellow at the time
of any alleged offense, except in the case of those parking restrictions which,
by their very nature, would not require the signs and markings.
   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time longer
than specified on official signs any day, except Sunday and on any street so
marked.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
   The county is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall
provide suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting
parking on that particular day. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to stop on any street so designated.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle on any
of the public ways or streets of the county for a period of 24 hours or longer.
Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of the public ways or streets
of the county for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned, and
shall be subject to all existing regulations of the county pertaining to
abandoned motor vehicles.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official shall have
the authority, whenever in his or her judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a
part of the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic signs
to that effect and to prohibit and prevent parking.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of the signs or directions.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or
abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another’s property, or
on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of
the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property or facility.
   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned or otherwise trespasses
in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee or person in
charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized motor vehicle
removed in accordance with the provisions of §§
72.25 ,
72.26  of this chapter.
   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility
shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or facility
is privately owned and that an unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the
owner’s expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B) above.
Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of
this subchapter regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any
section of any public park, playground, play lot or tot lot within the county
not designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a
roadway. However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and
regularly maintained roadway in any park or playground where at least two
wheels of the motor vehicle are resting on the roadway.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a motor
vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 PARKING WITH HANDICAPPED PERMITS.
   (A)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor vehicle
bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk pursuant to
appropriate county ordinances for handicapped persons, when operated by a
handicapped person or when transporting a handicapped person, may be parked in
a designated handicapped parking place, or when parked in a metered parking
space may be parked for two hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking
limit is imposed may be parked for two hours in excess of the parking limit.
The motor vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for that period of time
necessary to permit entrance or exit of the handicapped person to or from the
parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than 30 minutes.
   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a “No Stopping” or “No
Parking” zone, nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a
fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or evening
hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.
Penalty, see §
72.99
IMPOUNDING
§ 72.25 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   All police officers are empowered to authorize the impoundment of a
vehicle violating vehicle- related ordinances after a citation has been issued.
   (B)   A vehicle slated for impoundment will be tagged and placed under
control of the Police Department. Should a vehicle be moved without the consent
and approval of the Police Department a warrant shall be issued immediately for
the violator’s arrest.
   (C)   All fines, fees and charges must be paid in full before a release of
impoundment can be issued for the vehicle’s release.
§ 72.26 REQUIRED NOTICE TO OWNER; SALE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor
vehicles, who has complied with the notification requirements of KRS 281.928,
shall have a lien on the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in
division (B), for the applicable and reasonable charges assessed in accordance
with KRS 281.926 and 281.932, as long as it remains in his or her possession.
      (2)   If, after a period of 45 days, the applicable and reasonable
charges assessed in accordance with KRS 281.926 and 281.932 have not been paid,
the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in division (B), may be
sold to pay the charges after the owner and any lienholder have been notified
by certified mail at the addresses specified in KRS 281.928(1), ten days prior
to the time and place of the sale. If the proceeds of the sale of any vehicle
pursuant to this section are insufficient to satisfy accrued charges, the sale
and collection of proceeds shall not constitute a waiver or release of
responsibility for payment of unpaid charges by the owner or responsible
casualty insurer of the vehicle. A lien on a vehicle under this division shall
be subject to prior recorded liens, unless released by any existing lienholder
pursuant to division (A)(3).
      (3)   (a)   A lienholder having a prior recorded lien listed on the title
issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be notified by certified mail
within the first ten days of impoundment in accordance with KRS 281.928.
         (b)   The notification, in addition to the requirements of KRS
281.928, shall include the make, model, license number, vehicle identification
number, owner’s name and last known address, and tentative date of sale for the
vehicle, and state that the towing company or storage facility seeks to obtain
a new title free and clear of any liens, excluding tax liens.
         (c)   If the certified letter required under this division is not sent
within the ten days by the towing and storage company, then only ten days of
storage may be charged.
         (d)   The lienholder has the right to take possession of the motor
vehicle after showing proof of lien still enforced, and paying the reasonable
or agreed towing and storage charges on the motor vehicle.
         (e)   If a lienholder does not exercise the right to take possession
of the motor vehicle under this division within 45 days of notification, the
towing company or storage facility may obtain a new title under KRS 186A.145
free and clear of any liens, excluding tax liens.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall allow the transfer of a vehicle
subject to a lien, except as provided in KRS 186A.190 or in division (A)(3)(e).
      (4)   If there are no lienholders required to be notified under KRS
281.920 to 281.936, KRS 359.230 and KRS 376.275, and the owner does not
exercise the right to take possession of the motor vehicle under this section
within 45 days of notification required under KRS 281.928, the tow company or
storage facility may obtain a new title under KRS 186A.145 free and clear of
any liens, excluding tax liens.
(KRS 376.275(1))
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to the following contents of a
motor vehicle, which shall be released to the vehicle owner or the owner's
designated agent upon request, if the request is made within 45 days of the
date the vehicle was towed:
      (1)   Prescription medication in its proper container;
      (2)   Personal medical supplies and equipment or records;
      (3)   Educational materials, including but not limited to, calculators,
books, papers and school supplies;
      (4)   Documents, files, electronic devices or equipment that may be able
to store personal information or information relating to a person's employment
or business;
      (5)   Firearms and ammunition. Notwithstanding the provisions of KRS
376.275(3), firearms and ammunition that are not claimed by the owner of the
vehicle within 45 days of the date the vehicle was towed shall be transferred
to the Department of Kentucky State Police for disposition as provided by KRS
16.220;
      (6)   Cargo in the possession of persons engaged in transportation in
interstate commerce as registered under KRS 186.020;
      (7)   Cargo in the possession of an integrated intermodal small package
carrier as defined by KRS 281.605(12);
      (8)   Child restraint systems or child booster seats; and
      (9)   Checks, checkbooks, debit or credit cards, money orders, stocks or
bonds.
(KRS 376.275(2))
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of contents of motor vehicle, see KRS 376.275(4)
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.40 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official finds
that falling snow, sleet or freezing rain will create a condition which makes
it necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency routes be
prohibited, or whenever it is found on the basis of a firm forecast of snow,
sleet or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may create a
condition making it necessary that parking be prohibited, the Fiscal Court or
county official is authorized to announce the prohibition, to become effective
at a time specified by him, her or it. After the effective time of the
prohibition, no person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain
parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet or freezing
rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the County Fiscal
Court or any authorized county official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m.
that parking on snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified
time, a vehicle parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:
00 a.m. following the fall. The prohibition of parking announced by the County
Fiscal Court or any authorized county official under the authority of this
section shall remain in effect until the Fiscal Court or county official
announces the termination of the snow emergency, in part or in whole, after
which the prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no longer be
in effect.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.41 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the County Fiscal Court or any authorized county official shall
find that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency
prohibition no longer exist, the Fiscal Court or county official is authorized
to declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective
immediately on announcement. If the announcement is made other than between 6:
00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.42 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the County
Fiscal Court or any authorized county official. On a street or highway
designated as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be posted to this
effect.
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the
county shall be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be fined in an
amount not less than $20, nor more than $100, for each offense.
(KRS 189.990(1))
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Bicycles
   
73.02   Motorcycles and motorscooters
   
73.03   Skating and coasting
   
73.04   Clinging to vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the county.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public park,
playground, play lot or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on the bicycle.
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Bicycles; safety regulations and standards, see KRS 189.287
§ 73.02 MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.
   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall carry another person, except on a seat attached thereto or in a sidecar
attached to the vehicle.
   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate the vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or in a
parking area.
   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate the vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Operating and riding on motorcycles, see KRS 189.285
§ 73.03 SKATING AND COASTING.
   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as “play streets”
by the county and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be unlawful
for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle of any kind
to go on any roadway, except at a crosswalk.
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates or
any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten or
attach the vehicle on which he or she is riding thereto.
   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board or fenders of
any vehicle.
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
Street/Location Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Street/Location           Speed Limit Ord. No.      Date Passed
Coffman School House Road 45 mph      18.530-2      9-18-2018
Craig Road                35 mph      22.530-2      7-28-2022
Dillahay-Dame Loop        35 mph      2016.530-2    4-19-2016
East Harmon’s Ferry Road35 mph      21.530-1      2-15-2021
JI West Road              35 mph      18.530-1      7-17-2018
Lyons Lane                35 mph      2011-11.530-1 11-15-2011
Pleasant Hope Church Lane 25 mph      24.530-1      3-28-2024
Ross Lane                 15 mph      22.350-2      5-26-2022
Scotts Bridge Road        35 mph      2014-530-1    6-24-2014
West School House Road    35 mph      21.530-2      10-14-2021
 
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   LITTERING
      
95.   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Adoption and mandatory spay/neuter
   
90.03   Rabies vaccination
   
90.04   Humane Societies; standards and licensing
   
90.05   Kennels
   
90.06   Commercial animal establishments
   
90.07   Inspections
   
90.08   License revocation
   
90.09   Humane treatment of animals
   
90.10   Animals to be under control
   
90.11   Non-domesticated and exotic animals
   
90.12   Powers of County Animal Control
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. Any animal left more than 24 hours without a person checking on the
condition of the animal(s) and providing food and water. Any animal left on
private property without the owner’s consent or deserted or dumped on public
property or roadways.
   ANIMAL. Any live vertebrate creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL. The department of the county which is designated by the
Fiscal Court to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to operate the
animal shelter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person designated by the county, as required by
KRS 258.915, to assist in the operation of the animal shelter and to enforce
this chapter and state laws regarding animal control.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility operated by the city, county, any other
governmental agency or humane society for the purpose of impounding or caring
for animals.
   CAT. Any feline of the domesticated type.
   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any pet shop, boarding or breeding kennel,
grooming facility, auction, petting zoo, zoological park, circus, performing
animal exhibit or any person engaged in the business of breeding, buying or
selling at retail or wholesale, any species of animal for profit, but shall not
include a licensed veterinarian.
   DAY. For the purpose of this chapter, a 24-hour period shall constitute a
day.
   DOG. Any age canine of the domestic type.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Animals as are habituated to live in or about the
habitations of human beings, and which are kept, cared for, sheltered, fed or
harbored for use as a pet or as a source of food, raw materials or income.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal not indigenous to the United States and not
ordinarily tame and which is by nature an animal that lives apart from human
beings.
   HUMANE SOCIETY. Any organization existing for the purpose of preventing
cruelty to animals.
   IMPOUNDED. Having been received into the custody of the Animal Control
Officer or any authorized representative thereof.
   KENNEL. Any premises where any person or entity engages in boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for fee, selling, providing
temporary sanctuary, rescuing or adopting dogs or cats, except a KENNEL shall
not include boarding at a facility owned and operated by a licensed
veterinarian.
   LIVESTOCK.
      (1)   All cattle, buffaloes or animals of the bovine species;
      (2)   All horses, mules, burros and ass or animals of the equine species;
      (3)   All goats or animals of the caprice species;
      (4)   All swine or animals of the porcine species;
      (5)   All sheep or animals of the ovine species;
      (6)   All fowl or animals of the order Galliformes (game birds);
      (7)   All ducks and geese or animals of the Anatidae (water fowl) family;
      (8)   All ostrich, emu, rhea and cassowaries, or animals of the ratite
order; or
      (9)   All llamas or animals of the camelid family and deer and elk, whose
regulatory requirements are under KRS Chs. 150 and 246, as well as poultry,
ratite and corvine.
   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal, but not limited to felines (other than the
domestic house cat), non-human primates, bears, wolves, coyotes, foxes and
venomous reptiles, and any crossbreed of such animals which have similar
characteristics of the animals specified herein. In order to properly
administer the provisions of this section, the County Fiscal Court may add to
or remove from the classification of NON-DOMESTIC ANIMAL any bird, mammal
reptile (aquatic and amphibious forms) or other members of the animal kingdom.
However, additions to the list may be made only if Fiscal Court determines,
after public hearing, that such species because of habit, mode of life or
natural instinct is incapable of being domesticated; requires the exercise of
art, force or skill to keep them safely in subjection and would create a
reasonable likelihood of hazard to the public. Each determination by Fiscal
Court as to additions or deletions shall become effective when filed with the
County Judge Executive and approved by Fiscal Court.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation
owning, keeping, harboring or sheltering one or more animals. For purposes of
enforcing this chapter, an animal shall be deemed harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for three or more consecutive days.
   PERSON. All natural persons, corporations, partnerships, firms,
associations, governmental bodies, agencies or other entities.
   PET. Domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal(s) which:
      (1)   Molests passers-by or passing vehicles;
      (2)   Attacks people or other animals;
      (3)   Damages public or private property;
      (4)   Is repeatedly at large;
      (5)   Makes noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely manner;
      (6)   Creates unsanitary conditions; or
      (7)   Disturbs the peace, comfort or health of persons in any other
manner.
   PROPER QUARANTINE. Confinement to a secure enclosure which shall not permit
the animal to come in contact with another animal or person, except the owner
or caregiver, for a period of ten days.
   QUALIFIED PERSON. Any person granted a permit by the commonwealth’s
Department of Human Resources to vaccinate his, her or their own animal against
rabies.
   REASONABLE GROOMING. To maintain an animal’s coat to prevent conditions
which inhibits normal walking or eliminating body waste or which is medically
harmful to the animal.
   RESTRAINT. Enclosed in an area by a form of fencing designed to control the
movement of the animal or secured by a leash or chain. An animal shall be
deemed to be RESTRAINED if it remains on the premises of its owner or if it is
accompanied by a responsible person and is under that person’s control.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. Any animal that is off the property of the owner,
custodian, possessor or harborer and is not restrained. Except that a hound or
other hunting dog which has been released from restraint for hunting purposes
shall be deemed to be under reasonable control of its owner or handler while
engaged in or returning from hunting and, if the hunting dog becomes
temporarily lost from a pack or wanders from actual control or sight of its
owner or handler, it shall not be deemed to be a violation.
   STRAY. Any animal running at large.
   VETERINARIAN. One licensed and qualified to treat diseases and injuries of
animals.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or
domestic animal due to a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked
assault or bite which results in serious bodily harm;
      (2)   Any animal when unprovoked, approaches in a terrorizing manner, any
person in an attitude of attack upon streets, sidewalks or any public grounds
or places;
      (3)   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
unprovoked attacks which cause injury or endanger the safety of human beings or
domestic animals;
      (4)   Any animal which bites multiple times or to the extent of causing
severe injury and assaults or otherwise attacks human beings or domestic
animals;
      (5)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of fighting with animals;
      (6)   It shall be prima facie evidence that an animal is vicious if the
animal bites a human being or domestic animal more than once in the same
attack; and
      (7)   Exceptions. An animal shall not be deemed vicious solely because:
         (a)   It bites, attacks or menaces:
            1.   Any person assaulting its owner;
            2.   Any person or animal who has tormented or abused it.
         (b)   It is otherwise acting in defense of any attack from a person or
other animal upon its owner or another person; or
         (c)   It is protecting or defending its young or the young of any
other animal.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021)
§ 90.02 ADOPTION AND MANDATORY SPAY/NEUTER.
   (A)   Prior to the adoption of any animal from the animal shelter an
application must be completed by the person wishing to adopt the animal(s). The
application is designed to determine the prospective owner’s ability to care
for the animal.
   (B)   Animal Control and the animal shelter are not obligated to sell or
transfer possession of any animal in their custody.
   (C)   No animal shall be released for adoption from the county animal
shelter unless the new owner agrees to subject the animal to the spay-neuter
program sponsored by the County Fiscal Court and the payment of any and all
applicable fees required.
   (D)   Any 501(c)(3) organization or other similar organization may release
an animal for adoption in the county only if the organization spays or neuters
the animal before adoption.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021)
§ 90.03 RABIES VACCINATION.
   (A)   All animals, as required by KRS Ch. 258, shall be vaccinated for
rabies and re-vaccinated for rabies at the expiration of the immunization
period as certified by a veterinarian.
   (B)   Any dog, cat or ferret reclaimed or adopted from the animal shelter
must have a valid rabies vaccination. The purchase or issuance of a rabies
voucher through the animal shelter shall constitute temporary compliance with
this section until the expiration of said voucher.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 HUMANE SOCIETIES: STANDARDS AND LICENSING.
   (A)   All Humane Societies in the county shall be governed by the same
standards as commercial animal establishments as set forth in KRS Ch. 258, and
shall be subject to any ordinance pertaining to commercial animal
establishments.
   (B)   Any Humane Society, which operates from a fixed site in the county and
takes in strays or unwanted animals, shall apply for a kennel license with
Animal Control. The site shall be inspected prior to renewal of license.
   (C)   Humane societies shall maintain records on each animal accepted or
housed, noting the following:
      (1)   Name and address of previous owner or person turning in the animal;
      (2)   Date received;
      (3)   Condition of the animal and any medical treatment;
      (4)   Date of adoption, redemption or euthanization;
      (5)   Name and address of new owner; and
      (6)   Verification of neutering.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021)
§ 90.05 KENNELS.
   (A)   Upon application to the County Judge Executive, the Animal Control
Officer may issue a kennel license.
   (B)   If the owner/operator of a kennel receives a kennel license, then this
license shall be sufficient to cover all animals maintained by the kennel and
the kennel shall not be required to obtain a license, registration or permit
for each individual animal.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall issue kennel licenses only after an
the Animal Control Officer inspects the proposed kennel site and finds the
facility meets the terms and provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   All dogs and cats over four months of age maintained or kept in a
licensed kennel shall have a current rabies vaccination, pursuant to KRS
258.015, which shall govern the enforcement of this chapter.
   (E)   Licensed kennels shall provide veterinary care for all animals within
the kennel’s control to maintain good health and the general welfare of the
animals.
   (F)   Kennel owners shall renew their license annually by applying to the
Animal Control Officer and paying a $50 kennel license fee. License fees may be
changed by Fiscal Court by resolution.
   (G)   Any non-profit organization or Humane Society shall be exempt from the
fee for any and all kennels operating solely as a part of the business of the
nonprofit organization. Any such non-profit may file one application for all
kennels operating solely as part of its business and shall list the addresses
and maximum number of animals kept at all such kennels on its application.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   All commercial animal establishments shall obtain and maintain a valid
commercial kennel license in order to operate a commercial animal establishment
within the county.
   (B)   Upon Application with the County Judge Executive, the commercial
animal establishment licenses shall be issued by the Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   The commercial animal establishment license shall be valid for a
period of one year, effective July 1 through June 30 of each year. License fees
for commercial animal establishments shall be $50, and may be changed by a
resolution of the Fiscal Court.
   (D)   The commercial animal establishment license shall be renewed annually.
   (E)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide an adequate
environment for each animal, which is compatible with the general health and
welfare of the animals.
   (F)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate space for
each animal. Each cage or enclosure shall be large enough for the animal to
stand, sit, lay and turn around without touching the walls and ceiling of the
cage or enclosure, or another animal.
   (G)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate
sanitation. Each cage or enclosure shall be maintained as follows.
      (1)   Cages or enclosures containing dogs or cats, of any age, shall be
cleaned with hot water, disinfectant and detergent daily, (including holidays)
or more if conditions require additional cleaning or disinfecting to keep
animals out of contact with feces or urine. Litter boxes shall be cleaned daily
(including holidays) and the litter box changed as needed.
      (2)   Cages or enclosures containing birds shall contain a perch and
shall be cleaned with hot water and disinfectant at least twice weekly or more
if condition require addition cleaning.
      (3)   Cages or enclosures containing small animals shall be cleaned with
hot water and disinfectant at least twice weekly or more if conditions require
additional cleaning.
   (H)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate
nourishment and water for each animal as follows.
      (1)   Each animal shall be given fresh food and water daily, including
holidays.
      (2)   Soft food shall be available to those animals unable to chew
standard dry food.
      (3)   Potable water shall be available to each animal at all times.
      (4)   Food and water containers shall be washed and disinfected daily.
      (5)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide proper medical
treatment from a veterinarian for sick or injured animals.
      (6)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide adequate room
(cage) temperature for the general health and welfare of the animal.
      (7)   All commercial animal establishments shall provide a general
cleanliness of its establishment, and shall not permit an insect or rodent
infestation.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 INSPECTIONS.
   The Animal Control Officer shall be permitted and empowered to make an
inspection of any commercial animal establishment, kennel and Humane Society
within the county, and shall further be permitted to take photographs during
the inspection. The inspection shall take place upon the verbal request of the
Animal Control Officer, during regular business hours of the commercial animal
establishment.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021)
§ 90.08 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The Animal Control Officer may revoke any license issued under this chapter.
Grounds for such revocation include, but are not limited to, conviction
pursuant to any violation of this chapter or conviction pursuant to any related
state or federal law. Failure to adhere to the standards set forth in this
chapter or failure to permit the Department of Animal Control to inspect any
establishment, business or person regulated by this chapter during regular
business hours shall be grounds for revocation of any said license. License
revocation notices shall be in writing, specify the number of days for animal
removal, not to exceed seven days, and shall state the grounds therefor. Any
person who receives such license revocation notice issued pursuant to this
section may appeal such notice to the Fiscal Court within ten days following
the receipt of such notice. Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state
the grounds therefore and shall be signed by the person bringing the appeal or
his, her or their authorized representative. Failure to file a timely appeal to
a license revocation notice shall result in license revocation. A hearing for
an appeal, shall be held within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal
before the Fiscal Court or a committee established by the Fiscal Court, which
shall be the sole arbiter of the appeal.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021)
§ 90.09 HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to inhumanely treat any animal,
including, but not limited to, the deprivation of necessities, beating,
mutilating, torturing, killing, overloading, overworking or otherwise abuse any
animal. Nothing herein shall prevent Animal Control from humanely euthanising
any animal.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, display or keep any
animal without providing food, water, adequate shelter from the elements,
adequate space, reasonable grooming, ventilation, shade from the sun, proper
sanitation, care and medical attention.
   (D)   Any animal, which is chained, tied or otherwise restrained, shall be
provided no less than ten feet of chain, rope and the like, with a swivel
attached to prevent entanglement. No chain leash or other connection shall
exceed one-eighth of the animal’s body weight. Any animal restrained in such a
manner that the animal’s chain, rope or the like, allows the animal to leave
its owner or keeper’s property, shall be deemed running at large.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an animal within the
passenger compartment of an automobile without adequate ventilation in the
summer or adequate warmth in the winter. No person shall enclose any animal in
the trunk of an automobile. An Animal Control Officer or law enforcement
officer shall rescue any animal confined in such a manner.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, cause, instigate,
permit, observe or attend any dog-fight, cock-fight, bull-fight or other combat
between animals or between animals and humans.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set free any hare, rabbit or
other animal for the purpose of violating any provision of this chapter.
   (H)   No performing animal exhibition, circus or horse show, shall be
permitted, in which the animals are induced or encouraged to perform through
the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which
will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. All equipment
used on animals in such shows shall fit properly and be in good working order.
   (I)   No person(s) shall expose any poisonous substance, whether mixed with
food or not, so that the same shall be likely to be eaten by an animal;
provided that, it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his or her
property, common rat poison, mixed only with vegetable substances.
   (J)   Any person, who as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall immediately report the incident to Animal Control or any law
enforcement officer.
   (K)   No person(s) shall give away any live animal as a prize or for
inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as an inducement
to enter into business agreement, whereby the offer was for the purpose of
attracting the trade, except it shall not be unlawful to give away small fish,
not to exceed four inches, as a prize.
   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to color, stain, dye or
otherwise change the natural color of any live animal or to offer such colored
animals for sale in the county; except that, the mane and tail of an equine may
be changed pursuant to accepted practices in showing equine.
   (M)   It shall be unlawful to sell baby chicks, ducks or rabbits under the
age of two months in quantities less than six.
   (N)   It shall be unlawful for any person to crop a dog’s ears or tail,
except a licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 ANIMALS TO BE UNDER CONTROL.
   (A)   When livestock are running at large, Animal Control or the law
enforcement officer shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner as soon
as possible. If reasonably possible and feasible, the owner of the livestock
shall be notified prior to the actual capture and impoundment of the livestock
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to own or possess a vicious animal.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to own or possess an animal that conducts itself
in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 NON-DOMESTICATED AND EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own, harbor or keep as a pet any non-
domesticated or exotic animal, not indigenous to the United States, except
state and federal conservation officers, licensed nuisance wildlife officers
and licensed rehabilitators.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own, harbor or keep as a pet any non-
domesticated animal native to the United States, except state and federal
conservation officers, licensed nuisance wildlife officers and licensed
rehabilitators.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to sell, own harbor or keep any venomous reptile.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 POWERS OF COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL.
   (A)   All officers of Animal Control shall have the powers of a peace
officer for the purpose of enforcing animal control laws or ordinances in the
county, if they otherwise qualify as a peace officer under the laws of the
commonwealth.
   (B)   All officers of Animal Control shall comply with KRS 61.300.
   (C)   Whenever it is necessary for Animal Control to make an inspection in
order to perform any duty or enforce any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable state statute, they are hereby empowered to enter property at a
reasonable time and inspect the premises. Animal Control shall have the power
only if the consent of the owner or occupant of the property is freely given, a
search warrant is obtained or such exigent circumstances exist that a
warrantless, non-consensual search is required.
   (D)   All animals of any age running at large, as defined in this chapter,
and found in the county, may be picked up by Animal Control and impounded in
the animal shelter. All animals of any age which have bitten or scratched a
human being and which can not be properly quarantined or found not properly
quarantined may be picked up by Animal Control and impounded in the animal
shelter for any applicable quarantine period. A law enforcement officer or
Animal Control Officer may order any animal which has bitten or scratched a
human being to be quarantined at the animal shelter if the officer has reason
to believe such animal is vicious or may pose a threat to the safety of the
community. In the event an animal is impounded for a quarantine period, the
owner shall be responsible for a reasonable fee for board, administration and
medical attention during the impoundment.
   (E)   Any cat impounded in the Animal Shelter shall be held a minimum of
three days or unless earlier claimed by its owner. If the animal is not claimed
by its owner within three days of impoundment, the animal may then offered for
adoption or may be euthanised at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
Any person claiming or reclaiming an animal pursuant to this section shall pay
a reasonable fee for boarding, administration and medical attention for such
animal during impoundment.
   (F)   When any animal whose owner is known, is impounded in the Animal
Shelter, Animal Control shall notify the owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, within three business days of impoundment. If the certified
mail is returned undeliverable, the animal shall be held a minimum of 14 days
from the date of impoundment, before the animal may be adopted or euthanised at
the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
   (G)   The owner shall reclaim the animal within ten days of the receipt of
notice of impoundment. Any licensed animal or animal whose owner is known which
is not reclaimed by its owner within ten days of receipt of the notice of
impoundment may be offered for adoption or may be euthanised at the discretion
of the Animal Control Officer. Any person claiming or reclaiming an animal
pursuant to this section shall pay a fee of $25 or $5 per day whichever is
greater for boarding, plus the actual cost of medical expense for such animal
during impoundment.
   (H)   An Animal Control Officer may choose to issue a misdemeanor notice in
lieu of a uniform citation. The misdemeanor notice will stipulate the violation
(s) observed, associated fee and compliance date. The misdemeanor notice shall
allow up to but not exceed seven days to correct the violation. Should the
violation not be corrected within the allotted time, then the notice shall
serve as a uniform citation and the violating party shall report to County
District Court at the designated court date and time. If the violation is
serious in nature the Animal Control Officer may issue a uniform citation. All
associated fees shall be paid to the county animal shelter. Fifty percent of
the violation fees collected shall be used to fund a spay/neuter program.
   (I)   Any animal observed by a law enforcement officer or Animal Control
Officer to be in immediate danger may be removed from such situation by the
quickest and most reasonable means available.
   (J)   In the event that any law enforcement officer or Animal Control
Officer witnesses a vicious animal, as defined, the animal may be impounded and
the owner cited for violation of §
90.10 of this chapter. If the owner is cited and the animal impounded, the
animal shall remain in the custody of the animal shelter pending decision by
District Court, unless ownership is voluntarily relinquished to Animal Control.
   (K)   It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to interfere with,
hinder, harass or abuse any officer or individual authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   Any fees not set forth in this chapter shall be set annually by the
Fiscal Court by resolution, including, but not limited to, adoption and
boarding and fees.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   (A)   The penalty for a violation of §
90.10(K) of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $100,
for each occurrence. Each occurrence shall be deemed to be a separate offense,
which may be charged and penalized hereunder.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with mandatory spay/neuter requirements
of §
90.02 of this chapter shall:
      (1)   For the first offense, either show the court proof from a licensed
veterinarian that the surgical procedure has been performed or be ordered by
the court to surrender the animal to Animal Control without a refund of
adoption fees, and be fined a sum not less than $10, nor more than $100; and
      (2)   For the second offense, immediately surrender the animal to Animal
Control without a refund of adoption fees, and be fined not less than $50, not
more than $250.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the vaccination requirements of §
90.03 of this chapter shall on a first offense be fined not less than $10, nor
more than $100; on a second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $250.
   (D)   Any person violating any provision of §
90.09 of this chapter relating to the humane treatment of animals shall be
fined a sum not to exceed $500, or sentenced up to 12 months in the county
jail, or both.
   (E)   Any person violating §
90.10 of this chapter shall on the first offense be fined not less than $25,
nor more than $100; on the second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less
than $50, nor more than $250.
   (F)   Any livestock owner who violates §
90.10 of this chapter shall on the first offense be fined not less than $50,
nor more than $250, and required to reimburse the county for all reasonable
expenses incurred in capturing, impounding, boarding and providing necessary
medical services to the livestock. On a second or subsequent offense, the owner
shall be fined not less than $150, nor more than $500, and the owner shall
reimburse the county for all reasonable expenses incurred in capturing,
impounding, boarding and providing necessary medical services to the livestock.
   (G)   (1)   Upon conviction under §
90.10(B) of this chapter relating to the possession of a vicious animal, the
penalty shall be a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $500, or up to 90
days in the county jail or both.
      (2)   In addition, the court shall order one of the following regulations
be followed as a condition of the owner retaining ownership of the animal.
         (a)   The vicious animal shall be neutered, microchip implanted for
identification purposes and registered with Animal Control;
         (b)   The vicious animal shall be confined in an enclosure constructed
of an uncovered fence or structure of at least seven feet in height with anti-
climbers or a covered structure of sufficient height to allow the animal to
stand erect without touching the top or cover. All such enclosures shall be
designed to prevent the entry of small children and shall be suitable to
confine the vicious animal. Such enclosures shall be securely closed and
locked, and shall be designed to prevent the animal from digging out or
otherwise escaping from the enclosure;
         (c)   The enclosure shall display a sign warning of the vicious animal
and shall be visible from the public roadway or public access, if applicable;
         (d)   The vicious animal shall not be permitted outside of the
dwelling of its owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is necessary to
obtain veterinary care or under the direction of Animal Control. If the vicious
animal must be allowed outside the permitted areas, it shall be under the
direct control and supervision of its owner or keeper and shall be muzzled and
restrained with a lead or leash not to exceed three feet in length, or placed
in a secure animal carrier;
         (e)   The owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall immediately notify
Animal Control if the animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked an animal or
humane being, or is deceased. In the alternative to division (G)(2)(a) above,
the court may order that the animal be immediately surrendered to Animal
Control to be euthanised. Upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense
under §
90.10(B) of this chapter, relating to the possession of a vicious animal, the
penalty shall be a fine of not less than $250, nor more than $500, or up to one
year in the county jail, or both; and if the violation involves the same
animal, the court shall order the animal immediately surrendered to Animal
Control to be euthanised;
         (f)   Any person violating the provisions of §
90.11 of this chapter relating to non-domestic and exotic animals shall on the
first offense be fined not less than $25, nor more than $100, for each such
animal; on the second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $50,
nor more than $500. Upon conviction of a first offense for each such animal,
the Department of Animal Control shall take possession of said animal;
         (g)   Any commercial animal establishment or kennels violating the
minimum standards of KRS Ch. 258 or the provisions of this ordinance as
applicable shall on the first offense be fined not less than $50, nor more than
$250; on a second or subsequent offense be fined not less than $250, nor more
than $500, per offense;
         (h)   Any person who violates a section of this chapter for which a
specific penalty is not prescribed shall be fined not less than $100, nor more
than $500 or confined to the county jail not to exceed one year or both.
(Ord. 21-480.1, passed 11-22-2021)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations and Construction
   
91.01   Opening permit required
   
91.02   Application and cash deposit
   
91.03   Restoration of pavement
   
91.04   Barriers around excavations
   
91.05   Warning lights
   
91.06   Sidewalk construction
Road and Bridge Projects
   
91.20   Public meeting required
   
91.21   Notice requirements
   
91.22   Public may testify; effect of testimony
   
91.23   Meeting to be held prior to construction
   
91.24   Separate meeting for each project not required
   
91.25   Exemptions from meeting requirement
Obstructions
   
91.40   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
91.41   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
91.42   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
91.43   Removal of ice and snow
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations; Construction, see
Ch. 150
   Hazardous Substances, see
Ch. 95
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 151
   Zoning, see
Ch. 152
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 91.01 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized county
official, to make any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or public way of
the county unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to
commencement of the work.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and
shall be issued by the County Fiscal Court or other authorized county official.
Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the County Fiscal Court,
giving the exact location of the proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area
and depth to be excavated, and other facts as may be provided for. The permit
shall be issued only after a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of
restoration has been posted with the County Fiscal Court or other authorized
county official, conditioned upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of
excavations and restoration of all surfaces disturbed.
§ 91.03 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the County Fiscal
Court or other authorized county official, and in accordance with rules,
regulations and specifications approved by the County Fiscal Court.
   (B)   (1)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill
the excavation, restore the surface and remove all excess materials within the
time specified in the permit or, where not specified therein, within a
reasonable time after commencement of the work, the county may proceed without
notice to make the fill and restoration and the deposit referred to in §
91.02 of this chapter shall be forfeited.
      (2)   Thereupon, the deposit shall be paid into the appropriate county
fund; except that, part demanded and paid to the permittee as the difference
between the deposit and the charges of the county for restoration services
performed by it.
      (3)   If the amount of the services performed by the county should exceed
the amount of the deposit, the County Clerk or other proper administrative
officer shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the permittee.
§ 91.04 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any
manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, at all times during the night season shall install and maintain at
least two illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and conspicuously
posted on, at or near each end of the obstruction or excavation, and if the
space involved exceeds 50 feet in extent, at least one additional lamp for each
added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be the duty of the authorized county official to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the county. He or she shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the specifications to the County Fiscal Court for
approval. When the specifications are approved, the County Fiscal Court shall
advertise for proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the county
in construction and repair of sidewalks, and shall contract therefor, for a
period not exceeding one year, with the lowest responsible bidder, who shall
furnish good and sufficient sureties for the faithful performance of the work.
The County Fiscal Court may make separate contracts for the different kinds of
work with different parties.
Statutory references:
   Sidewalks; construction along public roads; specifications, see KRS 178.290
   Sidewalks; ramps for wheelchairs, see KRS 66.660
ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS
§ 91.20 PUBLIC MEETING REQUIRED.
    Before the county expends state-derived tax revenues on a municipal
highway, road, street or bridge, it shall provide an opportunity to the public
to provide input in a public meeting for which notice has been given under KRS
61.823(2) to (4) with regard to the project and to priorities for use of tax
monies for road and bridge purposes .
(KRS 174.100)
§ 91.21 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
    Prior to the contemplated date of its expenditure of state-derived tax
revenues on a road or bridge, the county shall include the topic as a specific
item on the public meeting agenda.
(KRS 174.100(1))
§ 91.22 PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.
    (A)   At the meeting, any person shall be allowed to speak with regard to
any proposed project, any project which he or she feels should be built or done
which has not been proposed, priorities for completion of projects, and any
other matter related to road or bridge projects.
(KRS 174.100 (1) )
    (B)   The county shall not be bound by the comments and input provided at
the meeting, but shall give due consideration to them.
(KRS 174.100(2))
§ 91.23 MEETING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
    The county shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project wherein
state-derived tax revenues are involved until the meeting as provided in this
subchapter has been held.
(KRS 174.100(3))
§ 91.24 SEPARATE MEETING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.
    This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate meeting for
each project. A single meeting encompassing the entire road and bridge program,
provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified at the
meeting, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(KRS 174.100(4))
§ 91.25 EXEMPTIONS FROM MEETING REQUIREMENT.
    The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency repair or
replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or human-caused
disasters, nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.
(KRS 174.100(5))
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 91.40 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the county by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way, without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.41 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the county by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting any
fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any fence or building is
permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.42 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant or
person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any street
or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.43 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the county abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his or her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove
therefrom all snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather
conditions, accumulated thereon within a reasonable time which will ordinarily
not exceed 12 hours after the abatement of any storm during which the snow and
ice may have accumulated.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Common law and statutory nuisances
   
92.03   Certain conditions declared a nuisance
   
92.04   Abatement procedure
   
92.05   Nuisance created by others
   
92.06   Suspension of license
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Private nuisances, see KRS 411.500 through 411.570
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE COLLECTOR. A person who collects and restores motor vehicles.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(b))
   AUTOMOBILE PARTS. Any portion or parts of any motor-driven vehicle as
detached from the vehicle as a whole.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(e))
   INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Unable to move under its own power due to defective
or missing parts, and which has remained in that condition for a period of not
less than ten consecutive days.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any style or type of motor-driven vehicle used for the
conveyance of persons or property.
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. A sight line within normal visual range by a person on
a public street or sidewalk adjacent to real property.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(h))
   PARTS CAR. An automobile that is not intended to be operated along streets
and roads, but is used to provide parts for the restoration of other
automobiles.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(j))
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any act, thing, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for a length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
      (2)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
stream, ditch or drainage; or
      (3)   Essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tend to depreciate the value of property of others.
   SCRAP METAL. Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper, aluminum or
any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any other material,
whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness in its original
form and can no longer be used for its originally intended purpose.
   UNFIT FOR FURTHER USE. In a dangerous condition; having defective or missing
parts, or in a condition generally as to be unfit for further use as a
conveyance.
§ 92.02 COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.
   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public nuisance,
those offenses which are known to the common law and statutes of the
commonwealth as public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded
against as is provided in this chapter or in accordance with any other
provision of law.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person having control
or management of any land within the county to permit a public nuisance to
develop thereon.
   (B)   The following conditions are declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   Dangerous trees or stacks adjoining street. Any tree, stack or
other object standing in such a condition that it will, if the condition is
allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb or property of, or cause hurt,
damage or injury to persons or property upon the public streets or public ways
adjacent thereto, by the falling thereof or of parts thereof;
      (2)   Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation on any premises of filth,
refuse, trash, garbage or other waste material which endangers the public
health, welfare or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful enjoyment
by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger that it will
catch or communicate fire, attract and propagate vermin, rodents or insects, or
blow rubbish into any street, sidewalk or property of another;
      (3)   Storage of explosives. The storage of explosive material which
creates a safety hazard to other property or persons in the vicinity;
      (4)   Weeds and grass. The excessive growth of weeds, grass or other
vegetation. Unless otherwise provided, EXCESSIVE shall mean growth to a height
of 12 inches or more;
      (5)   Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered or insecurely
covered cistern, cellar, well, pit, excavation or vault situated upon private
premises in any open or unfenced lot or place;
      (6)   Trees and shrubbery obstructing streets, sidewalks and drainage.
The growing and maintenance of trees or shrubbery which in any way interfere
with the use, construction or maintenance of streets or sidewalks, cause injury
to streets or sidewalks or constitute an obstruction to drainage;
      (7)   Keeping of animals. The failure to keep an animal’s pen, yard, lot
or other enclosure in a sanitary condition and free from preventable offensive
odors; and
      (8)   Junk; scrap metal; motor vehicles. The storage of motor vehicles in
an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use, automobile
parts or scrap metal within the county limits, except on premises authorized by
the county for those purposes.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, it shall be unlawful for the
owner, occupant or person having control or management of any premises within a
local government to permit a public nuisance, health hazard or source of filth
to develop thereon through the accumulation of:
      (1)   Junked or wrecked automobiles, vehicles, machines or other similar
scrap or salvage materials, excluding inoperative farm equipment;
      (2)   One or more mobile or manufactured homes as defined in KRS 227.550
that are junked, wrecked or inoperative and which are not inhabited;
      (3)   Rubbish; or
      (4)   The excessive growth of weeds or grass.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A)(1) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   Junked, wrecked or inoperative automobiles, vehicles, machines or
other similar scrap or salvage materials located on the business premises of a:
         (a)   Licensed automotive recycling dealer, as described in KRS
190.010(8);
         (b)   Used motor vehicle dealer, as defined in KRS 190.010(6); or
         (c)   Motor vehicle auction dealer, as defined in KRS 190.010(11).
      (2)   Junked, wrecked or inoperative motor vehicles, including parts
cars, stored on private premises by automobile collectors, whether as a hobby
or a profession, if these motor vehicles and parts cars are stored out of
ordinary public view by means of suitable fencing, trees, shrubbery or other
means; and
      (3)   Any motor vehicle as defined in KRS 281.010 that is owned,
controlled, operated, managed or leased by a motor carrier.
   (C)   An owner shall not permit any structure upon his or her premises to
become unfit and unsafe for human habitation, occupancy or use or to permit
conditions to exist on the structure or premises which are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of the structure, the
occupants of neighboring structures or other residents of the local government.
   (D)   A local government may provide by ordinance for the abatement and
decontamination of a property where a methamphetamine contamination notice has
been posted as provided in KRS 224.1-410. Pursuant to divisions (G) and (H)
below, notice and an opportunity to request a hearing shall be afforded to an
owner prior to decontamination of the property. A lien for all fees, charges
and costs incurred by the local government in the enforcement of an ordinance
related to decontaminating a property where a methamphetamine contamination
notice has been posted pursuant to KRS 224.1-410, shall be placed on the
property pursuant to division (I) below. The costs of abatement and
decontamination of a property where a methamphetamine contamination notice has
been posted are recoverable throughout the county.
   (E)   The county may establish by ordinance reasonable standards and
procedures for the enforcement of this section. The procedures shall comply
with all applicable statutes, administrative regulations or codes. Any
ordinance establishing these procedures may be enforced by any means authorized
by law. Proper notice shall be given to owners before any action is taken
pursuant to this section and, prior to the decontamination of a property where
a methamphetamine contamination notice has been posted pursuant to KRS 224.1-
410 or the demolition of any unfit or unsafe structure, the opportunity to
request a hearing shall be afforded the owner.
   (F)   Unless imminent danger exists on the subject premises that
necessitates immediate action, the local government shall send, within 14 days
of a final determination after hearing or waiver of hearing by the owner, a
copy of the determination to any lienholder of record of the subject premises
by first-class mail with proof of mailing. The lienholder of record may, within
45 days from receipt of that notice, correct the violations cited or elect to
pay all civil fines assessed for the violation and all charges and fees
incurred by the local government in connection with the enforcement of the
ordinance, including abatement costs, as permitted by division (G) below.
   (G)   The county shall have a lien against the property for all civil fines
assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the county
in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs.
The affidavit of the code enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the proceedings
pursuant to this section, and shall be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording
and shall bear interest thereafter until paid. The lien created shall take
precedence over all other liens, except state, school board and county taxes,
except as provided in division (H) below. The county shall possess the lien for
ten years following the date of the final, non-appealable order of a code
enforcement board or final judgment of the court. The lien may be enforced by
judicial proceeding.
   (H)   The lien provided in division (G) above shall not take precedence or
priority over a previously recorded lien if:
      (1)   The county failed to provide the lienholder a copy of the
determination in accordance with division (F) above; or
      (2)   The lienholder received a copy of the determination as required by
division (F) above, and the lienholder corrected the violations or paid all
civil fines assessed for the violation and all charges and fees incurred by the
local government in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including
abatement costs.
   (I)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (E) above or any
other remedy authorized by law, the owner of a premises upon which a lien has
been attached pursuant to this section shall be personally liable for the
amount of the lien, including all civil fines assessed for the violation and
all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the county in connection with
the enforcement of the ordinance. The county may bring a civil action against
the owner and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a
debt owed. The failure of the county to comply with division (F) above, and the
failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as provided in
division (H) above, shall not limit or restrict any remedies that the county
has against the owner of the premises.
   (J)   The provisions of divisions (E), (G) and (I) above shall not apply to
an owner, occupant or person having control or management of any land located
in an unincorporated area if the owner, occupant or person is not the generator
of the rubbish or is not dumping or knowingly allowing the dumping of the
rubbish and has made reasonable efforts to prevent the dumping of rubbish by
other persons onto the premises.
   (K)   The right to request a hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to a period of 30 days after notice has been placed on the property and
has been sent by certified mail return receipt requested.
(KRS 65.8840(3) - (14))
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 NUISANCE CREATED BY OTHERS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by the owner, occupant or person having
control or management of the premises, but merely that the nuisance be created
or contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests or other persons for whose
conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for whose conduct
the owner or operator is not responsible, but by the exercise of reasonable
care ought to have become aware of.
§ 92.06 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Whenever it is shown that a nuisance is associated with or caused by
the conduct of a business or activity licensed by the county and that the
existence of the nuisance presents an immediate threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, the County Fiscal Court may suspend the license of the
person or persons conducting the business or activity.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall cause a notice of the suspension to be served
personally upon the licensee, or upon any responsible agent of the licensee, at
the premises where the licensed business or activity is being conducted. The
notice shall clearly inform the licensee of the reason for the suspension, and
the conditions that must be met for the suspension to be removed.
   (C)   Upon application of the licensee, and upon a showing that the nuisance
has been satisfactorily abated and that any other reasonable conditions set
forth in the notice have been met, the County Fiscal Court may remove the
suspension.
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day’s
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 93: FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
   
93.01   Definitions; legality of items
   
93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display
   
93.03   Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale
   
93.04   Bond or liability insurance requirement
   
93.05   Exempted sales and uses
   
93.06   Destruction of fireworks
Fire Prevention
   
93.20   Blasting permit
   
93.21   Storage of flammables and other matter
   
93.22   Open burning code
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.
   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, FIREWORKS means any composition or
device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and which meets the definition of
“consumer fireworks”, as defined in division (B) below, or “display” fireworks,
as defined in division (D) below and as set forth in the U.S. Department of
Transportation’s (DOT) hazardous materials regulations. FIREWORKS does not
include:
      (1)   Exception No. 1: Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices
in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance with DOT regulations,
and packed and shipped according to those regulations, are not considered to be
FIREWORKS and shall be allowed to be used and sold at all times.
      (2)   Exception No. 2: Model rockets and model rocket motors designed,
sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models are not
considered to be FIREWORKS.
      (3)   Exception No. 3: Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a
mixture of sulfur, charcoal and saltpeter are not considered as being designed
for producing audible effects.
(KRS 227.700)
   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, “consumer fireworks” means
fireworks that are suitable for use by the public, designed primarily to
produce visible effects by combustion, and that comply with the construction,
chemical composition and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission. The types, sizes and amount of pyrotechnic contents of these
devices are limited as enumerated in this section. Some small devices designed
to produce audible effects are included, such as whistling devices, ground
devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial
devices containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive composition. CONSUMER
FIREWORKS are further defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in
CPSC, 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, are classified as Division 1.4G Class C
explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation and include the following.
      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.
         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler. These devices consist of
a metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with pyrotechnic composition.
Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower of sparks is produced.
Sparklers may contain up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition per item.
Those devices containing any perchlorate or chlorate salts may not exceed five
grams of pyrotechnic composition per item. Wire sparklers which contain no
magnesium and which contain less than 100 grams of composition per item are not
included in this category, in accordance with DOT regulations.
         (b)   Cylindrical fountain. Cylindrical tube containing not more than
75 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks,
and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke, is produced. This device may be
provided with a spike for insertion into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or
plastic base for placing on the ground (base fountain), or a wood or cardboard
handle, if intended to be hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one tube
is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200
grams, or 500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a
distance of at least one-half inch.
         (c)   Cone fountain. Cardboard or heavy paper cone containing up to 50
grams of pyrotechnic composition. The effect is the same as that of a
cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is mounted on a common base, the
total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if the
tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-
half inch.
         (d)   Illuminating torch. Cylindrical tube containing up to 100 grams
of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, colored fire is produced. May be
spike, base or hand-held. When more than one tube is mounted on a common base,
total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if the
tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-
half inch.
         (e)   Wheel. A device attached to a post or tree by means of a nail or
string. A wheel may have one or more drivers, each of which may contain not
more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition. No wheel may contain more than
200 grams total pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, the wheel revolves,
producing a shower of color and sparks and, sometimes, a whistling effect.
         (f)   Ground spinner. Small device containing not more than 20 grams
of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a wheel but intended to be
placed on the ground and ignited. A shower of sparks and color is produced by
the rapidly spinning device.
         (g)   Flitter sparkler. Narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire
and filled with not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that
produces color and sparks upon ignition. The paper at one end of the tube is
ignited to make the device function.
         (h)   Toy smoke device. Small plastic or paper item containing not
more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces
white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      (2)   Aerial devices.
         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets. Cylindrical tube containing not
more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Sky rockets contain a wooden
stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air upon ignition. A burst
of color or noise or both is produced at the height of flight.
         (b)   Missile-type rocket. A device similar to a sky rocket in size,
composition and effect that uses fins rather than a stick for guidance and
stability.
         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner. A tube containing up to 20 grams of
pyrotechnic composition. A propeller or blade is attached which, upon ignition,
lifts the rapidly spinning device into the air. A visible or audible effect is
produced at the height of flight.
         (d)   Roman candles. Heavy paper or cardboard tube containing up to 20
grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, up to ten stars (pellets of
pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color) are individually
expelled at several-second intervals.
         (e)   Mine, shell. Heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a
wood or plastic base and containing up to 60 grams of total chemical
composition (lift charge, burst charge and visible or audible effect
composition). Upon ignition, “stars”, components producing reports containing
up to 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report, or other devices are
propelled into the air. The term MINE refers to a device with no internal
components containing a bursting charge, and the term SHELL refers to a device
that propels a component that subsequently bursts open in the air. A mine or
shell device may contain more than one tube; provided, the tubes fire in
sequence upon ignition of one external fuse. The term CAKE refers to a dense-
packed collection of mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition including
lift charges of any multiple tube devices may not exceed 200 grams. The maximum
quantity of lift charge in any one tube of a mine or shell device shall not
exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quantity of break or bursting charge in any
component shall not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical composition in
the component. The tube remains on the ground.
         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube. A package kit containing a
cardboard, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) or equivalent launching tube with
multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is limited to a maximum of 60
grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge and visible or
audible effect composition), and the maximum diameter of each shell shall not
exceed one and three-quarter inches. In addition, the maximum quantity of lift
charge in any shell shall not exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quantity of
break or bursting charge in any shell shall not exceed 25% of the total weight
of chemical composition in the shell. The total chemical composition of all the
shells in a kit, including lift charge, shall not exceed 400 grams. The user
lowers a shell into the launching tube, at the time of firing, with the fuse
extending out of the top of the tube. After the firing, the tube is then
reloaded with another shell for the next firing. All launching tubes shall be
capable of firing twice the number of shells in the kit without failure of the
tube. Each package of multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning
label requirements of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
      (3)   Audible ground devices.
         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes. Small paper-wrapped or cardboard tube
containing not more than 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic composition. Those used
in aerial devices may contain not more than 130 milligrams of explosive
composition per report. Upon ignition, noise and a flash of light is produced.
         (b)   Chaser. Small paper or cardboard tube that travels along the
ground upon ignition. A whistling effect, or other noise, is often produced.
The explosive composition used to create the noise may not exceed 50
milligrams.
(KRS 227.702)
   (C)   Items listed below are classified as NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS
and are not classified as common fireworks by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, and their transportation, storage, retail sale, possession,
sale and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all times.
      (1)   Snake, glow worm. Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that
produces a large, snake- like ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as
the pellet burns. These devices may not contain mercuric thiocyanate.
      (2)   Smoke device. Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      (3)   Wire sparkler. Wire coated with pyrotechnic composition that
produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. These items may not contain
magnesium and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per item. Devices
containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams of
composition per item.
      (4)   Trick noisemaker. Item that produces a small report intended to
surprise the user. These devices include:
         (a)   Party popper. Small plastic or paper item containing not more
than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A
string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it, expelling paper
streamers and producing a small report;
         (b)   Booby trap. Small tube with string protruding from both ends,
similar to a party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled to
ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small report;
         (c)   Snapper. Small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity
of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device
explodes, producing a small report;
         (d)   Trick match. Kitchen or book match that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the
match, a small report or a shower of sparks is produced;
         (e)   Cigarette load. Small wooden peg that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette
containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced; and
         (f)   Auto burglar alarm. Tube which contains pyrotechnic composition
that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when ignited. A small quantity
of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams, may also be used to produce a small
report. A squib is used to ignite the device.
(KRS 227.704)
   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, DISPLAY FIREWORKS means pyrotechnic
devices or large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. This term includes, but is
not limited to, firecrackers containing more than two grains (130 milligrams)
of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of
pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits for
classification as consumer fireworks. DISPLAY FIREWORKS are defined by the
Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, and
are classified as Class B explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation.
(KRS 227.706)
   (E)   Legality of these items is as follows:
      (1)   Items described in division (B) above are legal for retail sale;
provided, all applicable federal and state requirements with respect thereto
are met.
      (2)   Items described in division (D) above are not legal for retail
sale, but are legal under permits granted pursuant to this chapter for the
purposes specified in this chapter for public displays and may be sold at
wholesale as provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Items described in division (C) above are legal for retail sale;
provided, all applicable federal and state requirements with respect thereto
are met.
(KRS 227.708)
§ 93.02 SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   No person, firm, copartnership or corporation shall offer for sale, expose
for sale, sell at retail or keep with intent to sell, possess, use or explode
any display fireworks, except as follows:
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department or other authorized county official
may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the county,
fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of
individuals. Every display shall be handled by a competent display operator to
be approved by the public official by whom the permit is granted, and shall be
of a character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the
official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person. COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR shall be defined as the person with
overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a fireworks display. The
competent display operator shall have a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives (ATF) license and have participated as an assistant in firing at
least five public displays. A COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR is also an employee
possessor. A permit under this division (A) shall be issued only to a competent
display operator holding an ATF license. At least one competent display
operator shall be on site during display set-up and firing. This competent
display operator shall maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by
the local authority having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on site
and at all times the display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of
the state’s Fire Marshal or local Fire Chief. All public displays that require
issuance of a permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1123 – Code for Fireworks Display
(adopted edition). Permits shall be filed with the state’s Fire Marshal at
least 15 days in advance of the date of the display. After the privilege is
granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for the display
shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted under this division
(A) shall be transferable. For the purposes of this division (A), PUBLIC
DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS shall include the use of pyrotechnic devices or
pyrotechnic materials before a proximate audience, whether indoors or outdoors.
Any person remaining within the display area shall be identified as licensed by
the ATF, or an employee thereof, or be an assistant in training to become a
competent display operator. All persons remaining within the display area shall
be at least 18 years of age. The Commissioner of the Department of Housing,
Buildings and Construction with recommendation from the state’s Fire Marshal
shall promulgate administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Ch. 13A to
administer the provisions of this division (A). The regulations shall address
the process by which permits are issued and any other procedures that are
reasonably necessary to effectuate this division (A);
   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
and Explosives if the sale is to the person holding a display permit as
outlined in division (A) above. The permit holder shall present the permit
along with other verifiable identification at the time of sale;
   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license issued by
the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives;
   (D)   The sale and use in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling
devices and distress signals for marine, aviation and highway use;
   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads;
   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater or
for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports;
   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations;
   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct
supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent or local
agency; and
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm, co-partnership,
non-profit or corporation from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling at
retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using consumer fireworks as
defined in §
93.01(B) of this chapter and as permitted pursuant to KRS 227.715.
(KRS 227.710) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.
   Except as provided in §
93.02 of this chapter, the consumer fireworks described in §
93.01(B) of this chapter may be offered for sale, sold at retail or kept with
the intent to sell, only if the following requirements are met.
   (A)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, non-profit or business intending to
sell consumer fireworks described in §
93.01(B) of this chapter shall register annually with the state’s Fire Marshal,
who may assess a fee of no more than $25 for each site at which fireworks shall
be sold. The registration requirement under this division (A) shall not apply
to permanent business establishments which are open year round and in which the
sale of fireworks is ancillary to the primary course of business. Each location
shall be required to charge sales tax at the current rate imposed on retailers
in KRS 139.200.
   (B)   Permanent business establishments open year-round and in which the
sale of consumer fireworks is ancillary to the primary course of business shall
only be permitted to sell those consumer fireworks described in §
93.01(B)(1) of this chapter, or shall meet the criteria for “seasonal retailer”
described in division (C) below.
   (C)   SEASONAL RETAILERS shall be defined as any person, firm, co-
partnership, non-profit or corporation intending to sell “consumer fireworks”
between June 10 and July 7, or December 26 and January 4 of each year or both,
and shall include permanent businesses, temporary businesses, stores, stands or
tents. A seasonal retailer shall register with the state’s Fire Marshal, who
may assess a fee of no more than $250 for each site at which fireworks shall be
sold. Each location shall be required to charge sales tax at the current rate
imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200.
   (D)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, non-profit or corporation intending
to sell consumer fireworks, as defined in §
93.01(B) of this chapter, as the primary source of business, that is not a
seasonal retailer as defined in division (C) above, shall register with the
state’s Fire Marshal, who may assess a fee of no more than $500 for each site
at which fireworks will be sold. Each location shall be required to charge
sales tax at the current rate imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200.
   (E)   The annual registration required by this section shall be received by
the state’s Fire Marshal at least 15 days prior to offering fireworks for sale
at the site for which the registration is intended. Evidence that a sales and
use tax permit has been obtained from the Department of Revenue shall be
presented to the state’s Fire Marshal as a condition of registration. If the
registration is received less than 15 days prior to offering fireworks for sale
at the site for which registration is intended, an additional assessment of
$100 shall be added to the initial fee.
   (F)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall have its
registration certificate displayed in a conspicuous location at the site.
   (G)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the International Building Code, with Kentucky
Amendments (adopted edition), and NFPA 1124 (National Fire Protection
Association) – Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail
Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted edition).
   (H)   No person or business shall give, offer for sale or sell any consumer
fireworks listed in §
93.01(B) of this chapter to any person under 18 years of age.
   (I)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed by a fireworks
distribution facility or manufacturing facility. No person under 18 years of
age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer fireworks retail sales facility
registered under this section unless the individual is supervised by a parent
or guardian.
   (J)   The state’s Fire Marshal may revoke the registration of any site which
is in violation of a requirement of this section, or any other requirement
provided pursuant to this chapter. If the violation renders any property
especially susceptible to fire loss, and there is present such hazard to human
life or limb that the public safety imperatively requires emergency action, the
state’s Fire Marshal may take that action, as provided in KRS 227.330(6).
   (K)   A person lawfully possessing consumer fireworks, as defined in §
93.01(B) of this chapter, may use those items if:
      (1)   He or she is at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Fireworks are not ignited within 200 feet of any structure, vehicle
or any other person; and
      (3)   Use of the fireworks does not place him or her in violation of any
lawfully enacted local ordinance.
(KRS 227.715) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   No permit shall be issued under §
93.02 of this chapter unless the applicant shall give bond or evidence of
liability insurance deemed adequate by the official to whom application for the
permit is made, in a sum not less than $1,000,000. However, the appropriate
county official or the state’s Fire Marshal may require a larger amount if, in
his or her judgment, the situation requires it, conditioned for the payment of
all damages which may be caused thereby either to a person or to property by
reason of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the licensee, his
or her agents, employees or subcontractors.
(KRS 227.720) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of explosives
or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or industry; gold
star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or chlorate; toy snakes
which contain no mercury; smoke novelties and party novelties, which contain
less than twenty-five hundredths grain of explosive mixture; shells or
cartridges, used as ammunition in firearms; blank cartridges for a show or
theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for
use by military organizations; or the sale of any kind of fireworks, provided
the same are to be shipped by the seller directly out of the state.
(KRS 227.730)
§ 93.06 DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The state’s Fire Marshal, or any fire department having jurisdiction
which has been deputized to act on behalf of the state’s Fire Marshal, shall
cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks which
are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a period of 60 days,
the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid to a properly
certified fireworks wholesaler.
   (B)   After a period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered for
sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer, distributor or
wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class 1.3G or “Display”
designation shall require the notification of the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The state’s Fire Marshal shall
provide the owner or possessor a receipt containing the complete inventory of
any fireworks seized within five business days of the seizure.
   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:
      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the state’s Fire
Marshal, the state’s Fire Marshal shall give notice by registered mail or
personal service to the owner of the State Fire Marshal’s intention to dispose
of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the State Fire Marshal’s
intent. The State Fire Marshal shall conduct an administrative hearing in
accordance with KRS Ch. 13B concerning the disposal of fireworks; or
      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is not known
to the state’s Fire Marshal, the state’s Fire Marshal shall cause to be
published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the
seizure was made, notice of the seizure, and of the State Fire Marshal’s
intention to dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once each
week for three consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of the
fireworks within ten days of the date of the last publication, the state’s Fire
Marshal may proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim the
fireworks within ten days of the date of the last publication, a hearing as set
out in division (C)(1) above shall be held.
   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local government
from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks within its
jurisdiction.
(KRS 227.750)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.20 BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the county without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the County Fiscal
Court or other authorized county official. The County Fiscal Court or other
authorized county official, before granting the permit, may require the
applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the county and all other persons
against injury or damages which might result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.21 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.
   (A)   All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and stored in
a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.
   (B)   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior or any material of
a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for these hazardous materials.
   (C)   No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which impedes or
prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.22 OPEN BURNING CODE.
   (A)   Open burning ban during periods of extreme fire.
      (1)   The Judge-Executive, or his or her designee shall be authorized to
enact by executive order a ban on all open burning in the unincorporated areas
of the county, either when he or she determines that a major fire hazard exists
or when notified by the Kentucky Division of Forestry, advising that such a
hazard exists.
      (2)   No person shall be allowed to participate in open burning in the
unincorporated areas of the county upon the signing of an executive order
provided above.
      (3)   These open burning provisions shall be enforceable by all sworn
peace officers of the county and all persons thus offending shall be referred
to the County Attorney for prosecution pursuant to KRS 149.401.
   (B)   Open burning. OPEN BURNING is any fire which purpose is to burn
vegetation, or debris as a result of excavation, or debris as a result of a
construction project. However, the term shall not include fires which may be
set for the purpose of burning plant beds.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person, corporation or other entity who violates the
provisions of division (A) of this section may upon conviction be fined of not
less than $50 to $500 for each violation.
(Ord. passed 12-22-2022)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
93.02 or
93.03 of this chapter, the regulations issued thereunder or any order issued
thereunder, or who knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to
violate the provisions of those sections, shall be fined not more than $1,000,
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
(KRS 227.990(4))
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
   
94.01   Throwing litter from vehicle
   
94.02   Tracking foreign matter on streets
   
94.03   Hauling loose material
   
94.04   Sweeping litter into gutters
   
94.05   Litter on private property
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.
   No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the county or upon private
property.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.
   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the county, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit upon any street, alley or other
public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
   Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel, cement,
fill dirt or loose material of any kind in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place shall haul it or cause it to be hauled in vehicles
provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of
the contents from falling or being thrown, blown or deposited upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place. Any materials which fall from or which
are thrown, blown or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place shall be removed immediately by the person in
charge of the vehicle.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the county the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the county, whether owned by that person or not; except that,
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon streets,
sidewalks or other public places, or upon any private property.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the county, whether owned by that person or not.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 95: HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Purpose and applicability
   
95.03   Administering agency
   
95.04   Preplaning required
   
95.05   Environmental emergency response
   
95.06   Temporary storage of hazardous substances
   
95.07   Agricultural operations
   
95.08   Operating guidelines for Central Dispatch
   
95.09   User responsibility
   
95.10   Liability for costs
   
95.11   Enforcement
   
95.12   Contractual indemnification and subrogation
   
95.13   Disclaimer of liability
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTERING AGENCY. The local disaster and emergency services (IDES)
organization as created by the Fiscal Court of the county pursuant to KRS
39A.020. IDES shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this
chapter.
   COSTS. The direct expenses which are attributable to all responsible parties
causing a response to environmental emergency and the subsequent removal when
acting in good faith with reasonable certainty of a release or threatened
release of hazardous substances, pollutants, contaminants and petroleum
products. COSTS includes, but is not limited to, mileage for responding
vehicles, use of any equipment, replacement of supplies, evacuation and
temporary housing, transportation, removal and proper disposal of contaminated
material, direct administrative and legal expenses, liability damage claims and
those COSTS assigned by a private emergency response entity when dispatched by
IDES. The term COSTS, as herein defined, does not exclude recoverable
expenditures or penalties lawfully due another public entity or governmental
agency when they are engaged jointly with the county or acting independently in
accordance with promulgated laws ascribed to an environmental emergency.
   ENVIRONMENT. The waters of the commonwealth land surface, subsurface and
surface soils and strata, or ambient air within the commonwealth or under the
jurisdiction of the commonwealth and its political subdivisions.
   ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY. The uncontrolled and unauthorized release or
threatened release of hazardous substances, pollutants, contaminates and
reportable quantities of petroleum products into the environment in such
quantities or concentrations as to cause or threaten to cause an imminent and
substantial danger to human health or the environment; the term “reportable
quantities of petroleum products” includes, but is not limited to, discharge of
oil and hazardous substances prohibited by § 311(b)(3) of the Federal Clean
Water Act (Pub. Law No. 92-500), being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1321, as amended.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE PERSONNEL. Any county employee acting under the direction
of the Judge Executive, IDES personnel, emergency medical service employee, law
enforcement officer, Fire Chief or private emergency response entity dispatched
by IDES, which responds to any occurrence that places property, the environment
and/or the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
county in either imminent or potential danger.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.
      (1)   Any substance or combination of substances including wastes of a
solid, liquid, gaseous or semi-solid form which, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment. These
substances may be toxic, corrosive, ignitable, irritants, strong sensitizers or
explosive, except the term HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE shall not include petroleum
products or crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise
specifically designated as a hazardous substance under this chapter, and shall
not include natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquified natural gas or
synthetic gas usable for fuel, or mixtures of natural gas and synthetic gas.
      (2)   The substances include the above definitions and those further and
more specifically defined by the following:
         (a)   Criteria established pursuant to the commonwealth’s Natural
Resources and Environment Protection Cabinet;
         (b)   Applicable Federal law as contained in §§ 101(14), 101(33) and
103(a) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980 (CERCLA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.; or
         (c)   The U.S. Department of Transportation in 49 C.F.R. § 172.101,
including 40 C.F.R. § 261.3, 49 C.F.R. § 171.8 and appendices.
   OCCURRENCE. The uncontrolled and unauthorized release or threatened release
of hazardous substances, pollutants, contaminates and reportable quantities of
petroleum products that initiates a response by IDES to an environmental
emergency.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCT. Any crude oil, or fraction thereof, which is liquid at
standard conditions of temperature and pressure. The term includes motor
gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol-blended fuels, diesel fuel, heating oil,
special fuels, lubricants, used oil and sludge. PETROLEUM PRODUCT, as herein
defined, is only subject to enforcement under this chapter if the amount in any
24-hour period is equal to or greater than 25 gallons or equal to or greater
than 75 gallons if diesel fuel, or in contravention of § 311 of the Federal
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1321.
   POLLUTANT or CONTAMINANT. Any element, substance, compound or mixture,
including disease-causing agents, which after release into the environment and
upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either
directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains,
will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, behavioral
abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological malfunctions (including
malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformations, in such organisms or
their offspring. The term does not mean “petroleum product”, as herein defined,
or natural or liquified gas, as excepted under the definition “hazardous
substance”.
   PREPLANNING. A joint assessment by persons storing, handling, using or
charged with custody of a hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant or
reportable quantity of a petroleum product and the IDES Director or his or her
designee, including inspections, joint training or other activities which are
conducted to prevent or mitigate an environmental emergency.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, discharging,
emptying, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing of hazardous substances,
pollutants or contaminant in quantities or concentrations which meet or exceed
the reportable quantity amounts as promulgated by state or federal regulations.
The term RELEASE shall not mean:
      (1)   Any claim which such persons may assert against the employer of
such persons as provided by CERCLA regulations, any release which results in
exposure to persons solely within a fixed workplace;
      (2)   Emissions from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling
stock, aircraft, vessel or a pipeline station pumping engine; or
      (3)   The normal application of fertilizers and pesticides by
agricultural users, homeowner on his, her or their own property, or commercial
applicators when such a release is in strict compliance with the manufacture’s
labeling and thus considered an authorized release.
   REMOVAL. The cleanup or physical removal of materials released to the
environment or in contact with persons. The term REMOVAL includes, but is not
limited to, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to monitor,
supervise, assess and evaluate the release or threatened release resulting in
an environmental emergency. The term REMOVAL shall further include terms such
as security, fencing, provisions for alternative water supplies, temporary
evacuation and the personal care, reception or lodging of persons effected by
the occurrence.
   REPORTABLE QUANTITY. The amount of hazardous substance designated in 40
C.F.R. part 302 under the Federal Comprehensive and Liability Act of 1980, as
amended, and as designated in 40 C.F.R. part 355 under Title III of the
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601
et seq. The reportable quantity of petroleum products is set forth by KRS
224.60-100 et seq. notwithstanding the above.
   THREATENED RELEASE. A condition or circumstance which presents a substantial
threat for causing an unauthorized release, when it can be shown that an
unauthorized release could otherwise occur unless preventative action is
promptly initiated to contain, reduce or mitigate the risk or apparent damage
to the general public, property or the environment.
   USER. Any person who handles, uses, operates, transports or is in custody of
any container, motor vehicle, rolling stock, aircraft or vessel where hazardous
substances, pollutants, contaminates or reportable quantities of petroleum
products could result in an environmental emergency if an unauthorized or
threatened release occurred, persons who proximately caused the release, or
owned or who by contract, agreement or otherwise has knowledge or arranged with
another party or entity for control, transport, acceptance or custody of such
material.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.02 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the general public’s
safety, health, general welfare and protection of property and the environment
in the county that could otherwise be endangered by the uncontrolled and
unauthorized or threatened release of a hazardous substance, pollutant,
contaminant or reportable quantity of a petroleum product. This chapter
requires the forthwith reporting of an occurrence and the emergency response
thereafter. This chapter specifics the responsibility and authority of the
administering agency and the responsibility and consequent liability of any
user or party responsible for an environmental emergency. This chapter attaches
penalties and the means of recovering costs from a user or any party who is in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter is consistent with KRS 224.1-400. The Fiscal Court of the
county shall cause this chapter to be incorporated with Section “Q” of the
County’s Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for information purposes only.
   (C)   This chapter is applicable to any user or other person or entity who
shall cause, or allow the unauthorized or threatened release of a hazardous
substance, pollutant, contaminant or reportable quantity of petroleum products
in the county. The occurrence shall be declared an environmental emergency and
all provisions of this chapter shall be effective and enforceable.
   (D)   This chapter is not directed to those users who cause an authorized
release in accordance with a valid permit granted by the state or federal
agency with jurisdiction over such occurrence where the time, location,
quantity and manner of release is to occur or a release is in substantially
lesser quantities than those reportable quantities established by state or
federal law, regulation or administrative policy. However, this chapter shall
permit the administering agency to verify such a release is valid and that it
does not warrant enacting the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   In the event that an unauthorized or threatened release involves a
fixed facility in the county, notification shall be given by calling 911 with
the detailed status and nature of the environmental emergency and on-site
emergency response action initiated by the facility personnel. Each fixed
facility in the county shall provide training for all employees and users as
required by State Department of Labor and OSHA standards and regulations. The
administering agency shall have the right for announced, periodic inspections
by the IDES Director and the fixed facility shall have preplanning documents
filed with IDES and updated at least annually or when the quantity,
concentration or material is increased beyond usual and customary inventory.
The owner and management personnel of any fixed facility shall be liable under
the provisions of this chapter for any occurrence detected outside the property
of the fixed facility which is the result of an unauthorized release or if the
authorized release results in exceeding the permitted release. On-site
liability shall be determined by the commonwealth’s Department of Labor or
OSHA.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.03 ADMINISTERING AGENCY.
   (A)   The County Fiscal Court hereby designates the local Disaster and
Emergency Services Organization of the county (herein called “IDES”) as the
lead agency for implementing the provisions of this chapter with the county’s
Fiscal Court retaining all administrative and policy decisions regarding the
public safety, health, general welfare of county residents, and protection of
property and the environment of the county.
   (B)   IDES shall have the authority to initiate the response, dispatch
private environmental response entities, coordinate inter-agency activity and
supervise the environmental emergency. Such action at a minimum requires proper
notification, securing or evacuating the area at risk, cleanup, monitoring,
disposal verification, reporting of occurrence and documenting such occurrence
which may include, audio and video material, communication records, manifests,
time sheets, equipment logs, laboratory reports or statements from responding
personnel or user. All such action shall be based on the capability of the
county to meet any commitment of finances, personnel or equipment.
   (C)   IDES shall utilize only those responding personnel who are trained at
their respective level of hazardous or emergency response. IDES shall have the
authority for management of the environmental emergency on the site and
coordinate with any state and federal agencies involved with the occurrence in
a manner to minimize the risk to the general public and environment.
   (D)   IDES shall make an official report of any occurrence to the county’s
Fiscal Court at its next regular scheduled meeting. The report shall detail the
impact on the general population, environment and all costs attributable to the
occurrence. Such a report does not constitute the required reporting of such
occurrence to the appropriate state or federal agency as required by law.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.04 PREPLANING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Prevention of an unauthorized release is a provision of this chapter
as given by compliance with CERCLA and applicable state and federal laws,
regulations or administrative policies. Any user or site that is known to
exhibit irresponsible prevention measures which is likely to cause an
unauthorized release shall be first notified by the IDES Director as to the
existence and provisions of this chapter. Written notice shall concurrently be
made to Judge Executive’s office and then transmitted by the Judge Executive to
the Cabinet for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Area 3 DES
Coordinator and the State Fire Marshal’s office when appropriate. Any activity
which constitutes a threatened release may immediately be issued a cease and
desist order by the County Attorney upon the joint recommendation of the IDES
Director and Judge Executive.
   (B)   The IDES Director shall meet with the Local Emergency Response
Committee (LEPC) annually to review all SARA Title III facilities and so
utilize those LEPC members who can contribute to the prevention of an
environmental emergency. LEPC should adopt guidelines which recognize the
purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.05 ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
   (A)   Notification by any person aware of an unauthorized release should be
made to County Emergency Dispatch by dialing 911. The dispatcher on duty shall
be responsible for informing both the Judge Executive and IDES Director or
their designees of such notification. It shall be the duty of the IDES Director
to respond and make an official determination of the reported occurrence at the
scene. IDES shall then notify all appropriate state and federal agencies and
further initiate the mutual-aid response if required. The Judge Executive shall
immediately assess the danger to the general public, property and environment
and order the evacuation if necessary or cause the EOC to be activated. The
most appropriate response action shall then be made by the IDES Director and
Judge Executive based on the financial, personnel and equipment capabilities of
the county.
   (B)   (1)   Medical attention for those persons immediately effected by an
occurrence should have first priority in responding to an environmental
emergency.
      (2)   Medical emergency guidelines shall be developed jointly by IDES and
the provider who is under contract for emergency medical services in the
county.
      (3)   The danger of fire should have second priority with emergency
guidelines developed by all county fire departments.
      (4)   The danger to the environment should have third priority.
      (5)   The danger to property in general should have fourth priority.
   (C)   A mutual-aid agreement between County DES and all incorporated cities
in McLean County and adjacent counties who are capable and willing to assist
shall be written that details each entity’s capability to responded to an
environmental emergency. Such an agreement shall include the state of readiness
of DES, medical, law enforcement, fire department, responding personnel,
equipment and the means to recover any costs, damages or liability, outside of
jurisdiction of the county’s Fiscal Court.
   (D)   Response to a threatened release should be considered as an imminent
danger and having the potential to cause an actual occurrence of an
uncontrolled, unauthorized release. Upon notification by a user or informed
person that such a situation exists or is perceived, Central Dispatch shall
first receive an on-scene evaluation from IDES before proceeding with
notification of an environmental emergency as set forth above in division (A)
above.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.06 TEMPORARY STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   Any user of hazardous substance, pollutants, contaminates or
reportable quantities of petroleum products which are stored or anticipated to
be stored in a railroad car, truck van, watercraft or vessel for more than 30
days shall notify the IDES Director of the type of material, its origin,
destination and scheduled transfer date.
   (B)   The IDES Director shall arrange for an on-site inspection upon
receiving proper notice and shall thereafter receive written verification
weekly from a competent inspector designated by the user that the material has
not breached its containment and thus resulted in an unauthorized or threatened
release.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.07 AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Agricultural users are exempt from this chapter when the hazardous
substance or petroleum product is being applied to crops or environment in
accordance with manufacture’s labeled directions.
   (B)   Agricultural users shall otherwise report any unauthorized release or
spillage to County Central Dispatch by dialing 911 and the occurrence shall
then be considered an environmental emergency and subject to the provisions set
forth by this chapter.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.08 OPERATING GUIDELINES FOR CENTRAL DISPATCH.
   (A)   The County Dispatch Committee shall prepare standard operating
guidelines for all occurrences that constitute an environmental emergency,
including emergency response, notification and prioritizing communication on
the scene of such incident.
   (B)   The standard operating guidelines should include all applicable steps
set forth by KRS 224.1-400(2) through (27) and KRS 224.1-405 along with
applicable guidelines deemed necessary by the representative member
organizations.
   (C)   County Central Dispatch shall act under the direct supervision of the
county’s Emergency Operations Center (EOC) if the occurrence is of the
magnitude to warrant the declaration of a local state of emergency.
   (D)   The guidelines given under §
95.05 and this section shall become part of this chapter, as amended, after
review by the County Dispatch Committee, LEPC and approved by Fiscal Court.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.09 USER RESPONSIBILITY.
   It is the responsibility of the user to report an unauthorized or threatened
release in the county by calling Central Dispatch at 911.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.10 LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   Any user whose willful or negligent act causes an unauthorized or
threatened release shall be jointly and severally liable for all public funds,
cost by private emergency response entity dispatched by IDES, or public “in-
kind” moneys expended during any phase of an environmental emergency upon
request by the county’s Fiscal Court.
   (B)   Any user or other person violating any provisions of this chapter may
be further liable and subject to other civil and fiduciary action warranted by
the county’s Fiscal Court, as given in §
95.99 of this chapter for any claim related to an environmental emergency not
herein otherwise specified.
   (C)   No liability, penalty or claim enjoined by the county’s Fiscal Court
shall subordinate any other liability, penalty or claim by any other political
subdivision or private entity as provided by applicable law.
   (D)   Appeals by the parties liable under the provisions of this chapter
shall be to the County Circuit Court unless jurisdiction is waived to Franklin
Circuit Court by the Cabinet for Natural Resources and Environment Protection.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   The IDES Director shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of this
chapter in accordance with provisions of §
95.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.12 CONTRACTUAL INDEMNIFICATION AND SUBROGATION.
   (A)   No conveyance, transfer, sale, indemnification, hold harmless or
similar agreement shall be effective to release the responsible parties who are
liable under the provisions of this chapter for an unauthorized release that
results in an environmental emergency or threatened release. Nothing in this
section shall bar any arrangement to insure, hold harmless or further indemnify
a party to such agreement for any liability under this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this section, including the provisions of division (A)
above, shall bar a cause of action that the responsible parties or others
subject to liability under this chapter, or a guarantor, has or could have, by
reason of subrogation or otherwise against any person.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.13 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall not create any liability for damages that result
from reliance on this chapter on the part of the County Fiscal Court, McLean
County DES, duly authorized responding personnel and dispatched private
environmental response entity, or administrative decisions lawfully made
hereunder.
   (B)   Each entity mentioned in division (A) above shall make a separate
determination, to their own satisfaction, the level of financial commitment and
insurability or bond, in addition to that which may be required under other
sections of this chapter, so as to initiate the most expeditious response to an
occurrence and the subsequent mitigation of any unauthorized release causing
risk to the general public and environmental.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any user or facility who fails to notify County Central Dispatch upon
an unauthorized or threatened release may be fined not less than $1,000, nor
more than $5,000. Each day’s continuance of such a failure or shall be
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Interest shall accrue at the highest legal rate allowed in addition to
a penalty of 2% per month, compound monthly or any fraction thereof, until such
time as all claims are paid.
   (C)   Except by pursuance of legal action, no person shall interfere or
attempt to interfere with any person authorized by this chapter to perform any
measure considered necessary and sufficient to prevent, mitigate or remove
hazardous substances, pollutants, contaminants or reportable quantities of
petroleum products if such action is intended to protect the general public,
property or environment in the county. Such reasonable measures include, but
are not limited to, site inspection, inquiry of materials stored, initiation of
emergency response, supervision of environmental emergency or any other
activity deemed necessary and sufficient by the authorized person in
performance with his, her or their official duties. Any person who violates
this division (C) shall be fined not less than $1,000, nor more than $500.
   (D)   The County Attorney, upon receipt of an affidavit from the Judge
Executive that a violation of this chapter has occurred, shall initiate
proceedings in the name of the county’s Fiscal Court in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters. Such action may include liens against real
property and intangible assets which shall have precedence over all other
subsequent liens, except state, county, school board or city taxes. The County
Attorney is authorized after receipt of affidavit by both the Judge Executive
and IDES Director to forthwith commence injunction proceedings that prevent
resuming any operations involving a hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant
or reportable quantities of a petroleum product by the user who violates any
provision of this chapter. The Judge Executive shall cause all members of
Fiscal Court to be notified of such violation and schedule a review by the IDES
Director with Fiscal Court and the County Attorney at the most appropriate time
to consider any pending legal action to recover any costs, penalties or other
damages entitled under this chapter.
(Ord. 95-330.1, passed 3-13-1995)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   PAWNBROKERS
      
113.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
114.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
115.   CATV FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Occupational License Tax
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Occupational license application required
   
110.03   Occupational license tax payment required
   
110.04   Apportionment
   
110.05   Employers to withhold
   
110.06   Returns required
   
110.07   Extensions
   
110.08   Refunds
   
110.09   Federal audit provisions
   
110.10   Administrative provisions
   
110.11   Information to remain confidential
   
110.12   Use of occupational license tax
   
110.13   Effective date
 
   
110.99   Penalty
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit. BUSINESS shall not
include a board of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations or unions,
or other associations performing services usually performed by trade
associations or unions as recognized by the Internal Revenue Service. BUSINESS
shall not include funds, foundations, corporations or associations organized
and operated for the exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable,
scientific, literary, educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where no part
of the earnings, incomes or receipts of such unit, group or association, inures
to the benefit of any private shareholder or other person.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company,
business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership, registered
limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association, joint stock
company-receivership, trust, professional service organization or other legal
entity through which business is conducted.
   COMPENSATION. Wages, salaries, commissions or any other form of remuneration
paid or payable by an employer for services performed by an employee, which are
required to be reported for federal income tax purposes and adjusted as
follows:
      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any retirement,
profit sharing or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred for federal
income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar arrangement,
including but not limited to salary reduction arrangements under I.R.C. §§ 401
(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h) or 457; and
      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any welfare
benefit, fringe benefit or other benefit plan made by salary reduction or other
payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce federal taxable
compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including, but not limited to,
I.R.C. §§ 125 and 132.
   CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business entity’s
federal income tax return become final and unappealable.
   COUNTY. The County of McLean, Kentucky.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any business
entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and any officer,
employee or elected official of the United States, a state or any political
subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any one or more of
the above. A person classified as an independent contractor under the Internal
Revenue Code shall not be considered an EMPLOYEE.
   EMPLOYER. The person for whom an individual performs or performed any
service, of whatever nature, as the employee of such person; except that:
      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or performed the
services does not have control of the payment of the wages for such services,
EMPLOYER means the person having control of the payment of such wages; and
      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a non-resident
alien individual, foreign partnership or foreign corporation, not engaged in
trade or business within the United States, EMPLOYER means such person.
   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent’s report or
other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service.
   FISCAL YEAR. Fiscal year, as defined in I.R.C. § 7701(a)(24).
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code, as defined in KRS 67.750
(7), being 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq.
   NET PROFIT. Gross income, as defined in I.R.C. § 61, minus all the
deductions from gross income allowed by I.R.C. Ch. 1, and adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax or local
tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or net income
and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States, local taxing
authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, any territory or possession of the United States or any foreign country
or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Include any amount claimed as a deduction that directly or
indirectly is allocable to income which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;
      (3)   Include any amount claimed as a net operating loss carryback or
carryforward allowed under I.R.C. § 172;
      (4)   Include any amount of income and expenses passed through separately
as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business entity that
is a pass-through entity for federal tax purposes; and
      (5)   Exclude any amount of income that is exempt from state taxation by
the Kentucky Constitution or the Constitution and statutory laws of the United
States.
   PERSON. Every natural person, whether a resident or non-resident of the
county. Whenever the word PERSON is used in a clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as applied to a
partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the partners
or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and
directors thereof.
   OCCUPATIONAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The official appointed by the County Fiscal
Court and charged with the general administration of the license fee and
occupational and net profits license tax imposed by this subchapter.
   RETURN or REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form,
statement, certification, declaration or any other document permitted or
required to be submitted or filed with the county.
   SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods, services or
property.
   TAXABLE NET PROFIT. In case of a business entity having payroll or sales
revenue only within the county, means net profit, as defined in this section,
and as apportioned under §
110.04 of this chapter.
   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar
year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.
   TAX DISTRICT. Any county or city with the authority to levy net profits or
occupational license taxes.
   TRADE, OCCUPATION AND PROFESSION. The doing of and remuneration for any type
of work, activity or the rendering of any and all types of personal services,
the holding of any kind of position or job within the county by a clerk,
laborer, tradesman, manager, elected or appointed government official or other
civil-service employee, and addition shall include and mean any non-resident of
the county who is employed by and employer where the relationship between the
individual performing the services and the person for whom such services are
rendered is as to those legal services, the legal relationship of employer and
employee, including also a partner of a firm or an officer of a firm or its
corporation if such partner or officer receives a salary for his or her
personal services rendered in the course of business of such firm or
corporation where those services of such official or employee are rendered in
whole or in part within the county.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.02 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person or business entity engaged in any trade, occupation or
profession, or other activity for profit or anyone required to file a return
under this subchapter in the county shall be required to complete and execute
the questionnaire prescribed by the Occupational Tax Administrator’s office
every year on or before 4-15-2021 and every year thereafter.
   (B)   Each person shall be required to complete a separate questionnaire for
each separate business before the commencement of business or in the event of a
status change, other than change of address. Licensees are required to notify
the Occupational Tax Administrator’s office of changes of address, or the
cessation of business activity, and of other changes which render inaccurate
the information supplied in the completed questionnaire.
   (C)   A fee of $50 shall be paid when the application is filed with the
Administrator’s office and said fee shall be credited towards the trade,
occupation, profession or other activity occupational license tax liability, if
any, for the previous tax year.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.03 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (E) and (F) below, every person
or business entity engage in any business for profit and any person or business
entity that is required to make a filing with the Internal Revenue or the
Kentucky Revenue Cabinet shall be required to pay to the county an occupational
license tax for the privilege of engaging in such activities within the county.
The occupational license tax shall be measured by 1% of:
      (1)   All wages and compensation paid or payable in the county for work
done or services performed or rendered in the county by every resident and non-
resident who is an employee; [reserved] non-resident business entity.
   (B)   All owners, members or partners of partnerships, LLCs, LLPs or S-
Corporations shall have the right to elect to pay the occupational license tax
as a business entity or individually as a person. If all the owners, members or
partners elect to report and pay the occupational license tax as a business
entity, then only the partnership, LLC, LLP or S-Corporation shall report and
pay the occupational license tax under this subchapter. All guaranteed payments
made by a partnership or LLC must be added to the partnership’s or LLC’s net
profit before calculating the occupational tax due. If all the owners, members
or partners elect to pay the occupational license tax individually, then it
shall be the duty of each and every owner, member or partner to report and pay
as a person any occupational license tax due. If all owners, members or
partners elect to pay the occupational license tax individually as a person
rather than as a business entity, then the business entity must notify the
Occupational Tax Administrator.
   (C)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or withdraws from
the county during any taxable year, or if any business entity in any manner
surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the dissolution,
cessation of business, withdrawal or loss or surrender of charter shall not
defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and collection of any
occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year during which the
business entity had business activity in the county.
   (D)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal income
tax return, tine occupational license tax shall be computed for the purposes of
this subchapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year required by
the Federal Government, and shall employ the same methods of accounting
required for federal income tax purposes.
   (E)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not apply
to the following persons or business entities:
      (1)   Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky National Guard
for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual field training;
      (2)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training
or work at election booths in state, county and local primary, regular or
special elections;
      (3)   Domestic housekeepers employed in a private residence;
      (4)   Any person or business that pays a franchise tax;
      (5)   Insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing
business in the commonwealth, except as provided in KRS 91A.080;
      (6)   Any profits, earnings, distributions of an investment fund which
would qualify under KRS 154.20-250 to 154.20-284 to the extent any profits,
earnings or distributions would not be taxable to an individual investor;
      (7)   Death benefits paid to the beneficiary of an employee or to his or
her estate;
      (8)   Accident and dismemberment insurance benefits;
      (9)   Disability or Workers’ Compensation Act, being KRS 342.001 et seq.,
benefits paid for disabilities sustained during the course of employment,
together with any amount of damages received by suit or agreement because of
such disability;
      (10)   Sickness or otherwise medical insurance benefits;
      (11)   Unemployment compensation paid by the state or any other agent;
      (12)   Boards of trade, chambers of commerce, trade associations or
unions, or other associations performing the services usually performed by
trade associations or unions, community chest funds or foundations,
corporations or associations or clubs organized and operated exclusively for
religious, charitable, scientific, literary, education, civic, fraternal or
humanitarian purposes where no part of the earnings or income or receipts for
such units, groups or associations inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder; and
      (13)   “Gross receipts” and “compensation”, when generally taken to mean
gratuity such as tips paid by someone other than their employer, shall be
exempt, but only with respect to an employee- employer relationship and such
shall be paid by employee.
   (F)   In no event shall any employee engaged in any trade, occupation or
profession within the county, or any business, shareholder of any partnership
or corporation or person engage in business for oneself be liable for an
occupational license tax in excess of $750.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020; Ord. 21-220.7A, passed 2-25-2021)
§ 110.04 APPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   Except as provided division (D) below, net profit shall be apportioned
as follows:
      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales revenue in more
than one tax district, by multiplying the net profit by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in division (B) below, plus
the sales factor, described in division (C) below, and the denominator of which
is two; and
      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than one tax
district, by multiplying the net profit by the sales factor as set forth in
division (C) below.
      (3)   For the purposes of divisions (A) through (D) below, the business
entity shall file an apportionment form provided by the Occupational Tax
Office.
   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
amount paid or payable in the county during the tax period by the business
entity for compensation, and the denominator of which is the total compensation
paid or payable by the business entity everywhere during the tax period.
Compensation is paid or payable in the county based on the time the
individual’s service is performed within the county.
   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
sales revenue of the business entity in the county during the tax period, and
the denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity
everywhere during the tax period.
      (1)   The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property is in the
county if:
         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than
the United States Government, or to the designee of the purchaser within the
county regardless of the F.O.B. point or other conditions of the sale; or
         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse,
factory or other place of storage in the county and the purchaser is the United
States Government.
      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenue from the sale, lease or rental
of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real property, are
apportioned to the county based upon a fraction, the numerator of which is the
time spent in performing such income-producing activity within the county and
the denominator of which is the total time spent performing that income-
producing activity.
      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real property is
allocated to the tax district where the property is located.
   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity’s activity in the county, the
business entity may petition the county or the county may require, in respect
to all or any part of the business entity’s business activity, if reasonable:
      (1)   Separate accounting;
      (2)   The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;
      (3)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors which will fairly
represent the business entity’s business activity in the county; or
      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable
allocation and apportionment of net profit.
   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the county, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid or payable
as a result of work done or service performed or rendered within the county.
The license tax shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the
compensation for work performed or services rendered within the county bears to
the total wages and compensation paid or payable. In order for the county to
verify the accuracy of a taxpayer’s reported percentages under this section,
the taxpayer shall maintain adequate records.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.05 EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.
   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee shall
deduct and withhold upon the payment of the compensation any tax imposed
against the compensation by the county. Amounts withheld shall be paid to the
county in accordance with §
110.03 of this chapter.
   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter ending
thereafter on or before the end of the month following the close of each
quarter, make a return and report to the county, and pay to the county, the tax
required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is permitted or
required to report within a reasonable time after some other period as
determined by the county.
   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the county any sums
required by this subchapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the county for any sum or sums withheld or required to
be withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   The county or city shall have a lien upon all the property of any
employer who fails to withhold or pay over to the county sums required to be
withheld under this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the
amounts withheld to the county, the lien shall commence as of the date the
amounts withheld were required to be paid to the county. If the employer fails
to withhold, the lien shall commence at the time the liability of the employer
is assessed by the county.
   (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and file on a
form furnished or approved by the county a reconciliation of the occupational
license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to employees. Either
copies of federal forms W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage and tax statements or
a detailed employee listing with the required equivalent information, as
determined by the county, shall be submitted.
   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or before
January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and occupational
license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid to the employee
for payment to the county during the preceding calendar year.
   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be
deducted and withheld under this section.
   (H)   The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any other
person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity subject to
this subchapter shall be personally and individually liable, both jointly and
severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation paid to one or
more employees of any business entity, and neither the corporate dissolution or
withdrawal of the business entity from the county, nor the cessation of holding
any corporate office, shall discharge that liability of any person; provided
that, the personal and individual liability shall apply to each or every person
holding the corporate office at the time the tax becomes or became obligated.
No person shall be personally and individually liable under this division (H)
who had no authority to collect, truthfully account for or pay over any tax
imposed by this subchapter at the time that the taxes imposed by this
subchapter become or became due.
   (I)   Every employee receiving compensation in the county subject to the tax
imposed under §
110.03 of this chapter shall be personally liable for the tax notwithstanding
the provisions of divisions (G) and (H) above. In all cases where the employer
does not withhold the tax levied under this subchapter from the employee, such
employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the county each
quarter in the same manner as if they were the employer. If an employer fails
to or is not required to withhold, report or pay the license fee it shall
become the duty of the employee to file with the county. The only employer that
is not required to withhold, report and pay the occupational license tax is the
Federal Government including the United States Postal Service. The payment
required to be made by an employee, can be made quarterly, for the periods
ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year, or at any
time the employee wishes to make an estimated payment for the year in which
wages are earned. All license fees must be received by February 28 for the
preceding calendar year, together with a copy of the employee’s W-2 form.
Employers not required to withhold, report or pay the license fee must annually
during the month of January of each year, make a return to the Occupational Tax
Administrator, in which is set forth the name and Social Security number of
each employee of the employer during the preceding calendar year, giving the
amount of salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation earned during such
preceding year by each such employee. This list shall include all current full-
time employees, part-time employees, temporary employees and terminated
employees whether it be voluntary or involuntary.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.06 RETURNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be
made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a fiscal
year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be supplied by the
county.
   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Occupational Tax Administrator, it is
necessary to examine the federal income tax return of any business entity in
order to audit the return, the county may compel the business entity to produce
for inspection a copy of its federal tax return and any statements and
schedules in support thereof that have not been previously filed. The county
may also require copies of reports of adjustments made by the Federal
Government.
   (C)   Every business entity subject to a occupational license tax governed
by the provisions of this subchapter shall keep records, render under oath
statements, make returns and comply with rules as the county from time to time
may prescribe. Whenever the county deems it necessary, the county may require a
business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a return,
render statements under oath or keep records, as the county deems sufficient to
determine the tax liability the business entity.
   (D)   The county may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the
correctness of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the
taxable income of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of
the business entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as
appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the county at the time
prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return, determined without
regard to any extension of time for filing the return.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020; Ord. 21-220.7A, passed 2-25-2021)
§ 110.07 EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The county may grant any business entity an extension of not more than
six months, unless a longer extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue
Service or is agreed to by the county and the business entity, for filing its
return, if the business entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment of
the occupational license tax, requests the extension and pays the amount
properly estimated as its tax.
   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business entity shall
pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on
the tax shown due on the return, but not been previously paid, from the time
the tax was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the
county. A fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.08 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under §
110.05 of this chapter, a refund or credit shall be made to the employer only
to the extent that the amount of the overpayment was not deducted and withheld
under §
110.05 of this chapter by the employer.
   (B)   Unless written application for refund or credit is received by the
county from the employer within two years from the date the overpayment was
made, no refund or credit shall be allowed.
   (C)   (1)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities
performed outside the county, based on time spent outside the county, whose
employer has withheld and remitted to the county, the occupational license tax
on the compensation attributable to activities performed outside the county,
may file for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the
filing of a return.
      (2)   The employee shall provide a schedule and computation sufficient to
verify the refund claim and the county may confirm with the employer the
percentage of time spent outside the county and the amount of compensation
attributable to activities performed outside the county prior to approval of
the refund.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.09 FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   As soon as practicable after each return is received, the county
may examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by the county
is greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional tax
shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by
the county within five years from the date the return was filed, except as
otherwise provided in this division (A)(1).
         (a)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent
return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time.
         (b)   In the case of a return where a business entity understates net
profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net profits, or both, which
understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of 25% of the amount of net
profit stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time
within six years after the return was filed.
         (c)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly
to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a federal audit, the
additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the times provided in
this division (A)(1)(c), or six months from the date the county receives the
final determination of the federal audit from the business entity, whichever is
later.
      (2)   The times provided in this division (A) may be extended by
agreement between the business entity and the county. For the purposes of this
division (A), a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing
the return shall be considered as filed on the last day. Any extension granted
for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last day
prescribed by law for filing the return.
   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination
of the federal audit within 30 days of the conclusion of the federal audit.
   (C)   The county may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) above.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.10 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the
collection or payment of the tax levied by this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
may be refunded or credited within two years of the date prescribed by law for
the filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the county, whichever
is the later; except that:
         (a)   In any case where the assessment period contained in §
110.09 of this chapter has been extended by an agreement between the business
entity and the county, the limitation contained in this division (B) shall be
extended accordingly; and
         (b)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to
adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file a
claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this division (B) or
six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.
      (2)   For the purposes of this division (B) and division (C) below, a
return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall
be considered as filed on the last day.
   (C)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected
pursuant to this subchapter is vested exclusively in the county.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.11 INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   (1)   No present or former employee of the county shall intentionally
and without authorization inspect or divulge any information acquired by him or
her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding the tax schedules,
returns or reports required to be filed with the county or other proper
officer, or any information produced by a hearing or investigation, insofar as
the information may have to do with the affairs of the person’s business.
      (2)   This prohibition does not extend to information required in
prosecutions for making false reports or returns for taxation, or any other
infraction of the tax laws, or in any way made a matter of public record, nor
does it preclude furnishing any taxpayer or the taxpayer’s properly authorized
agent with information respecting his or her own return.
      (3)   Further, this prohibition does not preclude any employee of the
county from testifying in any court, or from introducing as evidence returns or
reports filed with the county, in an action for violation of the county tax
laws or in any action challenging the county laws.
   (B)   The county reserves the right to disclose to the Commissioner of
Revenue of the commonwealth or his or her duly authorized agent all such
information and rights to inspect any of the books and records of the county if
the Commissioner of Revenue of the commonwealth grants to the county the
reciprocal right to obtain information form the files and records of the
state’s Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged character of the
information so furnished; provided, further, that, the county may publish
statistics based on such information in such a manner as not to reveal data
respecting net profits or compensation of any person or business entity.
   (C)   In addition, the county is empowered to execute similar reciprocity
agreements as described in division (B) above with any other taxing entity,
should there be a need for exchange of information in order to effect diligent
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.12 USE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX.
   The occupational license taxes shall go into the County Fiscal Court’s
General Fund.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.13 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   This subchapter became effective immediately upon passage by the
McLean County Fiscal Court following its second reading and publication as
required by state law.
   (B)   The license tax authorized herein shall be computed from 1-1-2021.
   (C)   The FY 2021 Budget and all subsequent budgets of the County Fiscal
Court shall represent the projected funds herein ascribed to by the subchapter
as provided by the Governor’s Office, Department of Community Development.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   A business entity subject to tax on net profits may be
subject to a penalty equal to 5% of the tax due for each calendar month or
fraction thereof if the business entity:
            1.   Fails to file any return or report on or before the due date
prescribed for filing or as extended by the county; or
            2.   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on or
before the due date prescribed for payment.
         (b)   The total penalty levied pursuant to this division (B)(1) shall
not exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less
than $25.
      (2)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or
before the date prescribed under §
110.05 of this chapter may be subject to a penalty in an amount equal to 15% of
the tax due for each calendar month or fraction thereof. The total penalty
levied pursuant to this division (B)(2) shall not exceed 25% of the total tax
due; however, the penalty shall not be less than $25.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any
business entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, an amount equal to
12% per annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously paid,
from the time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the county. A traction
of a month is counted as an entire month.
      (4)   Every tax imposed by §§
110.01 through
110.13 of this chapter, and all increases, interest, and penalties thereon,
shall become, from the time the tax is due and payable, a personal debt of the
taxpayer to the county.
      (5)   Any person who willfully violates any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.13 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $250, nor more than $500, or
imprisoned for not more than 12 months, or both. Such penalties shall be in
addition to other penalties imposed by §§
110.01 through
110.13 of this chapter.
      (6)   Each failure of refusal to comply with any of the provisions of §§
110.01 through
110.13 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each day that
such failure or refusal continues without compliance shall constitute a
separate and additional offense.
(Ord. 20.220.7, passed 12-22-2020; Ord. 21-220.7A, passed 2-25-2021)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License requirement
   
111.03   Application procedure
   
111.04   Standards for issuance
   
111.05   Revocation procedure
   
111.06   Standards for revocation
   
111.07   Appeal procedure
   
111.08   Exhibition of identification
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor, as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the county and who, in
the furtherance of that business, uses any building, structure, vehicle or any
place within the county.
   PEDDLER.
      (1)   (a)   Any person who travels from place to place by any means
carrying goods for sale, making sales or making deliveries; or
         (b)   Any person who, without traveling from place to place, sells or
offers goods for sale from any public place within the county.
      (2)   A person who is a PEDDLER is not an itinerant merchant.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in that activity within the county.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the County Fiscal Court.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the County Clerk. This application shall be signed by the
applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership or by the
president if a corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide
information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the county;
         (b)   The local address of the individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of the individual; and
         (d)   The capacity in which the individual will act.
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant’s business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character and quality of the goods or services to
be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock; and
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom the goods are manufactured or grown,
and where the goods are at the time of application.
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
and
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, the individual identified in division
(A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) above has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant; and
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their applications the following:
      (1)   If required by the county, copies of all printed advertising
proposed to be used in connection with the applicant’s business; and
      (2)   If required by the county, credentials from the person, if any, for
whom the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as
the representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
applications, in addition to any attachments required under division (C) above,
a statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to
the date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless the investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done or possesses any of
the following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; or
      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character.
§ 111.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the
County Clerk after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
111.06 of this chapter. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. This notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or
her last known address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
§ 111.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
§ 111.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
111.04 or
111.06 of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the County Fiscal
Court. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the County Fiscal Court, within
14 days after notice of the decision has been mailed to the person’s last known
address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The County
Fiscal Court shall set the time and place for a hearing, and notice for the
hearing shall be given to the person in the same manner as provided in §
111.05 of this chapter.
   (B)   The order of the County Fiscal Court after the hearing shall be final.
§ 111.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the county shall used to conduct the business licensed,
separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The County Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor
licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed
Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor”, the expiration date of the license and the
number of the license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during the
time that he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500. Each day’s violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
112.01   Register required; daily reports
§ 112.01 REGISTER REQUIRED; DAILY REPORTS.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of
all articles effected by him or her. The register shall show the dates of all
loans or purchases and the names of all persons who have left any property on
deposit as collateral security, or as a delivery or sale. The person shall
further be described as to the style of dress, height, weight, age, sex,
complexion, race, color of hair, mustache or beard, or both, if the same are
worn and if neither is worn such fact shall be noted. The registry shall
further show a full description of all property purchased or received on
deposit as collateral security, the time when the loan falls due, the amount of
purchase money, the amount loaned and the interest charged.
   (B)   The register described in division (A) above shall at all times be
open to the inspection of any officer of the state when in the discharge of his
or her official duty. Said register shall further be provided to any duly
authorized police or law enforcement officer in the county who request same, by
11:00 a.m., each day covering the previous 24-hour period.
   (C)   Blanks for the reports required in divisions (A) and (B) above shall
be in the form attached to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 02-430.1, passed 9-10-2002)
CHAPTER 113: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
113.01   Imposition of license fee
   
113.02   Amount of fee for companies issuing life insurance
   
113.03   Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
   
113.04   Due date; interest and refunds
   
113.05   Breakdown of collections
Statutory reference:
   Adjustments for overpayment, underpayment or non-payment, see KRS 91A.0804
§ 113.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits
of the city, on a calendar-year basis.
§ 113.02 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING LIFE INSURANCE.
   The license fee or tax imposed by the city upon each insurance company with
respect to life insurance policies may be based upon the first year’s premiums
and, if so based, shall be applied to the amount of the premiums actually
collected within each calendar quarter upon the lives of persons residing
within the corporate limits of the city.
(KRS 91A.080(2))
§ 113.03 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.
   (A)   The license fee or tax imposed upon each insurance company with
respect to any policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be based upon
the premiums actually collected by the insurance company within each calendar
quarter on risks located within the corporate limits of the city on those
classes of business which the insurance company is authorized to transact, less
all premiums returned to policyholders. In determining the amount of license
fee or tax to be collected and to be paid to the city, the insurance company
shall use the tax rate effective on the first day of the policy term. When an
insurance company collects a premium as a result of a change in the policy
during the policy term, the tax rate used shall be the rate in effect on the
effective date of the policy change. With respect to premiums returned to
policyholders, the license fee or tax shall be returned by the insurance
company to the policyholder pro rata on the unexpired amount of the premium at
the same rate at which it was collected and shall be taken as a credit by the
insurance company on its next quarterly report to the city.
(KRS 91A.080(3))
   (B)   No license fee or tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to
premiums:
      (1)   Received on policies of group health insurance provided for state
employees under KRS 18A.225;
      (2)   Received on policies insuring employers against liability for
personal injuries to their employees or the death of their employees caused
thereby, under the provisions of KRS Ch. 342;
      (3)   Received on health insurance policies issued to individuals;
      (4)   Received on policies issued through Kentucky Access created in
Subtitle 17B of KRS Ch. 304;
      (5)   Received on policies for high deductible health plans as defined in
26 U.S.C. § 223(c)(2); or
      (6)   Multi-state surplus lines, defined as non-admitted insurance as
provided in Title V, Subtitle B, the Non-Admitted and Reinsurance Reform Act of
2010, of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub.
Law No. 111-203;
      (7)   Paid to insurance companies or surplus lines brokers by non-profit
self-insurance groups or self-insurance entities whose membership consists of
school districts; or
      (8)   Paid to insurance companies or surplus lines brokers by non-profit
self-insurance groups or self-insurance entities whose membership consists of
cities, counties, charter county governments, urban-county governments,
consolidated local governments, unified local governments, school districts or
any other political subdivisions of the commonwealth.
(KRS 91A.080(10))
   (C)   No license fee or tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to
premiums paid to insurers of municipal bonds, leases or other debt instruments
issued by or on behalf of a city, county, charter county government, urban-
county government, consolidated local government, special district, non-profit
corporation or other political subdivision of the commonwealth. However, this
exemption shall not apply if the bonds, leases or other debt instruments are
issued for profit or on behalf of for-profit or private organizations.
(KRS 91A.080(13))
§ 113.04 DUE DATE; INTEREST AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30
days after the end of each calendar quarter.
(KRS 91A.080(8))
   (B)   (1)   Any insurance company or agent that overpays any license fee or
tax to a city shall be refunded the amount overpaid. If it is determined that
an insurance company or agent paid a license fee or tax to a city based upon
premiums collected upon lives or risks which are discovered to be located
outside the legal corporate limits of the city which was paid the license fee
or tax, the insurance company or agent shall be refunded those license fees and
taxes within 90 days of notice to the city paid.
      (2)   License fees which are not paid on or before the due date shall
bear interest at the tax interest rate as defined in KRS 131.010(6) from the
date due until paid. Such interest payable to the city is separate from
penalties provided for in KRS 91A.080(7). In addition, the city may assess a
10% penalty for a tax or fee not paid within 30 days after the due date.
(KRS 91A.080(9))
§ 113.05 BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine;
   (D)   Fire and allied perils;
   (E)   Health; and
   (F)   Life.
(KRS 91A.080(8))
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Findings
   
114.03   Definitions
   
114.04   Classification
   
114.05   Restrictions, requirements and conditions
   
114.06   Exhibition of sexually-explicit films, videos or live entertainment in
viewing rooms
   
114.07   Inspections
   
114.08   Live performances
   
114.09   Record keeping
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations relating to
sexually-oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials.
Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent, nor
the effect, of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 114.02 FINDINGS.
   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on
the community presented in reports made available to the Fiscal Court, and on
findings incorporated in the case of Renton vs. Play Time Theaters, Inc., 475
U.S. 41 (1986), Young vs. American Mini Theaters, 427 U.S. 50 (1976), and
Barnes vs. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other
communities including, but not limited to: Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis and
Saint Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas;
Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California;
Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio;
and Beaumont, Texas; as well as on findings from the report of Attorney
General’s Working Group on the regulation of sexually-oriented businesses (6-6-
1989, State of Minnesota), the Fiscal Court finds as follows.
   (A)   Sexually-oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of such
establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to ensure that the
owners of those establishments will be responsible for the activities that
occur on their premises.
   (B)   Certain employees of sexually-oriented business defined in this
chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher incidents of certain
types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
   (C)   Sexual acts occur at sexually-oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films,
videos or live sex shows.
   (D)   Offering and providing space for such activities encourages
occurrences thereof and thereby create unhealthy conditions.
   (E)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually-oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually-oriented businesses.
   (F)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually-oriented businesses.
   (G)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing,
cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States; and, through December, 2001,
there have been 1,284,059 reported cases of AIDS in the United States.
   (H)   As of 12-31-2003, there have been 4,071 reported cases of AIDS in the
commonwealth.
   (I)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection,
like syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
   (J)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually-oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the
failure of the owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
   (K)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually- oriented businesses where persons view adult-oriented
films.
   (L)   The findings noted in divisions (A) through (K) above raise
substantial governmental concerns.
   (M)   Sexually-oriented businesses, especially premises with adult booths,
have operational characteristics which engender substantial government
concerns.
   (N)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on
premises with adult booths advance a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters.
   (O)   The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the county
will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 114.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT AMUSEMENT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disk players, or other image producing
devices are regularly maintained to display images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be characterized as ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or
ADULT VIDEO STORE. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOK STORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE, so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performances characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
advertising the availability of such adult-type photographic reproductions;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of less than ten
hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown and characterized by the
dominant depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
   ADULT STAGE SHOW THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state
of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
   COUNTY. The County of McLean, Kentucky, including the cities of Calhoun,
Livermore, Island, Beech Grove and Sacramento, and any other community whether
incorporated or not.
   EMPLOYEE.
      (1)   Any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business.
      (2)   EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for
repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the
delivery of goods to the premises.
   ENTERTAINER. Any person who provides sexually-oriented entertainment in a
sexually-oriented business, whether or not an employee of the business and
whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment.
   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one if its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any sexually-oriented business, whether existing or the
opening of such business; the conversion of an existing business, whether or
not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; and the
addition to any sexually-oriented business.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the
affairs and/or the conduct of a sexually-oriented business.
   NUDE, NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial course of
conduct such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial
portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business
of the sexually-oriented business.
   SEMI-NUDE or in a SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.
      (1)   The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the
top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female
buttocks.
      (2)   This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or
other wearing apparel; provided, the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The depiction of human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation, active human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, or
holding or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
breasts.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
      (2)   Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult amusement arcade, adult book store,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult stage theater, escort agency or sexual encounter
center.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 114.04 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult amusement arcades;
   (B)   Adult book stores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;
   (C)   Adult cabarets;
   (D)   Adult motels;
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;
   (F)   Adult stage theaters;
   (G)   Escort agencies; and
   (H)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 114.05 RESTRICTIONS, REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   All sexually-oriented businesses classified under §
114.04 of this chapter shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by laws, which may be more restrictive,
no owner or operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit a person under
18 years of age to be employed by or enter the establishment.
   (B)   An establishment must have an employee on duty at all times the
business is open and must be positioned at a station in the premises located in
such a manner that the entrance can be monitored at all times. Any person who
reasonably appears to be under the age of 18 shall be requested to verify his
or her age. All persons under the age of 18 discovered in the establishment
shall be immediately escorted from the premises.
   (C)   No establishment, except for an adult motel, shall remain open at any
time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY-EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN
VIEWING ROOMS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements.
      (1)   Any wall or partition, which is situated so as to create a viewing
area in which any amusement device or viewing screen is located, shall be
constructed of not less than one hour fire- restriction material and shall
contain no hole or other perforation.
      (2)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there shall be an unobstructed view from a manager’s or cashier’s station
of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms. The view required in this section must be by
direct line of sight from the manager or cashier’s station.
      (3)   No viewing room or booth shall be obstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials. No
patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area to which patrons are not permitted.
      (4)   No viewing room or booth shall be occupied by more than one person
any time. No owner, operator or employee shall knowingly permit any viewing
room or booth to be occupied by more than one person any time.
      (5)   No restroom shall contain any video reproduction devices or
equipment.
      (6)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less ten foot candles as measured at floor
level.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the owner, operator or employee to ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times any patron or
customer is present in the premises.
      (8)   No owner, operator or employee shall allow openings of any kind to
exist between viewing rooms or booths.
      (9)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind to
exist between viewing rooms or booths.
      (10)   The owner and/or employees shall, during each business day, cause
the walls between the viewing booths to be regularly inspected to determine if
any openings or holes exist.
      (11)   All floor coverings in viewing rooms or booths shall be non-
porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
      (12)   There must be at least one employee on duty and situated at the
manager’s station at all times any patron is present inside the premises.
   (B)   All sexually-oriented businesses in operation in the county on the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with the configuration requirements
of divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above within 120 days after the effective date
of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.07 INSPECTIONS.
   At any time occupied or open for business, all sexually-oriented businesses
shall permit representatives of the county, including representatives of the
Sheriff’s Department, Fire Department, Health Department or other county
departments or agencies, to inspect the premises of a sexually- oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 LIVE PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   All live performances in any sexually-oriented business shall be on a
designated performance area consisting of a stage or platform at least 18
inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet from any
area in which any patrons are permitted.
   (B)   No person shall appear nude or in a state of nudity while engaged in
any live performance on the premises of any sexually-oriented business.
   (C)   No person shall appear semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition while
engaged in any live performance on the premises of any sexually-oriented
business except on the stage or platform described in division (A) above.
   (D)   No entertainer or employee shall be permitted to have any physical
contact with any patron during any performance.
   (E)   No entertainer or employee shall be visible from any public place
outside the premises during any performance.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 RECORD KEEPING.
   Each sexually-oriented business shall maintain and retain for a period of
two years beyond the last date of employment, the date of birth, last known
address, date of termination and Social Security number of all persons employed
by the sexually-oriented business.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $500, or
be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 12 months, or both.
(Ord. 06-430.1, passed 6-13-2006)
CHAPTER 115: CATV FRANCHISES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Grant of franchises
   
115.03   Application to FCC
   
115.04   Equipment and standard of service; type and capacity
   
115.05   Subscriber rates
   
115.06   Service
   
115.07   Compensation to county
   
115.08   Indemnification and insurance
   
115.09   Transfer of franchise
   
115.10   Other business activities
   
115.11   Filing plats, maps and records
   
115.12   Improving and modifying CATV system
   
115.13   Forfeiture
   
115.14   Right of intervention
   
115.15   Conflicting laws, rules or regulations
   
115.16   Removal of facilities
   
115.17   Advertisement
   
115.18   Notice
   
115.19   Bid forms
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDITIONAL SERVICE. Any communication service other than basic service
provided under the system of the company including, by way of example but not
limited to, burglar alarms, advertising, data or other electronic intelligence
transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and home shopping.
   BASIC SERVICE. The simultaneous delivery by the company to television
receivers (or any other suitable audio-video communication receiver) to
subscribers in the county of all signals required herein to be transmitted by
the company.
   CHANNEL. A band of frequencies six megahertz wide in the cable electro-
magnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying one audio-video television
signal.
   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM (CATV SYSTEM). The broadband
communications facility to be constructed, operated and maintained by the
company pursuant to this chapter.
   COMPANY. The person, firm, company or other business entity to which a non-
exclusive franchise is granted.
   COUNTY. The County of McLean, acting through its Fiscal Court.
   COURT. The Fiscal Court of McLean County, Kentucky.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE. The non-exclusive franchise defined herein.
   SUBSCRIBER. A purchaser of basic service (as herein defined) delivered over
the CATV system.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.02 GRANT OF FRANCHISES.
   (A)   General. The county shall grant one or more non-exclusive franchises
to construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid or dedicated,
and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the county, poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits and other television conductors and fixtures
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance in the county of a
CATV system (each of which is referred to herein as a “non-exclusive
franchise”), for a period of 20 years from the date of the grant of the non-
exclusive franchise.
   (B)   Conditions on street use; utilizations of existing utility facilities.
      (1)   Where feasible to do so, the company will endeavor to obtain rights
to use facilities belonging to utility companies within the county. Approval of
the assignment of such rights to the company by such utility companies is
hereby expressly given by the county, it being the intention of the county that
the company will utilize existing public utility facilities where feasible.
      (2)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the company within the county shall be located so as not to
interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and
places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or
other public ways and places, and not to interfere with existing public utility
installations.
      (3)   If the company disturbs any pavements, sidewalks, driveways or
other surfacing, it shall, at its own expense, and in the manner provided by
the county replace and restore all such pavings, sidewalks, driveways or other
surfaces of any streets or alleys thus disturbed.
      (4)   If, at any time during the period of such non-exclusive franchise,
the county shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade or location of
any street, alley or other public way, the company shall upon reasonable notice
by the county, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cable, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance
comply with the requirements of the county.
      (5)   The company shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above
or below ground where the same will unreasonably interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrant or other utility, and all such
poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed so as
to comply with all requirements of the county.
      (6)   On request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the
county, the company shall temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the
moving of buildings or other objects, the expense of such temporary removal, to
be paid in advance by the person requesting such removal. The company shall be
given not less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary
changes.
      (7)   The company shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and
overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the county, so
as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the
wires and cables of the company.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.03 APPLICATION TO FCC.
   The company shall, within the time period required by the FCC, make proper
application to the FCC for all permits, licenses or approvals required by law
for the construction and operation of a CATV system.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.04 EQUIPMENT AND STANDARD OF SERVICE; TYPE AND CAPACITY.
   (A)   The company shall engineer, install, maintain, operate and equip the
CATV system herein provided so as to meet the technical standards of the FCC.
   (B)   The signals distributed by the company shall be the best possible
signals available under the circumstances existing at the time and shall
provide the best possible quality reception to each subscriber.
   (C)   The CATV system shall be engineered and designed for a minimum 12-
channel capacity.
   (D)   The standards of equipment and service specified herein to be utilized
and rendered by the company are intended as minimum standards and nothing
herein shall be construed as an attempt to relieve the company from complying
fully with existing FCC regulations nor from meeting future standards of the
FCC within the times for compliance specified by the FCC.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.05 SUBSCRIBER RATES.
   (A)   The company will provide basic service to its subscribers at
reasonable rates for services rendered. REASONABLE RATES shall mean such rates
as shall permit the company to render efficient service, derive a reasonable
profit from its operation, provide sufficient capital to meet technical
advances in the cable television industry, and provide fair rates to its
subscribers. No such rate, term or condition relating thereto shall make or
grant any preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any
prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, that, nothing herein shall be
deemed to prohibit the establishment of different classes of customers (e.g.,
private and commercial) or a graduated scale of charges or a classified rate
schedule to which any customer, within such classification, shall be entitled.
   (B)   Subject to FCC regulations, and approval, where necessary, the company
may install and attach encoder-decoder devices or similar devices to
subscribers’ terminals so that subscribers will be able to receive special CATV
network, syndicated or other than basic CATV system-provided services and
programming for which programming or services a separate charge may be made.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.06 SERVICE.
   (A)   The company shall distribute all television signals disseminated to
the general public without charge by FCC licensed television stations
(including education and foreign language stations) which may be distributed
within the county under regulations of the FCC, which said service is defined
herein as “basic service”.
   (B)   As part of the consideration for the rights and privileges herein
granted, the company shall provide one free drop, with no monthly service
charge to County Courthouse, county fire and police stations, county public
library and to all public and parochial primary and secondary schools located
within the county which are passed by a cable.
   (C)   The company shall maintain a competent staff of employees sufficient
to provide adequate and prompt service to its subscribers. Except where an
emergency requires a more expedited procedure, the company may interrupt
service for the purpose of repairing or up-grading the system during periods of
minimum use.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.07 COMPENSATION TO COUNTY.
   (A)   (1)   The company, in consideration of the terms of the non-exclusive
franchise, shall pay to the county a sum equal to the cost of the advertising
and granting of the non-exclusive franchise upon proper billing by the county
to the company, plus a sum equal to 3% of the gross income received by the
company for the distribution of basic service television signals on the CATV
system within the county excluding the present or future franchised areas of
Livermore, Calhoun, Island and Sacramento. No other tax, levy or charge of any
kind shall be imposed upon the company by the city.
      (2)   It is understood by and between the parties that such revenues as
may be obtained from advertising on the CATV system and for other services,
supplemental to the presentation of free over-the-air television signals, shall
not be included in said gross. It is further provided that, if the FCC should
impose a percentage varying from the rate set out above, then the percent above
shall be changed to comply with FCC standards.
      (3)   The above fee shall be payable one-half thereof in semi-annual
payments. Said semi-annual payment dates shall be June 30 and December 31 of
each year, and each semi-annual payment shall be made within 30 days
thereafter.
      (4)   The company shall keep complete records of accounts showing dates
and payments received.
   (B)   In the event that the non-exclusive franchise granted to the company
should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic 20-year term,
the company shall immediately submit to the county a statement showing the
basic service gross receipts of the company for the time elapsed since the last
period for which the company has paid to the county the required percentage of
such gross annual receipts, and the company shall pay to the county not later
than 30 days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of
such basic service gross receipts.
   (C)   In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable
date fixed in divisions (A) and (B) above, interest on such payments shall
apply from such date at the yearly rate of 10%.
   (D)   The county shall have the right to inspect the company records showing
its gross receipts for basic service from which its franchise payments are
computed, and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid
under the non-exclusive franchise shall be always accorded to the county. No
acceptance of any payment by the county shall be construed as a release of or
an accord or satisfaction of any claim the county might have for further or
additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or for any other
performance or obligation of the company hereunder.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.08 INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Indemnity.
      (1)   The company shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify,
defend and save harmless the county its officers, boards, commissions and
employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liabilities and judgment
for damage.
      (2)   These damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited
to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising
out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized
herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed
or prohibited by the non-exclusive franchise.
      (3)   The company shall, and by its acceptance of the non-exclusive
franchise shall specifically agree to, pay all expenses incurred by the county
in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above.
The company shall provide and pay for all legal services necessary to defend
the county in this regard.
   (B)   Insurance. At all times during the terra of the non-exclusive
franchise granted to the company, the company shall obtain and pay all premiums
for a general comprehensive public liability insurance policy and a property
damage insurance policy with limits of $300,000/$100,000 and $25,000.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.09 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   The non-exclusive franchise shall not be assigned or transferred by the
company, in whole or in part, without the consent of the county and such
consent shall not unreasonably be withheld.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.10 OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   The company shall not, directly or indirectly, engage in the business of
selling, repairing or installing television receivers or radio receivers within
the county during the term of the non-exclusive franchise.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.11 FILING OF PLATS, MAPS AND RECORDS.
   The company shall file with the County Engineer a true and correct copy of
maps and plats of existing and proposed installations and these maps and plats
shall be updated every 12 months.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.12 IMPROVING AND MODIFYING CATV SYSTEM.
   The company shall maintain its CATV system in accordance with accepted
industry and FCC technical standards, and shall endeavor to make reasonable
efforts to improve and modify its CATV system, as technology and the state of
the art permit. As many television signals as possible will be transmitted by
the CATV system to its subscribers, subject to FCC approval, where necessary.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.13 FORFEITURE.
   (A)   The county may declare a forfeiture of a non-exclusive franchise in
the event of substantial violation by the company to which it was granted of
any of the terms thereof, upon written notice to the company specifying the
nature of the violation, unless such violation is corrected or ceases to exist
within 60 days from the date of the written notice of same to the company.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the company
shall not be considered to be in default or in violation of any of the terms
hereof it prevented from fulfilling such obligations or terms by reason of
uncontrollable forces. The term UNCONTROLLABLE FORCES shall be deemed, for the
purpose of this franchise, to mean earthquake, storm, lightning, flood,
backwater caused by flood, fire, epidemic, accident, failure of facilities,
war, riot, civil disturbance, strike, labor disturbances, restraint by court of
public authority or other similar or dissimilar causes beyond the control of
the company, which causes the company could not have avoided by exercise of
reasonable care. The company, when unable to fulfill any obligation or term of
the non-exclusive franchise by reason of uncontrollable forces shall remove
such disability with reasonable dispatch.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.14 RIGHT OF INTERVENTION.
   The company agrees not to oppose intervention by the county in any suit or
proceeding to which the company is a party.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.15 CONFLICTING LAWS, RULES OR REGULATIONS.
   In the event the laws of the United States (including, without limitation,
the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984), being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.,
or the commonwealth or rules and regulations or any agency of the United States
or the commonwealth, whether presently in existence or hereinafter enacted or
set in force, are in conflict with any provision(s), or portions thereof, of
this chapter, those provision(s) (or portions thereof) of this chapter which
are in conflict therewith shall be deemed amended so as to comply with said
laws, rules and/or regulations.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.16 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   At the end of the term of the non-exclusive franchise granted to the company
or upon its termination prior to the end of its specified term, the company,
upon the request of the county and at the company’s expense, shall remove such
facilities from all public property. Upon termination of service to any
subscriber, the company shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment
from the premises of each subscriber upon his or her written request at no cost
to the subscriber.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.17 ADVERTISEMENT OF NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
   The County Clerk is authorized and directed to advertise for bids for a non-
exclusive franchise (as defined in §
115.02 of this chapter).
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.18 NOTICE.
   The notice for bids on a non-exclusive franchise shall be posted on the
public bulletin board at the Fiscal Court, and shall be advertised at least
once, said publication to be not less than seven days nor more than 21 days
prior to the date for acceptance of bids; the acceptance of bids shall be at a
regular meeting of the Fiscal Court on 3-3-1987 at 8:30 a.m., at which time the
county shall publicly receive the bids and grant a non-exclusive franchise to
the highest and best bidder; provided, however, that, the county reserves the
right to:
   (A)   Reject any and all bids;
   (B)   Award more than one non-exclusive franchise; and
   (C)   Withhold the granting of any non-exclusive franchise.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
§ 115.19 BID FORMS.
   (A)   The County Clerk shall likewise prepare and furnish to prospective
bidders upon request a form for bidding on the non-exclusive franchise. No bid
will be considered unless it is filed on such form. The county reserves the
right, at its option, to waive informalities or irregularities in bids.
   (B)   The said form shall require the bidder to furnish the following
information:
      (1)   A statement of the ownership of the bidder as follows:
         (a)   If the bidder is a corporation, the state and date of
incorporation, the name and address of each director and officer, and the name
and address of each shareholder owning in excess of 20% of the stock ownership
of such company;
         (b)   If the bidder is a partnership, association, or joint venture,
the name and address of each general partner or joint venturer, the interest
owned by each general partner or joint venturer and the type of such
partnership, joint venture or association (i.e., whether general, special or
otherwise); and
         (c)   If the bidder is an individual or sole proprietorship doing
business under an assumed name, the name and address of the bidder or of all
persons or firms making up the proprietorship and the interest owned by each
person or firm.
      (2)   Whether such bidder is the owner of any interest in other CATV
franchises or systems, and the number, location and address thereof;
      (3)   Whether such bidder is the owner of any interest in any license
issued by the Federal Communication Commission, and if so, a description of the
license, and whether such bidder has ever been convicted of any violation of
any law or regulation with respect to such license;
      (4)   A statement that the bidder has read and is familiar with the
contents of CATV Operation Rules and Technical Standards, published by the
Federal Communications Commission;
      (5)   A statement of the bidder’s technical qualifications for the
construction and operation of a CATV system and a statement showing the
adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements; and
      (6)   A schedule of the rates to be initially charged for services
rendered.
(Ord. 87-450.1, passed 2-10-1987)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Social hosting
   
130.02   Noise restrictions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 SOCIAL HOSTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and winch
contains 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage
purposes wither alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
      GATHERING. A party, gathering or event, where a group of three or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
      HOUSEHOLD or PREMISES. Any home, apartment, condominium, premises or
other dwelling unit or meeting room or hall, including the yard and cartilage
of such household or premises which are owned, rented, leased or under the
control of the person or persons responsible for the party, regardless of
whether such premises are occupied on a permanent or temporary basis, or merely
occupied as a premises for a social function.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
the court.
      MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent
or stepparent of another person.
      PREMISES. Any residence or other private property, place or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
      RESPONSE COSTS. The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire
or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding
to, remaining at or other dealing with a gathering, and the administrative
costs attributed to such response(s);
         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering;
         (c)   The cost of repairing any government equipment or property
damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to,
remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering; and
         (d)   Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this
section.
   (B)   Hosting, permitting or allowing a party, gathering or event where
minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited; consumption of alcohol by
minor prohibited; presumption.
      (1)   (a)   It is a duty of any person having control of any premises,
who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverage by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps include: controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering;
and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
         (b)   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in division (B)(1)(a) above.
         (c)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of 21 years to consume
alcohol, except as permitted by statute. A person under the age of 21 years is
presumed to have consumed alcohol if they have an alcohol concentration of 0.02
or more as measured by a scientifically reliable test or tests of a sample of
the person’s breath or blood taken within two hours of the initial contact by a
law enforcement officer.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her
parent of legal guardian, as permitted by KRS 530.070(1)(a).
      (3)   This section shall not apply to any Kentucky Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control license at any premises regulated by the Department
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
(Ord. 12.1030-01, passed 9-28-2012) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 NOISE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. This section shall apply to all unincorporated areas of
the county, except where the county’s jurisdiction is preempted by federal or
state law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede or
contravene the authority which the state or federal governments or their
agencies have with respect to the management, protection and utilization of the
lands and resources under their jurisdiction.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGRICULTURE. The operation of farm premises, including the planting,
cultivation, producing, growing, harvesting and preparation for market of
agricultural or horticultural commodities thereon, the raising of livestock for
food products and for racing purposes, and poultry thereon, and any work
performed as an incident to or in conjunction with the farm operations.
      LIMITED. In operation only during daytime hours.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, including a registered limited
liability partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, firm,
association, trust, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company or
legal representative thereof.
      TEMPORARY. In operation for a period of 30 days or less.
   (C)   Prohibition. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any
engine, motor, compressor or other mechanized equipment which continuously
produces a sound level greater than:
      (1)   Seventy decibels using the “A” weighting filter (“dB(a)”) when
measured at a distance of 300 feet from the operating engine, motor or
equipment in question during the daytime hours;
      (2)   Fifty decibels using the “A” weighting filter (“dB(a)”) when
measured at a distance of 300 feet from the operating engine, motor or
equipment in question when operating during the nighttime hours; or
      (3)   Fifty dB(a) when measured to the nearest residence, public building
or human occupied building from the operating engine, motor or equipment in
question. Sound level measurements shall conform to the following guidelines.
         (a)   Sound level meters shall conform, at a minimum to the
requirements of the American National Standards institute.
         (b)   Sound level measurements shall be taken four feet above ground
level.
         (c)   Sound levels shall be determined by averaging minute by minute
measurements made over minimum 15-minute sample duration, if practicable. The
sample shall be taken under conditions that are representative of the noise
experienced by the complainant (e.g., at night, morning, evening or during
special weather conditions).
         (d)   In all sound level measurements, the existing ambient noise
level from all other sources in the encompassing environment at the time and
place of such sound level measurement shall be considered to determine the
contribution to the sound level by the operation of the subject equipment.
   (D)   Special limited exemption. Any person may make written petition to the
Fiscal Court for a special limited exemption for operations exceeding the
prohibited decibel levels.
   (E)   Mitigation plan. Any operation which exceeds the sound level
referenced above may be mitigated by one or more of the following noise
abatement measures, listed below in ascending order of mitigation:
      (1)   Acoustically insulated housing or covers enclosing any motor or
engine;
      (2)   Screening of the site or noise emitting equipment by fence or
landscaping; and
      (3)   Solid wall or fence of acoustically insulating material surrounding
all or part of the engine, motor or motorized equipment.
   (F)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Noise created during agricultural operations; and
      (2)   Noise resulting from the temporary or limited operation of an
engine, motor or motorized equipment.
(Ord. 08-1010.1, passed 4-8-2009) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Criminal violations of §
130.01(B) of this chapter shall be punishable, on a first offense, by a
mandatory minimum fine of $100, with neither fine, nor costs, suspended, and,
on second and subsequent offenses, by a fine of $200, plus costs, with neither
fine, nor costs, suspended.
      (2)   The County Attorney, in the name of the commonwealth, shall
prosecute violations of §
130.01 of this chapter and may recover the response costs associated with
enforcement through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance
or law. Section 130.01 of this chapter shall not limit the authority of peace
officers to make arrests for any criminal offenses arising out of conduct
regulated by §
130.01 of this chapter, nor shall they limit the commonwealth’s ability to
initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same.
   (C)   (1)   Any person in violation of §
130.02 of this chapter shall be notified by written notice served upon him, her
or them by the Sheriff and shall have 30 days from the date of service of that
notice to file with the office of the Judge Executive a written plan to
mitigate the noise consistent with the mitigation elements detailed above. The
office of the Judge Executive shall then have 30 days from the date of the
submission of the plan to respond by either accepting the plan or by requesting
additional mitigation measures. Said response shall also advise the offender of
the date on which the accepted plan must be implemented to avoid imposition of
penalties.
      (2)   Any person who fails to timely submit a mitigation plan to the
office of the Judge Executive or who fails to timely implement the accepted
plan of mitigation shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each day the
violation continues.
(Ord. 08-1010.1, passed 4-8-2009; Ord. 12.1030-01, passed 9-28-2012)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Adoption of state codes; enforcement agents
   
150.02   Application
   
150.03   Appeals
Right-of-Way and Drainage Construction
   
150.15   Standard specifications adopted by reference
   
150.16   Inspection and certificate of construction
   
150.17   Water flowing over county roads; unauthorized connections prohibited
   
150.18   Authorized official ro determine need for culvert
   
150.19   Property owner responsible for costs of culvert installation;
maintenance by Road Department
   
150.20   Installation by County Road Department; costs to become a lien against
property
   
150.21   Blocking county road ditch; construction with unapproved materials
   
150.22   Drainage requirements
   
150.23   Violation; appeal
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF STATE CODES; ENFORCEMENT AGENTS.
   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Title 815, Chapter 7 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Residential Code, as
contained in Title 815, Chapter 7 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations;
the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained in Title 815, Chapter 20 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Standards of Safety, as
contained in Title 815, Chapter 10 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations,
together with any amendments, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
forth in this code of ordinances. Copies of the above codes and any amendments
thereto shall be placed on file in the office of the County Clerk where they
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
§ 150.02 APPLICATION.
   The application of the Kentucky Building Code and Kentucky Residential Code
shall be extended to all single-family dwellings in the county which are to be
constructed or remodeled.
§ 150.03 APPEALS.
   Appeals from decisions made by the Building Inspector under this subchapter
may be taken to the state’s Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction unless
and/or until a local board of housing appeals, as set forth in KRS Ch. 198B, is
established to hear the appeals.
Statutory reference:
   Appeals procedure, see KRS 198B.070
RIGHT-OF-WAY AND DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.15 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Kentucky Transportation Specifications for Drainage is adopted herein by
reference as if fully set out herein and the same shall be and hereby are
adopted as the minimum standards of construction for all right-of-way and
drainage constructed in the county after the effective date of this subchapter.
A current copy of said manual is attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein as Exhibit “A”.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.16 INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   Any person or entity undertaking to construct road, street or storm sewer
within the county shall apply to the county’s Road Supervisor or other county
official as designated by the Fiscal Court for inspection and certification
that such road, street, sidewalk or storm sewer has met specifications as set
forth in this subchapter. The county’s Road Supervisor shall prepare a written
inspection report in duplicate showing date and time and by whom inspection was
made, where tests were made, thickness and type of paving materia! and whether
the project meets specification. If the project does not meet specifications,
the person performing the inspection shall state in the written report, the
defects found and action required to bring the project up to the standards. The
original of the inspection report shall be kept by the county’s Road Supervisor
or other county official designated by the Fiscal Court. The copy of the
inspection report shall be given to the builder and the Judge Executive.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.17 WATER FLOWING OVER COUNTY ROADS; UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No entity or person shall construct a drain or drainage system of any type
such that the water being drained flows onto or over a county road or shall
make an unauthorized connection with a county sewer or storm sewer.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.18 AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL TO DETERMINE NEED FOR CULVERT.
   The authorization official(s) that determines the need for a culvert shall
be the county’s Road Supervisor or other county personnel, appointed by the
Judge Executive.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.19 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR COSTS OF CULVERT INSTALLATION;
MAINTENANCE BY ROAD DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a property owner constructs a new driveway or entrance onto a
county road or elects to install a new culvert for any other reason, the
property owner shall be responsible for the cost of said culvert construction.
The county’s Road Department shall construct the culvert and the expense of the
materials shall be paid by the property owner; however, the county’s Road
Supervisor shall give the property owner written notice of the approximate cost
of installing the culvert. The property owner then shall have 30 days after
receiving the notice to appeal directly to the county’s Fiscal Court. If
appealed, the county’s Fiscal Court shall conduct a hearing, wherein the
county’s Road Supervisor must establish the facts making the cost and action
necessary.
   (B)   When the county’s Road Department, or its agents, are performing
normal ditch maintenance along a county road, and it is deemed necessary by the
county’s Road Supervisor, or other appropriate county personnel, to install a
new culvert, or to replace an existing culvert that does not meet county
standards with regard to type of material used in construction of said culvert,
or sizes of said culvert. The county’s Road Supervisor shall construct a
compliant culvert at the expense of the property owner. However, the county’s
Road Supervisor shall give the property owner written notice of the intent to
install or replace an existing culvert at the cost of installing the culvert.
The property owner then shall have 30 days after receiving the notice to appeal
directly to the county’s Fiscal Court and the county’s Fiscal Court shall
conduct a hearing wherein the county’s Road Supervisor must establish the facts
making the action necessary.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. pased 9-24-2020)
§ 150.20 INSTALLATION BY COUNTY ROAD DEPARTMENT; COSTS TO BECOME A LIEN AGAINST
PROPERTY.
   If the property owner, after receipt of notice pursuant to §
150.19(A) and (B) of this chapter, refuses or for any reason, does not pay for
the cost of installing said culvert, the county’s Road Department shall install
said culvert or culverts and said cost shall become a lien on the property,
capable of being filed with the County Clerk’s office.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.21 BLOCKING COUNTY ROAD DITCH; CONSTRUCTION WITH UNAPPROVED MATERIALS.
   If any contractor, property owner or property owner’s agent blocks a county
road ditch, with any type of material or constructs a culvert with material
that is not approved by the county’s Road Department, said contractor, property
owner or property owner’s agent, shall be liable for any damages caused to said
road, plus the cost of returning said ditch to original condition.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.22 DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any entrance, whether in a rural or urban area, shall not obstruct or
restrict the normal watercourses involved, unless suitable provisions are made
therefore. The county’s Road Supervisor or his or her designee shall be
satisfied that the type, size and installation of the drainage features
proposed in the application are adequate for present and foreseeable future
requirements and have a reasonable life span. As to the type of drainage pipe
material, the county’s Road Supervisor shall be guided by the Kentucky
Transportation Cabinet Manual on Drainage.
   (B)   Requirements for drainage shall be as follows.
      (1)   Necessary drainage structures for an entrance shall not be tied
onto an existing highway drainage structure unless the necessary junction
boxes, manholes and catch basins are installed by the permittee in accordance
with county specifications.
      (2)   The size, length and type of the entrance pipe shall be as required
by the county’s Road Supervisor, but in no case shall be less than 15 inches in
diameter, and not less than 20 feet in length.
      (3)   All entrance pipes, whether of corrugated metal, concrete or
bituminous coated corrugated metal shall meet appropriate Department
specifications and requirements. Pipes shall be of sufficient length to prevent
end damage. Sloped box inlet or outlet may be required by the county’s Road
Supervisor.
      (4)   Valley gutters constructed of concrete or bituminous material,
which meet Department standards, may be used in lieu of entrance pipe where the
pipe cannot be placed.
      (5)   (a)   Where long lengths of pipe are used, catch basins or clean
out boxes shall be installed at approximate intervals in accordance with the
policy.
         (b)   Special considerations maybe given to placement of clean-out
boxes at longer intervals for pipe with larger diameters. Boxes shall also be
constructed at all angles in pipe alignment.
      (6)   When necessary, gratings and catch basins must be employed to
intercept and prevent water flowing from the driveway over the sidewalks or
roadways.
      (7)   Utilities are not to be placed in or through existing drainage
conduits.
      (8)   When a fill is to be placed against an existing roadway, the fill
shall be constructed to intersect the outside shoulder edge and slope away from
the road on a six to one (6:1) slope to the ditch flow line or a depth of three
feet. Furthermore, special drainage features as required by the county’s Road
Supervisor shall be required of the applicant to adequately drain the road bed
and shoulders. This refers to French drains or toe drains in the existing fill.
      (9)   Occasionally, under pavement drainage is provided by sand, crushed
stone or other types of drains in front of pavement through the shoulder of the
road. Requests to join the pavement at these existing drainage points must be
accompanied by plans showing the methods proposed to extend these drains so
that their original purpose will be continued. This provision is applicable to
commercial and private entrances.
      (10)   Any proposal to alter or significantly increase a drainage area,
runoff factors or change in any way a drainage structure must be accompanied by
a complete drainage survey (upstream and downstream) based upon a 25-year and
100-year storm with hydraulic analysis of all affected drainage structures in
the area.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.23 VIOLATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The county’s Road Supervisor or his or her designee shall determine if
a violation exists and shall put the property owner on written notice and allow
30 days for corrective action.
   (B)   Parties aggrieved by the levy lien shall have 30 days after receiving
such notice in which to appeal directly to the county’s Fiscal Court must
conduct a hearing wherein the Road Supervisor must establish the facts and
legal grounds for the issuance of levy. The property owner, or his or her
designee, shall have the right to present evidence and testimony at the
hearing. A ruling shall be issued within 30 days of the hearing.
(Ord. 20.540-1, passed 9-22-2020)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in §
150.01 of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties.
      (1)   Violators of the state’s Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $100, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(KRS 318.990)
      (2)   Violators of the state’s Standards of Safety shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
      (3)   Violators of the Uniform State Building Code or the Uniform State
Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$10, nor more than $1,000, for each offense. Each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Violations of State Building or Residential Code; penalty, see KRS 227.990
(1)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas
   
151.08   Establishment of development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Interpretation
   
151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Enforcement; violation notice
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.25   Local Administrator; duties and responsibilities
   
151.26   Development permit
   
151.27   Appeals and variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General construction standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Standards for streams without established base flood elevation
(unnumbered A Zones) and/or floodways
   
151.43   Standards for shallow flooding zones
   
151.44   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
151.45   Standards for accessory structures in all zones beginning with the
letter “A”
   
151.46   Critical facilities
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the commonwealth has, in KRS 67.084, delegated to local
government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic
inundation which result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and by the location
in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding by
provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood height or velocity;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
areas.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such
a manner as lo minimize future flood-blighted areas caused by flooding;
   (G)   Ensure that potential homebuyers are on notice that property is in a
special flood hazard area; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the
principle source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination
of both. In A ZONES, flood waters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are
usually not a significant threat lo structures. Areas of 100-year flood, base
flood elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principle structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation and should be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use, which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   A1-30 AND AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual
chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
   AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one
and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
   AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between
one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are
shown.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.
   AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO AND AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) that result from the de-certification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-
year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
   A99 ZONE. The part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to
be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under
construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rale Map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three
feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   B AND X ZONES (SHADED). Areas of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood,
areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot
or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile, and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood, which has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.) BASE FLOOD is the
term used throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH and AR/AO
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1%
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all four sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally aboveground;
including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank or other human-made
facility or infrastructure. See definition for STRUCTURE.
   C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular
program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop
extra measures for protection from flooding.
   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the
Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated or qualified community
official) from available technical studies, historical information and other
available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by
flood waters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe
consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or
unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the
health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not
limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to
avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes,
hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, vehicle and
equipment storage facilities, emergency operations centers likely to be called
upon before, during and after a flood, public and private utility facilities
important to maintaining or restoring normal services before, during and after
a flood; and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials,
hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
piling, columns (post and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. (See
freeboard requirements for residential and non-residential structures.)
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized
rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date
of the initial FIRM.
   ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE)
used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage or access to the
structure.
   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMs
effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as
EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the county based on
specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of
special flood hazards.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD have a moderate to
low risk of flooding.
   FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOOD WATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows). See MUDSLIDES.
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See FLOOD-
RELATED EROSION.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (i.e., mud flow) and flood-related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and/or the Flood Boundary
Floodway Map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by flood waters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by a NFIP participating
community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing
natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency
preparedness plans, flood-control works, floodplain management ordinances and
open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of
police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification stating that a non-residential structure, together with attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities is water-tight to a specified design
elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and all structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated
debris impact forces.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory
floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/
or hydrologic analysis.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be applied not
just to the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofing level, but also to
the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as
building utilities, HVAC components and the like.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in §
151.27 of this chapter, the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the Fiscal Court
will consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to
government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100
years. Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those
increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or
port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality that
is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry).
   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result
from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or
misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL classification of
a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its
appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood-routing
capacity).
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).
      (1)   Increased cost of compliance coverage provides for the payment of a
claim for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws
or ordinances after a direct physical loss by flood. When a building covered by
a Standard Flood Insurance Policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the state
or community declares the building to be substantially or repetitively damaged,
ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the cost to elevate, flood-proof, demolish
or remove the building.
      (2)   ICC coverage is available on residential and non-residential
buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as
schools, libraries and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
   KRS 151.250. Plans for dams, levees and the like to be approved and permit
issued by the Cabinet (Environmental and Public Protection Cabinet).
       (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city,
county or other political subdivision of the state, including levee districts,
drainage districts, flood-control districts or systems or similar bodies, shall
commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement of any
dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other obstruction, except those
constructed by the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, in the floodplain or
floodway of any stream, unless the plans and specifications for such work have
been:
         (a)   Submitted by the person or political subdivision responsible for
the construction, reconstruction or improvement; and
         (b)   Approved in writing by the Cabinet and a permit issued.
         However, the Cabinet by administrative regulation may exempt those
dams, embankments or other obstructions that are not of such size or type as to
require approval by the Cabinet in the interest of safety or retention of water
supply.
       (2)   No person, city, county or other political subdivision of the
state shall commence the filing of, or place a building, barrier, or
obstruction of any sort in, any area in the floodplain or floodway, unless
plans and specifications for such work have been submitted to and approved by
the Cabinet and a permit issued as required in division (1) above.
       (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to give the Cabinet any
jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction, improvement,
enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district, ditch or system
established for agricultural purposes. However, the Cabinet may require
approval prior to construction of structures, dams, embankments, levees,
bridges, fill, or other construction related to agricultural operations that
impact the base flood of a stream.
      (4)   The Department for Natural Resources, through KRS Ch. 350, shall
have exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Ch. 151 concerning the regulation of dams,
levees, embankments, dikes, bridges, fills or other obstructions across or
along any stream or in the floodway of any stream which structures are
permitted under KRS Ch. 350 for surface coal-mining operations.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Studies. LOMCs include the following
categories.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA
amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is
not located in a SFHA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations and planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION - FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that a
structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill above
the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM.
      (1)   A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
      (2)   For a LEVEE SYSTEM to be recognized, the following criteria must be
met.
         (a)   All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage,
whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially
adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the
operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised).
         (b)   All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or
state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a
community participating in the NFIP.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant material, void
of utilities, except for essential lighting, and cannot be temperature
controlled.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support or
basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of
construction. It does not include earth that is displaced for aesthetic or
landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or
properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structure’s foundation
system.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including
basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME.
      (1)   A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built
on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities.
      (2)   The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar
transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
and intended to be improved property.
      (3)   The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational
vehicle”. (See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.)
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a letter
suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel. The
letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised.
(The letter “A” is not used by FEMA; the letter “B” is the first revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual cash value) or
adjusted assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of the
tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used
as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as
shown on a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is
synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures; and to minimize the costs of
disaster response and recovery.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUD FLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river,
flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (i.e, MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is
in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator
only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage
that occurs.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall
program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRMs. Refer to
FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the county’s floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the county’s adopted floodplain management ordinances.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools,
farm structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, warehouses and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less
than six months’ duration.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and Digitally Referenced FIRMs
(DFIRMs). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or
collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried
downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). (See BASE FLOOD.) The flood that
has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any
flood zone that begins with the letter “A” is subject to the 100-year flood.
Over the life of a 30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing such a
flood with the SFHA.
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate
in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that
are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before 12-31-1974, or before the effective date of the initial
FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
12-31-1974, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations. During periods of PROBATION, each insurance
policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management standards or of the standards of 44 C.F.R. §§
60.3, 60.4, 60.5 and/or 60.6.
   PUBLIC SAFELY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health
of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons,
or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of
any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light
duly truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where
more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher
amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
See BASE FLOOD.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or
other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of non-
compliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or
other development.
   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages
equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the structure,
beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or, four or more flood
losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or, three or more
flood losses over the life of the structure that are equal to or greater than
the current value of the structure.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., as amended, which states that no new or renewal
flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the
Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local
zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or
local laws, regulations or ordinances that are intended to discourage or
otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject to
inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a
FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO or AR.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. (Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development.) The date a building permit is issued; provided, the actual
START of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the
property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks or other human-made
facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease or development,
either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions or any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels.
   SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out
where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a
community or other third party.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
      (1)   Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the building prior to the damage occurring.
This term includes structures that are categorized as repetitive loss.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, “repair” is considered to
occur when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences.
      (3)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any combination of reconstruction, alteration or improvement to a
building, taking place during a one-year period in which the cumulative
percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the current market value of
the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
      (2)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions;
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided that, the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”; or
         (c)   Any building that has been damaged from any source or is
categorized as repetitive loss.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities
and pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and
pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure
to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for
participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.
   UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment.
   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with
this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials and other transportable materials drain or are
carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake
or underlying aquifer.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% probability of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. UNSHADED X ZONES (C zones on older
FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is
less than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or a Flood
Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), areas
applicable to KRS 51.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or
other delegated, designated or qualified community official as determined by
the Fiscal Court of the county from available technical studies, historical
information and other available and reliable sources, areas within the
jurisdiction of the Fiscal Court of the county which may be subject to periodic
inundation by flood waters that can adversely affect the public health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the county,
dated 4-18-2011, with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS), other
supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. This FIS and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may
be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this
chapter and which are recommended to the Fiscal Court by the Floodplain
Administrator and are enacted by the Fiscal Court pursuant to statutes
governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are permanent
records of the county and are on file and available for review by the public
during regular business hours at County Courthouse.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See §
151.26(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Fiscal Court from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Fiscal Court of the county, any
officer or employee, the commonwealth, the Federal Insurance Administration or
the Federal Emergency Management Agency thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.13 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is not in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying
with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any
approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
   (B)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duty authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or the property owner,
stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this chapter and/
or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be
remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with the
approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, which
period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the
violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may
include an order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state
that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and
corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary
fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed.
   (C)   Notice of citation.
      (1)   If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or agent of the
Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter including obtaining or complying with the terms and conditions of
a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications thereof, a duly
authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a citation to the
offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation issued, how the
violation is to be remedied to bring the development into conformity with this
chapter or with the approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy
is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are recommended.
      (2)   When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation is
issued shall respond to the citation within seven days of the date the citation
is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the
citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a
hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued
does not respond to the citation within seven days, that person shall be deemed
to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation
occurred shall be considered final.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.25 LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Fiscal Court of the county hereby appoints the Judge Executive or
designee to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter by
granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions, and
is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   (1)   The Floodplain Administrator and or staff is hereby appointed,
authorized and directed to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further authorized to render
interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
      (2)   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to the following:
         (a)   Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that:
            1.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
            2.   All other required state and federal permits have been
obtained: review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required
by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344;
            3.   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
            4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the
carrying capacity of affected watercourses. For purposes of this chapter,
ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
         (b)   Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer §§
151.40 through
151.46 of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the Fiscal
Court for adoption.
         (c)   Notification of other agencies.
            1.   Notify adjacent communities, the commonwealth’s Division of
Water and any other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory
authority prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse;
            2.   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
            3.   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
         (d)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
            1.   Certification required by §
151.41(B) of this chapter (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed and
certified elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
151.41(B) of this chapter;
            2.   Certification required by §
151.41(B) of this chapter (elevation or flood-proofing of non-residential
structures) as shown on a completed and certified flood-proofing certificate.
Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in
accordance with §
151.26(B) of this chapter;
            3.   Certification required by §
151.41 of this chapter (elevated structures);
            4.   Certification of elevation required by §
151.44 of this chapter (subdivision standards);
            5.   Certification required by §
151.41(E) of this chapter (floodway encroachments);
            6.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
            7.   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
            8.   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified
in §§
151.13 and
151.99 of this chapter.
         (e)   Map determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions.
            1.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
151.27(C)(2) of this chapter.
            2.   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonable utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
§§
151.40 through
151.46 of this chapter;
            3.   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure,
the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
151.41(B) of this chapter a flood-proofing certificate; and
            4.   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall
be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open
for public inspection.
         (f)   Right of entry.
            1.   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any
condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may enter such
building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or
perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.
            2.   If such structure or premises are occupied, he or she shall
first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure
or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request
entry.
            3.   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
            4.   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or
occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building,
structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the administrator for the
purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
         (g)   Stop work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on
any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in
writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her
agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed.
         (h)   Revocation of permits.
            1.   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued
under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or
plans on which the permit or approval was based.
            2.   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by
the Administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, installation or replacement of the structure for which the permit
was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of
this chapter.
         (i)   Liability. Any officer, employee or member of the Floodplain
Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for
the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his or her duties, shall
not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member because
of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter shall be defended by the Department of Law until the final termination
of the proceedings.
         (j)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain
construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the
holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced construction
within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.26 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or
other development begins within any special flood hazard area established in §
151.07 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Endorsement of local administrator is required before a state floodplain
construction permit can be processed.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and
elevation of highest adjacent grade;
         (b)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
non-residential structure will be flood-proofed;
         (c)   All appropriate certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the non-residential flood-proofed structure will
meet the flood-proofing criteria in §§
151.41(B) and
151.43(B) of this chapter; and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction
continues, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the
state a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or flood-proofed
elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In AE, A1-30, AH and A
Zones where the community has adopted a regulatory base flood elevation, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
         (b)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken
prior to the submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s
risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and flood-
proofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.27 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Nature of variances.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the Fiscal Court to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite
rare, The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The
criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The Fiscal Court of the
county shall establish an Appeal Board consisting of the county’s Board of
Adjustments.
   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.
      (1)   The Appeal Board shall bear and decide requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the local Circuit Court, as provided in
Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   (D)   Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by the
proposed facility;
      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case
of functionally dependent facility;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use lo the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and bridges.
   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary lo further the
purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation
from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the Fiscal Court need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the
applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which (the Fiscal Court believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the “minimum necessary” to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be
made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not
destroy the historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in §
151.05 of this chapter, under “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or
victimization of the public (as defined in §
151.05 of this chapter) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon request.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided that, the provisions of divisions (D)(1)
through (D)(11) above are satisfied and that the structure or other development
is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a
public nuisance.
   (F)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
and
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” (see definition) upon determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall not be
issued within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
   (B)   (1)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement.
      (2)   Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or fame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition
to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (F)   Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (G)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (H)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (I)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction”, as contained in this chapter.
   (K)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been
provided, as set forth in §
151.07 of this chapter, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, mechanical equipment and ductwork elevated no lower
than one feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter
walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of division (C) below.
      (1)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is specified.
      (2)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain Administrator will
determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods
include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses,
use of existing data available from other sources, use of historical data, best
supportable and reasonable judgment in the event no data can be produced. Title
401 KAR (Kentucky Administrative Regulations) Ch. 4, Regulation 060, states as
a part of the technical requirements for a state floodplain permit: the
applicant shall provide cross-sections for determining floodway boundaries (and
thereby base flood elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA
maps are not available. All cross-sections shall be referenced to mean sea
level and shall have vertical error tolerances of no more than +0.5 foot.
Cross-sections elevations shall be taken at those points which represent
significant breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of
the base floodplain change. Each cross-section shall extend across the entire
base floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by
the Cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not
occur, the cabinet may require additional cross-sections or specific site
elevations which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory flood
way boundary calculations.
      (3)   In all other zones, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the Community Building Inspection
Department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or non-residential structure
(including manufactured homes used for non-residential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (B)(1) below or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities:
      (1)   Be flood-proofed below an elevation one foot above the level of the
base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment and
ductwork, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation;
      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth herein;
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division (D) below;
and
      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage and which are
subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials below an
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation, and, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood water. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin
1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or
         (b)   Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
flood water.
   (C)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures on columns, posts or pilings (e.g., that include fully
enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base
flood elevation) shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls:
      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher
than the exterior foundation grade); and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters in
both directions.
      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   (a)   All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed
on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction,
including elevation and anchoring. Locations include:
            1.   On individual lots or parcels;
            2.   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
            3.   In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
            4.   In substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
            5.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; and
            6.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site
upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result
of a flood.
         (b)   All manufactured homes must be:
            1.   Elevated on a permanent foundation;
            2.   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above
the level of the base flood elevation; and
            3.   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (2)   Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as
a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that:
         (a)   The manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement,
so that either the:
            1.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or
            2.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less
than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
      (3)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A, A1-30,
AO, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) must either:
         (a)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this
chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements for “manufactured
homes”.
      (4)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed
and insured in accordance with the state’s motor vehicle regulations, is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
151.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with
supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base
flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood discharge; and
      (2)   If division (E)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
151.40 through
151.46 of this chapter.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.42 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
(UNNUMBERED A ZONES) AND/OR FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07 of this chapter, where streams exist, but where no base flood data has
been provided or where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the
following provisions apply.
   (A)   (1)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be
located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
      (2)   The engineering certification should be supported by technical data
that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles.
   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be
elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with §
151.07 of this chapter.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.43 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.
   (B)   These areas have flood hazards associated with base flood depths of
one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist and the water
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; therefore, the following
provisions apply.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO, the flood depth specified
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO,
if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
either the base flood elevation or in Zone AO the flood depth specified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if no
flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely flood-proofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in
Zone AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so
that any space below that level is water-tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in §
151.41(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.44 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available
(Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, shall be provided.
   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure
(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.45 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL ZONES BEGINNING WITH THE
LETTER “A”.
   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated “A”,
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;
   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade,
total openings are to be one square inch per one square foot of floor area, at
least two openings required on opposite walls;
   (D)   Built of flood resistant materials below a level one feet above the
base flood elevation;
   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking; and
   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.46 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of
new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the floodway; however,
they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the level of the base flood
elevation at the site. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into flood
waters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor civil offense. Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined no less than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and,
in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 10.630.1, passed 3-15-2011)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Purpose
   
152.002   Short title
   
152.003   Authority and administration
   
152.004   Area of jurisdiction
   
152.005   Definitions
   
152.006   Variances
   
152.007   Amendments
   
152.008   Violations
Minor Subdivision Plats; Approval Procedures
   
152.020   Purpose
   
152.021   Procedure for minor subdivision plats
   
152.022   Plat specifications for minor subdivisions
Major Subdivision Plats; Approval Procedures
   
152.035   Purpose
   
152.036   Pre-application conference
   
152.037   Preliminary plat procedure
   
152.038   Final plat procedure
Major Subdivisions; Plat Specifications
   
152.050   Purpose
   
152.051   Preliminary plat materials
   
152.052   Final plat materials
Minimum Design Standards
   
152.065   Purpose
   
152.066   Completion of improvements
   
152.067   Street design standards
   
152.068   Block design standards
   
152.069   Lot design standards
   
152.070   Easement design standards
   
152.071   Community facilities design standards
   
152.072   Other required improvements
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 PURPOSE.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.002 SHORT TITLE.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.003 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.004 AREA OF JURISDICTION.
   [Reserved]
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   [Reserved]
   BUILDING LINE. A line beyond which no building or part thereof shall
project, except as otherwise provided by this regulation.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the administrative officer allowing a
property owner or his or her agent to construct, alter or remove a building and
the like or engage in similar activity which would alter the character of the
lot in question.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building, including covered porches, carports and
attached garages in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it
is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed the
PRINCIPAL BUILDING on the lot on which it is situated.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the administrative officer
after building has taken place that certifies that the building meets minimum
standards for human occupancy and the plans on which the permit is issued.
   LOT. A piece, parcel or plot of land occupied by or to be occupied by one
principal building and its accessory buildings and including the open spaces
required under this regulation, and having its principal frontage on a street.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot that abuts on two intersecting streets at their
intersection.
      (2)   DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT. Any lot other than a corner lot that abuts on
two streets.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Those subdivisions of land that are of major significance
to the future development of the community, and shall include all subdivisions
that do not conform to the definitions established for minor subdivisions.
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS shall also be those subdivisions that create five or more
lots for sale or building development for the establishment of residential,
commercial or industrial activities. If the Commission determines that a minor
subdivision is of significant importance to the development of an area, the
subdivision may be treated as a MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Those subdivisions of land that are generally of
secondary planning significance to the area’s future development.
      (1)   CONSOLIDATION MINOR SUBDIVISIONS. Those subdivisions characterized
by the following.
         (a)   Adjoining properties. The subdivision shall be solely for
transferring a portion of a parcel or tract of land to an adjoining property
with which it is to be consolidated. Such adjoining property shall have a
common boundary with the parcel of land intended for transfer.
         (b)   Conformance to community plans. The subdivision shall be in
conformance with community development plans, implementation devices and other
applicable regulations or ordinances; including, among other considerations,
any necessary dedication for adequate street rights-of-way.
      (2)   BUILDING SITE MINOR SUBDIVISION. Those subdivisions characterized
by the following.
         (a)   Number of divisions. There shall be a maximum of four lots in a
building site minor subdivision.
         (b)   Access. All lots shall abut for at least 70 feet upon a street
dedicated for public use. If a new street is involved, the subdivision shall be
considered a major subdivision.
         (c)   Conformance to community plans. The subdivision shall be in
conformance with community development plans, implementation devices and other
applicable regulations or ordinances; including, among other considerations,
any necessary dedication for adequate street right-of-way.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable, single-family dwelling unit, eight feet or
more wide and more than 30 feet long suitable for year-round occupancy and
containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as
immobile housing.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership that has been
planned improved and is available for public use for the placement of two or
more mobile homes for non-transient use.
   STREET. A way set aside for vehicular traffic, regardless of size or
designations, excluding private driveways serving only one parcel of land.
      (1)   ALLEYS. Streets used primarily for vehicular service access to the
backs o the sides of properties which otherwise abut on streets.
      (2)   ARTERIAL STREETS. Streets designed or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic.
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets that carry or will carry intermediate
volumes of traffic from minor streets to arterial streets.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of a parcel of land into three or more lots or parcels
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building
development providing that a division of land for agricultural purposes, as per
KRS 100.111, into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new
street shall not be deemed a SUBDIVISION. The term includes a re-subdivision
and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision
or to the land subdivided as follows:
      (3)   Any division or re-division of land into parcels of less than one
acre occurring within five years, following a division of the same land shall
be deemed a SUBDIVISION within the meaning of this act.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 8-23-1988; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord.
passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.006 VARIANCES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   These land subdivision regulations are adopted as minimum
requirements, and all developers should consider developing their subdivisions
at higher standards. Thus, the developer Is encouraged to go beyond the
requirements of these regulations and the Planning Commission may require
standards above the minimum contained herein, whenever it feels that public
health, safety or welfare purposes justify such increases.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may also reduce or otherwise vary the
requirements of these regulations whenever it encounters the situations
described below. In granting such variances, the Commission may attach and
require whatever conditions it feels are necessary to secure the basic
objectives of the regulations.
   (B)   Exceptional conditions. When the Commission finds that strict
application of these regulations would result in extreme physical difficulties
because of exceptional and unique topographic or other physical conditions, the
Commission may modify these regulations to the extent necessary to provide
relief from the undue hardship; provided, however, that, such relief may be
granted, without detriment to the public welfare and substantially impairing
the intent and purpose of these regulations. In granting such variances or
modifications, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will
substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied
or modified. A financial disadvantage to the property owner is no proof of
hardship within the purpose of these regulations.
   (C)   Design innovation and large scale development. These regulations may
be modified by the Planning Commission in the case of plans for cluster
development, planned unit development or other design innovations which, in the
Commission’s opinion, achieve the basic objectives of these regulations. The
Commission may require such conditions, as it deems necessary to secure the
objectives of these regulations.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.007 AMENDMENTS.
   The Commission may revise, modify or amend these regulations by appropriate
action taken at regularly scheduled meeting after the required notice and
public hearing.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.008 VIOLATIONS.
   The following violations and penalties are hereby cited from KRS Ch. 100.
   (A)   No subdivision of land before approval. No person or his or her agent
shall subdivide any land before securing the approval of the Planning
Commission of a plat designating the area to be subdivided.
   (B)   No selling of land before approval. No person owning land composing a
subdivision, or his or her agent, shall transfer or sell or agree to sell any
lot or parcel of land located within a subdivision by reference to, or by
exhibition, or by any other use of a plat of such subdivision, before such plat
has received final approval of the Planning Commission and recorded by the
County Clerk. However, subdivision plats recorded prior to establishment of
these regulations shall be exempted. Any such instrument of transfer, sale or
contract shall be void and shall not be subject to being recorded.
   (C)   Metes and bounds descriptions. The description of lots or parcels by
metes and bounds in any contract or instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not exempt the person
attempting to transfer from penalties provided or deprive the purchaser of any
right or remedies he or she may otherwise have.
   (D)   No recording before approval. No plat of a subdivision of land shall
be recorded by the County Clerk until the plat has been approved by the
Commission and the approved entered thereon in writing by the Chairperson of
the Commission.
   (E)   Injunction. The Planning Commission shall have the power to apply for
an injunction against any type of subdivision constructed by a subdivider or a
landowner where the subdivision regulations have been violated.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS; APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 152.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish special requirements to
expedite the preparation and processing of minor subdivision plats.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.021 PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   The following procedures shall be followed in the processing of all minor
subdivision plats.
   (A)   Plat preparation. A plat suitable for recording shall be prepared by a
licensed surveyor or registered engineer, after the developer has communicated
with the administrative officer to determine if the proposed subdivision
qualities as a minor subdivision.
   (B)   Submission. The developer shall submit two copies of the original plat
to the Commission, together with fee of $50.
   (C)   Administrative official’s review. The administrative official shall
review the plat for conformance to all applicable regulations, mark the copies
where any necessary changes are required and return one copy to the developer.
During review process, the administrative official will secure comments from
other concerned agencies.
   (D)   Planning Commission review. When the plat conforms to these
regulations, it shall be submitted to the Commission for the necessary
approval, conditional approval with conditions attached, postponement or
disapproval. The Commission may delegate this review procedure to the
administrative officer.
   (E)   Signing by Chairperson. When the plat fully conforms to these
regulations, the Chairperson of the Commission or his or her authorized
representative shall sign the Commission’s certification on the plat to signify
the Commission’s approval and make it eligible for recording.
   (F)   Copies required. After signing of the plat by the Chairperson of the
Commission or this authorized representative, and before the approval plat is
returned to the developer, the developer shall have five copies of the plat
made and delivered to the Commission. The approved plat may then be returned to
the developer.
   (G)   Recording. After the commission’s approval of the plat, the signed
plat shall be recorded in the exact form as previously approved, or the
approval becomes null and void.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.022 PLAT SPECIFICATIONS FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   Minor subdivision plats shall be prepared according to the following
specifications. In addition to the plat, the Planning Commission, if necessary,
may require improvement drawings.
   (A)   Material and size. Plats submitted to the Planning Commission shall be
of good quality and contain neat and legible information. The plats shall not
be larger than 22 inches by 34 inches or less.
   (B)   Title block. The title block shall be placed at the lower right-hand
corner of the sheet and shall include the name of the subdivision as
“consolidation” (or building site) plat of the (name of property). The title
block shall also contain the following information: names and mailing addresses
of the owner and the engineer or surveyor; graphic scale; written scale; date
of preparation; and other pertinent legend information as may be required by
the Commission.
   (C)   Location sketch. A location sketch shall be placed in the upper left-
hand corner of the sheet, and shall show the relationship of the property being
subdivided (drafted in solid black) to a sufficient number of streets or
highways in the area to enable one to quickly recognize the area in which the
subdivision is located.
   (D)   Land subdivision plan. The land subdivision plan shall be placed in
the center of the plat and shall show the boundaries of the subdivision in a
heavy and solid line. The following information shall also be placed on the
plat: acreage in the subdivision; names or rights-of-way; pavement width of all
streets which abut, adjoin or are included within the subdivision; width and
location of all easements; and building setback lines.
      (1)   All subdivision boundaries and lot lines shall be surveyed in the
field and accurate bearings and dimensions shall be placed on all boundary
lines. The scale of the drawing shall be one inch equals 100 feet, when
possible.
      (2)   All adjoining properties shall have their intersections with the
subdivision illustrated by dashed lines, and the name of the adjacent property
owners shall be placed on the plat. The record plat or deed book and page
numbers of all properties to be subdivided shall also be shown.
   (E)   Consolidation of property. When a portion of a tract of land is
transferred to an adjoining property, the dimensions of the remaining property
from which the portion was transferred shall be placed on the plat.
   (F)   Certification block. The certification block shall be placed at the
bottom of the plat and next to the title block or attached to the plat. It
shall contain the following signed certifications: owner’s certification,
engineer’s or land surveyor’s certification, Commissions’ certification. All
certifications shall be in accordance with Appendix I, attached to the
ordinance codified herein and incorporated herewith.
   (G)   Physical improvements. When required by the Commission, the physical
improvements shall conform to the improvement requirements of other articles
herein.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS; APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 152.035 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the procedure that shall be
followed by the developer and the Planning Commission in preparing, reviewing
and approving all subdivision plats (except for minor subdivision plats for
which different procedures or requirements are established in §§
152.020 through
152.022 of this chapter).
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.036 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   General. The developer shall arrange a conference with the
administrative official before a preliminary plat is submitted. The purpose of
the conference is to afford the developer an opportunity to avail himself or
herself of the assistance of the administrative official and/or the Commission
before he prepares a preliminary plan and makes formal application for its
approval. This procedure will reduce the number of unnecessary and costly
changes that are often required when a plat is submitted to review before the
administrative official has had an opportunity to review it.
   (B)   Sketch plan. The developer should have a rough sketch plan prepared
before the pre-application conference to show the boundaries of the tract, the
proposed street and lot arrangement and other pertinent information.
   (C)   Office visit. The developer should then visit the administrative
official’s office and informally discuss his or her ideas with the
administrative official. This informal discussion shall not constitute a formal
application and will be considered confidential. The developer should also
consult with the utility companies and other local agencies at this time. If a
developer does not have a sketch plan, but would like to discuss certain
general ideas with the administrative official, he or she should feel free to
visit the administrative official’s office and discuss these ideas.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.037 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE.
   All subdivision plats shall receive their first official consideration as
preliminary plats. No developer shall proceed with any construction work
including grading, before a plat has been given preliminary approval. The
following procedures shall be required during the preliminary plat procedure.
   (A)   Design plans. The developer shall have a registered surveyor,
registered engineer, landscape architect, architect or community planner
(provided that, engineering data are supplied by a registered engineer or
surveyor for landscape architects, architects and community planners) prepare
the preliminary plat in conformance with the format, design and improvement
requirements of these regulations. Utility companies and concerned city and
county agencies should be consulted before the preliminary plat is prepared.
   (B)   Formal application and submission. A completed application secured
from the administrative official’s office and six prints of the preliminary
plat (including improvement drawings and other required preliminary plat
information), together with the payment of a $75 fee, submitted to the
administrative official shall constitute an application for formal action on
the preliminary plat. For maximum assurance that a plat will receive Commission
consideration at a certain meeting, the plats must be submitted at least 14
days before such meeting.
   (C)   Distribution and review of plats. The administrative official shall
make copies of the preliminary plats available to all concerned city and county
agencies. The plats will be reviewed and the administrative official will
summarize all recommendations for presentation to the Commission.
   (D)   Planning Commission review. The Commission shall consider no
preliminary plat for action until the administrative official has reviewed the
plats. After review and recommendation by the administrative official, the
Commission will review all recommendations and then decide upon their own
recommendation that may include approval of the plat, conditional approval with
conditions noted, postponement or disapproval.
      (1)   Notification of action. After Commission action, the administrative
official shall mark two copies of the plat in conformance with the Commission’s
actions. The administrative official shall notify the developer of the
Commission’s action and request him or her to pick up his or her plat.
      (2)   Approval. The developer is authorized to proceed with physical
improvements in the proposed subdivision and to proceed with the preparation of
the final plats. Lots shall not be sold until a final plat has been approved.
      (3)   Conditional approval. The developer may proceed as outlined above
in divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) above, but only after corrected preliminary
plats have been submitted to the administrative official.
      (4)   Postponement. Action is delayed for definite reasons that shall be
noted by the Commission.
      (5)   Disapproval. The denial of approval for the submitted plat. Before
further action can occur, the developer must revise his or her plat to conform
to the Commission’s requirements.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.038 FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE.
   All subdivision plats shall receive their second and last consideration as
final plats. No developer shall sell or agree to sell any lot until after a
final plat has been approved. The following procedure shall be required for all
final plats.
   (A)   Design plans. The developer shall have a registered surveyor or
engineer prepare a final plat in conformance with the format, design and
improvement requirements of these regulations. The final plat is a legal record
of the subdivisions as surveyed in the field and must agree with the approved
preliminary plan; except that, final plans covering a portion of the approved
preliminary plat may be submitted.
   (B)   Time lapse. Unless a time extension has been requested by the
developer and granted by the Commission, all final plats shall be submitted
within 12 months of the approval date of the preliminary plat If a time period
in excess of 12 months elapses, the preliminary plat must be re-submitted and
approved before final plat approval can be considered.
   (C)   Material to be submitted. The developer must submit the following
final plat materials. For maximum assurance that a plat will be considered at a
certain Commission meeting, the plat materials must be submitted at least 14
days prior to such meeting.
      (1)   Subdivision plats. Six prints of the plat showing the manner in
which the land is proposed to be subdivided and legally recorded shall be
presented to the administrative official. The plats shall be in conformance
with specifications outlined in §§
152.050  through
152.052  of this chapter.
      (2)   Bond for physical improvements. The Commission shall have no
obligation to allow developers to post surety bonds in lieu of completed
physical improvements, but it may permit said bond if it so desires. When bonds
are permitted, the developer shall submit his or her cost estimates to the
administrative official to cover the full cost of all physical improvements.
The developer shall then post a surety bond with the staff, running to the
Planning Commission for and on behalf of the Planning commission. A time period
of one year shall be allowed for construction of the improvements.
   (D)   Distribution and review of plats. The Commission’s staff shall make
copies of the final plat available to all concerned city and county agencies.
The plats will be reviewed and the administrative official will summarize all
recommendations for presentation in the Commission.
   (E)   Planning Commission review. The Commission shall consider no final
plats for action until the staff has reviewed them. After review and
recommendations by the administrative official, the Commission will review all
recommendations and then decide upon its own recommendation that may include
approval of the plat, conditional approval with conditions noted postponement
or disapproval.
   (F)   Notification of action. After Commission action, the administrative
official shall mark two copies of the plat in conformance with Commission’s
action. The administrative official shall notify the developer of the
Commission’s action and request him or her to pick up his or her plat.
      (1)   Approval. The Chairperson of the Commission has signed means the
final plat or his or her authorized representative and may be recorded. After
recording, the developer may sell or agree to sell lots by reference to the
approved and recorded final plat, Commission approval shall not be deemed to
constitute or effect an acceptance by the city or county of the dedication of
any street or other proposed space offered for dedication, since such
acceptance is the prerogative of the city and county legislative bodies.
      (2)   Conditional approval. The developer may proceed as outlined above
in division (F)(1) above, but only after he has met the conditions attached to
the approval.
      (3)   Postponement. The Commission has deterred action until some fixture
Commission meeting in order that certain clarification can be made in regard to
the plat.
      (4)   Disapproval. Complete denial of the final plat. To request review
and action, the developer must revise his or her plat to conform to Commission
requirements and resubmit a new set of final plats.
   (G)   Recording final plat. Within 90 days of the Commission’s approval,
unless a time extension has been granted by the Commission previous to the
expiration date, a certified copy of the final plat shall be filed for
recording in the County Clerk’s office. The Commission’s action is also voided
if the certified plat is altered in any manner (except for Commission
requirements) between the date of the Commission approval and recording.
   (H)   Release of bond. If a surety performance bond has been permitted by
the Commission, its release shall be approved by the Commission after all
improvements, in the opinion of the administrative official, have been
satisfactorily completed.
   (I)   Private engineer’s inspection. Before the surety performance bond is
released, the developer’s engineer must certify that all physical improvements
have been completed and are in full conformance with the Commission’s
regulations.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS; PLAT SPECIFICATIONS
§ 152.050 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to describe the content and format
of required plat materials and the information that the plats must contain.
Conformance to these requirements will provide for the expedient processing of
plats.
   (B)   All plans shall adhere to these specifications unless the Commission
grants permission for modifications due to unusual or special circumstances.
The Commission’s shall return plans that are flagrantly or repeatedly lacking
the required data to the developer staff immediately after the absence of data
is apparent.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.051 PRELIMINARY PLAT MATERIALS.
   The preliminary plat material shall consist of three categories of materials
as explained below. Other materials as explained below. Other materials may be
submitted by the developer or may be required by the Planning Commission.
   (A)   Restrictive covenants. When the developer proposes to regulate land
use in a subdivision and otherwise protect a development, one draft copy of
such covenants shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plat materials.
   (B)   Land subdivision plat. Six prints of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted on sheet sizes of 24 inches by 36 inches or less unless the
administrative official grants permission for other sizes because of unusual or
special circumstances. If necessary, more than one sheet may be used if a key
map is prepared to relate each sheet to the entire subdivision. The information
required on the preliminary plats shall be positioned in the following manner.
      (1)   Title block. The title block should be placed on the lower right-
hand corner of the sheet, and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name. The name of the proposed subdivision, which
shall not duplicate or approximate the name of any other subdivision in the
county;
         (b)   Property identification. The record name and matting address of
the property being subdivided;
         (c)   Identification. The record name and mailing address of the
property owner and the developer’s engineer; and
         (d)   Legend information. Graphic scale, written scale, north point
date of preparation and other pertinent legend data.
      (2)   Location sketch. A sketch showing the general location of the
subdivision shall be placed in the upper right-hand corner of the sheet. The
location sketch shall be drawn at a scale large enough to show the proposed
subdivision’s relationship to existing and proposed features such as major
traffic arteries, schools, recreation areas, shopping areas and industrial
areas.
      (3)   Lot design. The design scheme shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet
or less to the inch, and the following existing conditions and proposed
development features shall be illustrated:
         (a)   Boundary lines. The location, distance and bearings of the
boundary lines;
         (b)   Streets. Street names, right-of-way widths and approximate
grades shall be shown on all streets adjacent to and within the proposed
subdivision;
         (c)   Utilities. The location and size of all utilities and easements
adjacent to and within the proposed subdivision;
         (d)   Topography. Contours with ten-foot intervals;
         (e)   Subsurface conditions. When required, results of tests made to
ascertain soil percolation quality if individual disposal systems are proposed;
         (f)   Other conditions on the tract. Such as watercourses, marshes,
wooded areas, isolated preferable trees and houses or barns and other
significant features that will be retained or removed;
         (g)   Conditions on adjacent land. Such as approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope; railroads, commercial areas and other nearby non-
residential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent, unplatted
land; subdivision names of adjacent platted land; perimeter lotting and typical
lot size in adjacent subdivisions;
         (h)   Proposed development on tract. The following information on
proposed development shall be shown;
         (i)   Streets. The proposed names, right-of-way and pavement widths
and approximate grades and direction thereof;
         (j)   Other rights-of-way or easements. The location, width and
purpose;
         (k)   Lots and setback lines. The location and approximate distances
of all lot lines. Lot numbers shall also be shown;
         (l)   Setback lines. The location of proposed building setback lines
with dimensions showing the setback from the street rights-of-way;
         (m)   Public sites. The name, acreage and use of any sites proposed
for public use, such as parks, playgrounds and school sites; and
         (n)   Multi-family and non-residential uses. The acreage and use of
non-public uses, such as multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, churches and
the like.
   (C)   Other materials. When the tract shown on the subdivision plans
represents only a portion of the developer’s holding, and additional sketch
shall be required to illustrate the proposed street layout for the remainder of
the tract.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.052 FINAL PLAT MATERIALS.
   The final plat materials shall consist of three groups of materials;
restrictive covenants; plat for recording; and as built improvement
construction drawings. Other materials may be submitted by the developer or
required by the Commission.
   (A)   Restrictive covenants. When the developer intends to regulate land use
in a subdivision and otherwise protect the development, two copies of
restrictive covenants shall be submitted as part of the final plat materials.
   (B)   Plat for recording. A legible plat suitable for recording with an
overall sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches or less shall be prepared. If
necessary, more than one sheet may be used if a key map is shown to relate each
sheet to the entire platted area. The developer shall submit three prints of
this plat when he or she makes application for final approval. The information
required on this sheet should be positioned in the title block, certificate
block, location sketch or on the lot design scheme as follows:
      (1)   Title block. The title block should be place on the bottom of the
sheet and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name. The name of the subdivision and where the
proposed final plat is a portion of a larger subdivision bearing the same name,
the section number of other positive identification. A subdivision name shall
not duplicate or closely approximate any other subdivision name in the county;
         (b)   Person identification. The names and mailing addresses of the
following: the property owner; developer; and developer’s engineer; and
         (c)   Legend information. The graphic scale, north point, date of
preparation and other pertinent legend information.
      (2)   Certification block. The certification block should be placed on
the bottom of the sheet at the end of the title block or attached to the plat,
and shall contain the following certification with signatures:
         (a)   Owner’s certification;
         (b)   Engineer’s certification;
         (c)   Commission’s certification; and
         (d)   Public water certification.
      (3)   Certifications. All certifications shall be in accordance with
Appendix II, attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated
herewith.
      (4)   Location sketch. A sketch showing the general location of the
subdivision in relation to the surrounding area should be placed in the upper
right or left-hand corner of the sheet. The location sketch shall be drawn at
the scale large enough to show the proposed subdivision’s relationship to
existing and proposed community features such as major traffic arteries,
schools, recreation areas, shopping areas and industrial areas.
      (5)   Lot design. The design scheme shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet
or less to the inch, and shall show the following information for the proposed
subdivision and adjacent land:
         (a)   Streets on adjacent land. The exact location of streets on
adjacent land, and with width along the property lines for all existing or
recorded streets intersecting or paralleling and boundaries of the proposed
subdivision;
         (b)   Owners of adjacent land. For adjacent land which is platted,
show the boundaries with dashed lines, the record name, date of recording and
plat book and page number. For adjacent land that is unplatted, show the name
(s) of record;
         (c)   Boundary lines of tract. In a line style and weight which will
distinguish the developer’s property from all adjacent property, show the tract
boundary lines with lengths to hundredths of a foot and bearings to the nearest
minute. These boundaries shall be determined from an accurate survey in the
field;
         (d)   Monuments. Show the accurate location and material of all
permanent reference monuments;
         (e)   Streets, easements and lot lines. For street rights-of-way show
the names, bearings, angles of intersection, right-of-way and pavement widths;
for all arcs show the length, radii, points of curvature and tangent bearings;
for all easements or other rights-of-way show the locations, widths and
purposes; for lot lines show dimensions in feet to hundredths of a foot and
bearings to the nearest minute, as well as interior angles of all lots;
         (f)   Lot numbers. Lot numbers shall be shown and numbered in
numerical order; and
         (g)   Reservations and dedications. Show the accurate outline of all
property which is either offered for dedication to public use or which is
reserved by covenant in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in
the subdivision with the purpose plainly thereon.
      (6)   Construction drawings. Two copies of these drawings shall be
submitted to the City or County Engineer (whichever has jurisdiction) or the
administrative official on a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches. The drawings
shall be referenced to the name and unit number of the proposed subdivision,
and shall show the following information:
         (a)   Street profiles. The profile of each street indicating the
existing ground surface and the grade of the new street surfaces at a
horizontal scale equal to the horizontal scale of the record plat, and a
vertical scale of one-tenth of the horizontal scale, with final grades
indicated; and
         (b)   Street cross-sections. A cross-section of each new street shall
be shown at a scale of ten feet or less to the inch, and shall include the
width of pavement, and location and width of sidewalks, and the location and
utilities.
      (7)   Other materials. In addition to other sketches or materials which
may be required by the Planning Commission, the following shall apply to surety
performance bonds and recording of plats.
         (a)   City (County) Engineer’s inspection. After completing all
improvements, the developer shall notify the City (County) Engineer or the
administrative official that the improvements are ready for final inspection.
         (b)   Engineer’s notification to Commission. If the City (County)
Engineer or the administrative official finds the improvements are complete in
conformance with Commission requirements, he or she shall notify the
Commission’s staff by letter and recommend the release of the bond. Conversely,
if the date of completion has passed and the improvements are not completed in
accordance with Commission requirements, the Engineer shall notify the
Commission and recommend that the bonding company be notified to complete the
required work within a specified period.
         (c)   Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall then
act on the Engineer’s or the administrative official’s recommendation and
either release the bond and/or call for completion of the required
improvements.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.065 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the minimum design standards
and the minimum standards to which developers shall conform in providing and
constructing physical improvements within a subdivision.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.066 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Unless the Planning Commission approves a surety performance bond, all
required improvements shall be completed prior to final plat approval.
   (B)   (1)   With the Commission’s approval, the developer, in lieu of
completing the improvements as stated above, shall furnish the Commission with
either a surety performance bond or an escrow account in a local tending
institution running to the Planning Commission for and on behalf of the
Planning Commission.
      (2)   The bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of all required
improvements to be installed by the subdivider.
   (C)   The required improvements shall be installed by the developer at his
or her expense in accordance with the specifications of the official or
agencies having jurisdiction. Improvements exceeding these minimum requirements
must be reviewed by the Commission and may be provided by the developer or
required by the Commission.
   (D)   All physical improvements shall be installed under the direction and
supervision of the developer’s engineer.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.067 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Streets within or adjacent to a proposed subdivision shall be classified
according to one or more of the classifications noted below, and physical
improvements and design standards shall be required in accordance with the
fallowing standards.
   (A)   Right-of-way and pavement width.
Street Type Minimum Dedicated Right-of-Way Width Minimum Pavement Width
Street Type            Minimum Dedicated Right-of-Way Minimum Pavement Width
                       Width
Alley                  20 feet                        20 feet
Arterial street        80 feet                        44 feet
Collector street       60 feet                        36 feet
Limited access highway 120 feet                       44 feet
Marginal access street 20 feet                        20 feet
Minor street           40 feet                        24 feet
NOTES TO TABLE:
The major street plan may indicate greater right-of-way widths for certain
limited access and arterial streets, but in no case shall the subdivider be
required to dedicate more than 80 feet for any one street.
 
   (B)   Base course. The base course shall consist of dense graded aggregate,
as defined in Art. 3.3.2-A of Kentucky Department of Highways Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2007 Edition, as revised and
amended. The base course shall be bonded with water and rolled to a smooth
surface.
   (C)   Surface. The surface shall consist of 200 pounds per square yard of
State Department of Highways Class I, Type B, bituminous concrete (using P.A.C.
5 or P.A.C. 7 bitumen), as defined in Art. 4.3.4-A-3 of Kentucky Department of
Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2007
Edition, as revised and amended, or a comparable surface approved by the
Planning Commission.
   (D)   Drainage. The proposed layout and design of streets and lots within a
shall be conductive to proper drainage patterns.
   (E)   Conformity to major street plan. The location of all streets in a
proposed subdivision shall conform in general alignment to the major street
plan.
   (F)   Street continuity. The proposed street layout shall provide for the
continuation of existing streets to adjoining tracts, unless the Planning
Commission deems such extension undesirable for specific reasons of topography
or design. Where it is desirable, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, to
provide street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended
by dedication to the boundary of such property.
   (G)   Relation to topography. Streets shall be designed with respect to
topography to produce the most usable and properly situated lots, provide
proper drainage for storm water and produce proper grades.
   (H)   Street names. Proposed streets in alignment with existing streets
should bear the name of the existing street. When streets are not in alignment,
no names shall be used which would duplicate or be confused with names of
existing streets.
   (I)   Conflicting traffic or land use. When a proposed subdivision contains
or is adjacent to existing or proposed railroad right-of-way, other significant
rights-of-way or conflicting and detrimental land uses, the Planning Commission
may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots, lots with rear
service alleys, lots with additional depth or other measures which may be
necessary for protection of abutting properties and the maintenance or junction
of major traffic arteries.
   (J)   Portions of streets (proposed). New half or partial streets shall not
be permitted. The entire minimum right-of-way shall be dedicated when a
proposed subdivision is located on one or both sides of a street.
   (K)   Existing deficient street rights-of-way. Subdivisions platted along
existing streets should dedicate additional right-of-way, if necessary, to meet
the minimum width requirements specified in these regulations.
   (L)   Reserve strips and private streets. There shall be no reserve strips
or private streets platted within a subdivision.
   (M)   Oversized improvements. When street rights-of-way or improvements are
required in excess of what is necessary to meet the demands of the subdivision
under consideration, the Commission should require dedication or improvement
costs of the developer only to the extent required by his or her subdivision.
The appropriate authorities should be encouraged to finance the acquisition or
cost of the additional improvements.
   (N)   Street intersections. Minimum standards for intersection design are as
follows.
      (1)   Number of approaches. Intersections involving more than four basic
street approaches shall be prohibited. Merging lanes, deceleration lanes, “Y”
intersections and the like are not in this prohibition and are considered as
parts of one-street approach.
      (2)   Angle of intersection. For a tangent distance of at least 100 feet,
measured from the intersection of right-of-way lines, all streets should
intersect at an angle of 90 degrees. In no case should the angle of
intersection be less than 75 degrees.
      (3)   Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150
feet should not be made.
      (4)   Excessive grades at intersections. When a street grade at the
approach to an intersection exceeds 3%, a leveling area shall be provided with
grades of not greater than 3% for a distance of 50 feet from the intersection
of street centerlines. Vertical curves shall then be used to connect the
intersecting grades.
   (O)   Minimum property line radii. At street intersections, the minimum
radius at property lines shall be 20 feet for all streets.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.068 BLOCK DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be observed in the design of blocks.
   (A)   Residential block length. Intersecting streets shall be provided at
such intervals as necessary to meet existing street patterns, topography and
standards required for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation. Blocks should not, however, exceed 1,600 feet in length, nor be
less than 500 feet in length.
   (B)   Residential block width. The width of blocks shall be sufficient to
provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.
   (C)   Non-residential blocks. Blocks intended for non-residential uses shall
be of such length width, and other design as the Commission finds necessary for
the prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking,
loading and unloading, and limitation and control of vehicular access points to
adjacent streets.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.069 LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be required in the design of lots.
   (A)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall be of sufficient width to permit
compliance with the required minimum setback line. In order to comply with the
additional width requirement and continue the same size homes as are on
adjoining lots, corner lots shall be increased to whatever width is necessary.
   (B)   Lot lines. Side lot tines shall be at right angles to straight street
centerlines and radial to curved street centerlines. Rear lot lines should
consist of straight lines with a minimum number of deflections, where
practical.
   (C)   Access. Lots less than 100 feet in width shall have no more than one
point of access to any one public street. There shall be no more than two
points of access to one public street on a lot of less than 400 feet, but more
than 100 feet in width. Lots in excess of 400 feet may have two points of
access to any one public street for each 400 feet of frontage.
      (1)   No point of access shall be allowed within ten feet of the
intersection of the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets.
      (2)   No curbs on city streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered
without written approval of the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   A point of access shall not exceed 20 feet in width for one way
and/or lane ingress or egress. Two-way access points shall not exceed 35 feet
in width.
   (D)   Lot dimensions.
      (1)   Lots located in areas where a zoning ordinance is in effect shall
conform to the zoning regulations’ lot size requirement, except residential
lots not served by public sewer, shall be at least 80 feet wide and 20,000
square feet in area. (Where no zoning ordinance is in effect, residential lots
served by public sewer shall be at least 70 feet wide and 7,500 square feet in
area.) Residential lots not served by public sewer shall be at least 80 feet
wide and 20,000 square feet in area.
      (2)   A greater lot area than specified above may be required for
residential lots if, in the opinion of the county’s Health Officer, there are
factors of drainage, soil conditions or other conditions to cause potential
health problems.
   (E)   Building setback line. Lots located in areas where a zoning ordinance
is in effect shall conform to the zoning regulations. Where no zoning ordinance
is in effect, the minimum building setback line for the right-of-way shall be
at least one-half of the total width of the street right-of-way. In no instance
shall this distance be less than 35 feet unless waived by the Commission.
   (F)   Development of hazardous areas. When lots are located on land which is
subject to flooding subsidence, or other hazards injurious to the health and
safety of potential users, and when such hazards cannot be eliminated or
adequate safeguards provided to protect the health and safety of potential
users, the Planning Commission may declare such land to be unsuitable for
subdividing and disapprove such plans or portions thereof.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.070 EASEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Utilities. Easements 12 feet in width may be required between, at the
rear, or in front of lots, whenever necessary. Easement of greater width may be
required if necessary for the extension of water and sewer lines or other
utilities.
   (B)   Storm water drainage easement. Storm water easements or drainage
rights-of-way may be required by the Planning Commission if necessary for
proper drainage within or through a subdivision.
   (C)   Connection to existing easements. When necessary, utility and drainage
easements shall connect with existing easements on adjoining property.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.071 COMMUNITY FACILITIES DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Assessing the need for community facilities. During the review of
subdivision plats, the Planning Commission shall consider the adequacy of
existing or proposed community facilities which will serve the additional
population to be housed in a proposed subdivision. Subdivides shall consider
dedicating or reserving land for facilities that will be needed in a
subdivision, such as public buildings, recreational areas and shopping
facilities.
   (B)   Adequacy of such areas. Areas provided or reserved for such community
facilities shall be adequate for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.072 OTHER REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Water supply system. Where public water supply, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall construct a
complete water distribution system, having a minimum of a six-inch main line
and including a connection for each lot. Appropriately spaced fire hydrants
shall be required when the water flow meets ISO flow requirements. In the event
ISO flow requirements are not met, then the Planning Commission, in its
discretion, may order the installation of fire hydrants should they believe
that at a future time water pressure would be adequate. In the event a public
water supply is not within a reasonable distance, then the subdivider shall
provide the lots with an alternate water supply that shall be approved by the
county’s Health Officer.
   (B)   Storm drainage. Adequate provisions for storm water drainage shall be
provided in accordance with standards specified by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Sanitary sewers. Where the public sanitary sewer system, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, is reasonably accessible, sanitary sewers
shall be installed to adequately serve all lots with connections to the public
system; approval of the size line will be obtained from the Engineer. Where
lots cannot be served by the extension of an existing public sanitary sewer,
the subdivider shall obtain approval of lot sizes from the county’s Health
Officer for individual septic tanks and disposal fields, or approval of a
neighborhood disposal system.
   (D)   Electric supply system. Provision shall be made in every subdivision
for a satisfactory electric supply system. Every consideration should be given
to the possibility of underground installation of all necessary wires.
   (E)   Monuments.
      (1)   Concrete monuments. Two concrete monuments at least 36 inches in
length and four inches square with a suitable center point shall be set on at
least two corners of the boundary of a subdivision, as required by a certified
Engineer.
      (2)   Iron pin monuments. Iron pin monuments three-fourths’ inch in
diameter and at least 24 inches long shall be placed at all points on boundary
lines where there is a change of direction and at all lot comers. These pins
shall be placed only after all grading and other construction have been
completed.
   (F)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required on lots abutting a public access
and shall have a minimum width of four feet.
   (G)   Intent. It is not the intent of these regulations to impose
prohibitive or unduly restrictive requirements upon subdivision development,
but rather to promote orderly growth and progressive development as herein
above set out, and in determining the adequacy of storm water drainage and
whether or not public water supply and public sanitary sewers are reasonably
accessible, due consideration will be given to economic factors involved,
including relative cost of connection to public water system compared to
separate water distribution system, and relative costs of installation of
individual septic tank and disposal field or neighborhood disposal system as
compared to connection with public system and installation of sanitary sewer
system.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity who violates any of these provisions or any of
the regulations adopted pursuant hereunder for which no other penalty is
provided, shall upon conviction be fined not less than $10, but no more than
$500, for each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   Any person, owner or agent who violates this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500, for each lot or
parcel which was the subject of sale or transfer, or a contract for sale or
transfer.
(Ord. passed 10- -1977; Ord. passed 1-6-1998; Ord. passed 11-12-2001)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Goals
   
153.002   Objectives
   
153.003   Authority
   
153.004   Title
   
153.005   Interpretation
   
153.006   Definitions
   
153.007   Legal status; minimum requirements
   
153.008   Schedule of fees
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.020   Zoning administration
   
153.021   Building permits
   
153.022   Grievance procedure
   
153.023   Amendments
Variances
   
153.035   Generally
   
153.036   Conditions which warrant a variance
   
153.037   Variance for multi-building development
   
153.038   Variances which are prohibited
   
153.039   Granting a variance
   
153.040   Addition to powers
   
153.041   Procedure for appeals to the Board of Adjustments
   
153.042   Notice of decision
District Establishment and Boundaries
   
153.055   Zoning districts established
   
153.056   Boundaries
   
153.057   Divided lots; extension of districts
   
153.058   Vacated streets or alley
   
153.059   Annexed lands
Zoning Districts and Basic Requirements
   
153.070   Agricultural districts
   
153.071   Low Density Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
   
153.072   Medium and Light Density Single-Family and Multi-Family Residential
District (R-2)
   
153.073   Business and Commercial District (B-1)
   
153.074   Industrial District (I-1)
Supplemental Regulations
   
153.085   Provisions applicable to zoning districts
   
153.086   Access control
   
153.087   Accessory buildings
   
153.088   Dwellings in rear of main buildings prohibited; exceptions
   
153.089   Height limitations; exceptions
   
153.090   Lots of record
   
153.091   Off-street parking
   
153.092   Unloading space
   
153.093   Setback lines; exceptions
   
153.094   Street frontage required
   
153.095   Subdivision coordination required
   
153.096   Traffic visibility across corner lots
   
153.097   Water supply and sewage disposal approval
Signs
   
153.110   Signs and advertising devices
   
153.111   Signs permitted in zoning districts
   
153.112   Temporary signs
   
153.113   Portable signs
   
153.114   Permanent signs; billboards
   
153.115   Permits for sign construction or erection
   
153.116   Amortization of non-conforming signs
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
   
153.130   Definitions
   
153.131   When mobile homes are considered standard housing
   
153.132   Mobile home parks
   
153.133   Parking
   
153.134   Utilities
   
153.135   Fire protection
   
153.136   Accessory structures
   
153.137   Procedure for permitting
   
153.138   Issuance of building permits
   
153.139   Issuance of certificate of occupancy
   
153.140   Enforcement
   
153.141   Exception
Planned Developments
   
153.155   Planned developments in general
   
153.156   Planned commercial developments
   
153.157   Planned industrial park
   
153.158   Planned residential developments
Cellular Antenna Towers
   
153.170   Purpose
   
153.171   Definitions
   
153.172   Permitted locations
   
153.173   Uniform application requirements
   
153.174   Design standards
   
153.175   Planning Commission action
Solar Energy Systems
   
153.190   Design standards
   
153.191   Requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 GOALS.
   The goal of this chapter is to guide the use of land and the location of
buildings in a manner, which will stabilize property values and assist in
achieving an orderly pattern of land use within the county.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.002 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To promote public health, safety, morals and the general welfare of
the county;
   (B)   To facilitate orderly and harmonious development; and
   (C)   To preserve the visual and/or historical character of the county and
the intensity of land use.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.003 AUTHORITY.
   Zoning authority is granted by KRS Ch. 100.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.004 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, and referred to as the
“McLean County, Kentucky Zoning Ordinance”, and the Zoning Map herein referred
to, and herein incorporated is entitled “Zoning Map - McLean County, Kentucky”.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.005 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Whenever this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law,
rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular
number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular;
the word “person” includes a firm or corporation as well as an individual, and
the word “lot” includes the words “plot and parcel”, except where the natural
construction of the writings indicates otherwise. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not permissive. “Map” means the Zoning Map of McLean County,
Kentucky.
   ALLEY. Any public or private way less than 30 feet in width set aside as a
permanent right-of-way for vehicular travel.
   AGRICULTURAL FACILITY. Any structure relating to, used in or concerned with
agriculture.
   BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, shelter or
protection of persons, animals or goods, including permanently attached
fixtures and appurtenances such as balconies and porches.
      (1)   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
      (2)   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Any building other than a principal building.
   DWELLING. A residence designed or used for human occupancy, except mobile
homes.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling designed for or occupied by one
family only.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling for or occupied by two or more
families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using
common cooking facilities.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation of activity carried on by a member of the
immediate family residing on the premises; provided:
      (1)   There is no exterior indication that the premises are being used
for other than residential purposes;
      (2)   No commodity is sold on the premises except that which is prepared
on the premises;
      (3)   No person is employed other than a member of the immediate family
residing on the premises; and
      (4)   Not more than 25% of the total floor area of any dwelling is used
for such purpose.
   LOT. For zoning purposes, as covered by this chapter, a lot is a parcel of
land at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use,
coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are
herein required. Such LOT shall have frontage on an improved public street, and
may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record and portions of lots of
record, or of portions of lots of record;
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that, in
no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot, which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the County Clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the
description which has been so recorded.
   LOT FRONTAGE. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements or corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under yard in
this section.
   LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting
the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of
the side lot lines in the rear.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot
lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front
yard; provided however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost
points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80%
of the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of
cul-de-sacs, where the 80% requirement shall not apply.
   MANUFACTURE. Any process by which the physical or chemical properties of a
material are substantially modified or changed.
   MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure constructed on or after 7-15-1976,
in one or more sections, fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or
assembly at the building site as a permanent structure (with or without a
permanent foundation) with transport features removed, with a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling, bearing a Class A or B seal issued by
the commonwealth’s Department of Housing, Building and Construction, Office of
the State Fire Marshal. The structure must also bear a seal certifying that it
is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Code, as set forth in 24 C.F.R. parts 3280, 3282 and 3283 and
42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., and as mandated by the United States of America and
as administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any area of land upon which two or more occupied mobile
homes are located, and including any building or structure used or intended for
use as a park of the equipment of such mobile home park.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for
the accommodation of one mobile home.
   RETAIL. The sale of goods and services in small quantities directly to the
ultimate consumer.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A single-family dwelling containing, in addition to the
family living quarter, one or more rooms designed for or occupied by non-family
members; provided that, no such room shall contain cooking equipment.
   SIGN. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not
on the premises on which the sign is located; provided, however, that, the
following shall to be included in the application of the regulations herein:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations;
      (2)   Flags and insignias of any government, except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion;
      (3)   Legal notices; identification, information or directional signs
erected or required by governmental agencies;
      (4)   Integral decorative or architectural features or buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights; and
      (5)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising manner.
   STREET. Any public or private way 30 feet or more in width set aside as a
permanent right-of-way for vehicular travel.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with fixed location on the ground
or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including,
among other things, buildings, fences and walls.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which a building, structure or land is
occupied or maintained.
   VARIANCE, DIMENSIONAL. A departure from the terms of the zoning regulations
pertaining to height or width of structures and size of yards and open spaces,
where such departure will to be contrary to the public interest, and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property because of its size, shape or
topography and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, the literal
enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship.
   YARD. A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or
portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the
graded lot upward; provided, however, that, fences and walls may be permitted
in any yard subject to height limitations as indicated herein.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard adjacent to the front lot line extending between side
lot lines. In any required front yard, no fence or wall shall be permitted
which materially impedes vision across such yard above the height or 30 inches,
and no hedge or other vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes
vision across such yard between the heights of 30 inches and ten feet.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard adjacent to a side lot line extending from the rear line
of the required front yard to the rear lot line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard adjacent to the rear lot line extending between inner
side yard lines.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.007 LEGAL STATUS; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be held as minimum requirements for the
promotion of public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Whenever the
provisions of this chapter require a more restrictive use of land, or impose
other higher standards than are required in other ordinances or regulations,
private deed restrictions or private covenants, this chapter shall govern.
However, if the requirements of state statutes and/or administrative
regulations, county ordinances and/or covenants are more restrictive than those
established in this chapter, then those requirements shall govern.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.008 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)   The following fees became effective January 1, 2022.
Appeal to Board of Adjustments      $5, plus advertising costs
Building permit
   Commercial: new construction and additions
      0 to 1,000 square feet  $75
      1,001 to 2,000 square fe$150
      2,001 to 5,000 square fe$225
      5,001 to 25,000 square f$300
      Over 25,000 square feet $450
   Industrial: new construction and additions
      0 to 2,000 square feet  $150
      2,001 to 25,000 square f$300
      25,001 to 50,000 square $450
      50,001 to 100,000 square$900t
      Over 100,000 square feet$1,800
   Residential                   $0.13 per each square foot constructed with
                                    a maximum fee of $250
Cell tower application              $2,500, plus advertising/mailing costs
Certificate of occupancy            Fee included in cost of building permit
Hearing for conditional use permit  $10, plus advertising costs
Hearing for variance                $100, plus advertising/mailing costs
Plat fee                            $20, plus $5 per lot
Sign permit
   32 square feet or less        $50
   33-55 square feet             $75
   Over 50 square feet           $120
Solar pane; application
   Level 1                       $150
   Level 2 Agriculture           $300
   Level 2 Industrial            $1,000
   Level 3                       $2,000
Zoning change                       $250, plus advertising/mailing costs
 
   (B)   For any request for a permit that is disapproved, the fee will be
returned, except for a $10 minimum for handling paperwork.
(Ord. 20.920-17, passed - -; Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020; Ord. 20-920-1,
passed 7-21-2020; Ord. 22-920017, passed 4-14-2022)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.020 ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Chairperson of
the Planning Commission or his or her designee.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee
shall keep accurate records in a permanent file for the issuance of building
permits, certificates of occupancy, inspections, violations, stop orders and
condemnations. If the Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her
designee Find any provision of this chapter being violated, the person or
persons responsible for such violation shall be notified by the Chairperson of
Planning Commission or his or her designee through registered mail. Said
notification shall order the discontinuation of any illegal use of land,
buildings and/or structures.
   (C)   In the event of this issuance of a discontinuation order, the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee shall be required
to inform the county’s Joint Planning Commission of his or her action. Said
information shall be in writing, and shall be issued to the Planning Commission
on or before each meeting.
   (D)   Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.021 BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Building permit required prior to construction or alteration. It shall
be unlawful to commence the excavation for, or the construction of any
building, or to commence the building of any building, including accessory
buildings before the Zoning Administrator has issued a permit for such work.
   (B)   Fees applicable to issuance of building permits. Unless otherwise set
by this chapter, the fees to be charged for building permits shall be set by
the county’s Planning Commission.
   (C)   Exceptions. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
required in the following cases:
      (1)   Recurring maintenance;
      (2)   Installation of required improvements in accordance with an
approved plan; and
      (3)   Agricultural facilities, as defined in §
153.006  of this chapter.
   (D)   Procedure.
      (1)   Applications. In applying to the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission or his or her designee for a building permit, the applicant shall
submit a plan along with the application. This plan must be drawn to scale,
showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the outside dimensions of
all structures to be constructed or altered and all existing structures. The
use of structures and the proposed yard depths should be detailed, and any
other information pertinent to the assessment of conformance should be
Included. The County Health Officer’s certificate approving the water and
sewage facilities must accompany the application.
      (2)   Issuance of permit.
         (a)   If the proposed construction or alteration conforms to all
applicable ordinances, regulations and codes, the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission or his or her designee shall issue a building permit authorizing
construction or alteration.
         (b)   If the proposed construction or alteration fails to conform, the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee shall refuse to
issue a building permit, and shall cause delivery of written notice to the
applicant stating the reason for refusal. The Chairperson of the Planning
Commission or his or her designee shall act upon all applications for building
permits within two weeks from the date of their submission.
      (3)   Restraint of construction without permit. If no building permit has
been issued, and a builder begins, or continues to build, a restraining order
may be obtained upon application to the appropriate court, and evidence of the
lack of a building permit shall establish a prima facie case for the issuance
of the restraining order.
      (4)   Validity. The issuance of a building permit shall not waive any
provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   Duration. A building permit shall become void one year from the
date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the
construction or alteration authorized therein.
   (E)   Certificate of occupancy. No land or building or part thereof
hereafter erected or altered shall be used until the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that
such land, building or part thereof and the proposed use thereof, are found to
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Within three days after
notification that a building or premises, or part thereof, is ready for
occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Chairperson the Planning
Commission or his or her designee to make a final inspection thereof and to
issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building, or part thereof are
found to conform with the provisions of this chapter; or if such certification
is refused, to state in writing the cause for such refusal, and to immediately
thereon mall notice of such refusal to the applicant at the address indicated
on the application.
   (F)   Board of Adjustment. There shall exist a Board of Adjustment with the
duties and responsibilities of such boards as set forth in KRS 100.217-261, as
amended.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.022 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   Appeals from the decisions of the Planning Commission and/or the Board of
Adjustment may be taken to the Circuit Court of the county within 30 days after
final action of the bodies in accordance with KRS 100.347, as amended.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.023 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   All regulations restrictions and boundaries provided for in this
chapter may be amended or repealed, but only in accordance with the following
procedures.
   (B)   A written request for amendment shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for its study and recommendation. Any property owner or resident of
the county or county officer, department, board or bureau, including the
Planning Commission or a member thereof may request such amendment.
      (1)   Within 90 days after receipt of a request for amendment, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing at which parties in interest
and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice shall be given as
required by law, stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing,
      (2)   Within 60 days after the hearing the Planning Commission shall
forward a written recommendation to the county’s Fiscal Court that the proposed
amendment be adopted, rejected or modified. If the Planning Commission fails to
make a recommendation within the allotted time, such failure shall be construed
as a favorable recommendation.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the Fiscal
Court shall adopt, reject or modify the proposed amendment in accordance with
its usual procedures. In case the project is against either of the area of the
lots included in the proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the
rear thereof extending 150 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite
thereto extending 150 feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots, an
amendment shall become effective only by the favorable vote of three-fourths of
all the members of the Fiscal Court.
      (4)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and KRS Ch.
100, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the
official zoning map, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map
promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Fiscal Court and an entry
shall be made on the official zoning map as follows:
 
ON                                                   , 2020, BY OFFICIAL ACTION OF THE MCLEAN COUNTY FISCAL COURT, THE FOLLOWING
CHANGES WERE MADE IN THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
 
(DESCRIPTION OF CHANGES)
 
 
   (C)   A proposal for amendment of the zoning map of the county shall include
a metes and sounds description of the property to be rezoned along with a plat
on the same scale as the “Zoning Map of McLean County, Kentucky” located in the
office of the county’s Judge Executive.
   (D)   Before any map amendment is granted, the Planning Commission and the
Fiscal Court must find that the map amendment is in agreement with the
community’s Comprehensive Plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one
or more of the following apply, and such finding shall be recorded in the
minutes and records of the Planning Commission and the county’s Fiscal Court:
      (1)   The original zoning classification given to the property was
inappropriate or improper; and
      (2)   There have been major changes of an economic, physical or social
nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the community’s
Comprehensive Plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of
such neighborhood.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
VARIANCES
§ 153.035 GENERALLY.
   The Board of Adjustments may grant dimensional variances in accordance with
the following requirements.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.036 CONDITIONS WHICH WARRANT A VARIANCE.
   The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for
dimensional variance on a lot of record. A variance can be granted where
because of unusual shape, smallness of size or other extraordinary physical
conditions, the property owner is deprived of a reasonable capacity to use the
land in a manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the same
zone. The conditions, which warrant a variance, must have existed at the time
this regulation was adopted.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.037 VARIANCE FOR MULTI-BUILDING DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   A variance from this chapter may be granted for multi-building
development if it is shown that the land in question cannot be subdivided and
that more open space is created, and a lower density can be established and
traffic problems are lessened, and a better relationship between the land and
the building is created by not subdividing the land. However, in no case shall
the Board of Adjustments grant a variance, which does not comply with the
zoning regulations, where applicable, or which destroys the character of the
neighborhood.
   (B)   However, any future subdivision of a multi-dwelling development
requires that all lots and buildings meet the requirements of the subdivision
regulation at the time of such subdivision.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.038 VARIANCES WHICH ARE PROHIBITED.
   The Board of Adjustments shall not possess the power to grant a variance to
permit a use or alteration or extension of any land, building or structure
which is not permitted in the one in question; to alter density requirements in
the zone in question; or to permit a use not authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.039 GRANTING A VARIANCE.
   Before any variance is granted, the Board must find all of the following
facts which shall be recorded along with any imposed conditions or restrictions
in its minutes and records and issued in written form to the applicant to
constitute proof of the dimensional variance:
   (A)   The specific conditions in detail, which are unique to the applicant’s
land and do not exist on other land in the same zone;
   (B)   The manner in which the strict application of the provisions of the
regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land in
the manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the same zone;
   (C)   The unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of actions
of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of the zoning regulation;
   (D)   Reasons that the variance will preserve, not harm, the public safety
and welfare and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood; and
   (E)   A map of the proposed area shall be made available to the Board of
Adjustments upon review of a variance. The map shall illustrate:
      (1)   A title block containing the name of the property owner and address
of the property in question, the name of the plan preparer (if applicable), a
north arrow and a written and graphic scale;
      (2)   The boundary of the subject property and the zoning and owner names
of all adjoining property;
      (3)   Location, arrangement and approximate dimensions of existing and
proposed driveways, walkways, parking areas and arrangement of spaces, dumpster
pads, points of ingress and egress and other vehicular and pedestrian right-of-
way;
      (4)   Location of any proposed or existing streets or deceleration lanes
(when deemed necessary) within or abutting the subject property;
      (5)   Screening, landscaping, buffering, recreational and other opens
spaces;
      (6)   Approximate size, location, height, floor area, area arrangement
and use of proposed and existing buildings and signs;
      (7)   Storm drainage areas, floodplain, conceptual drainage controls and
storm water retention and any other designated environmentally sensitive or
geologic hazard areas;
      (8)   Proposed and existing easements for utilities or other purposes,
locations of sanitary sewers including lengths and alignments of laterals; and
      (9)   Areas of substantial existing trees including those located along
fence rows and drainage areas.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.040 ADDITION TO POWERS.
   In granting a variance, the Board may attach thereto such conditions
regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building,
structure or use, as it may deem advisable in the furtherance of the purposes
of this regulation.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.041 PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Who may appeal. Any appeal to the Board of Zoning Adjustment may be
taken by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any governmental
officer, department, board of bureau affected by any decision of the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee based in whole or
in part upon the provisions of this regulation.
   (B)   Time limitation. Such an appeal shall be made by filing with the Board
of Zoning Adjustment, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. Said
notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date upon which the
notice of refusal of building permit or certificate of occupancy is mailed by
the Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee and failure
to file notice of appeal within 30 days shall constitute a waiver of the right
to appeal.
   (C)   Establishing meeting date. The Board of Adjustments shall set a date
not more than 30 days after receiving the above records for hearing of the
appeal.
   (D)   Notice.
      (1)   Public notice shall be given in accordance with KRS Ch. 424 and all
interested parties shall be notified of the pending hearing. The appellant will
be given written notice at least one week prior to the hearing.
      (2)   An appropriate sign will be posted on the property for which the
variance is requested at least ten days before the public hearing. The sign
will describe the variance requested and the meeting date, time and place. The
Secretary of the Board of Adjustments for a person appointed by the Board shall
post the sign.
   (E)   Evidence of hardship.
      (1)   The applicant must present evidence that the property will not
yield a reasonable return if used in compliance with the regulation; that the
conditions causing the hardship are unique and not shared by neighboring
property in the same zone; that the granting of the variance will not conflict
with the zoning regulations.
      (2)   The Board shall use this evidence, and any other evidence presented
in accordance with KRS Ch. 100, in granting a variance in accordance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.042 NOTICE OF DECISION.
   The Board of Adjustments shall decide the appeal within 60 days and give
written notice to the Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her
designee and appeal applies to the property for which it is granted and may be
transferred with the land.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
DISTRICTS ESTABLISHMENT AND BOUNDARIES
§ 153.055 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the unincorporated territory of the county
is divided into the following categories of zoning districts:
 
A-1 Agricultural District
B-1 Business and Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
R-1 Low Density, Single-Family Dwelling Residential District
R-2 Medium and High Density, Single-Family and Multi-Family Dwelling
    Residential District
 
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.056 BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The boundaries of the above zoning districts are hereby established as
shown on the zoning map. A copy of which is appended to the ordinance codified
herein and incorporated herein by reference. The original of this map is on
file in the office of the county’s Judge Executive.
   (B)   The boundary lines of districts are lot lines, the centerlines of
creeks or of such lines extended, railway rights-of-way, the centerlines of
streets or alleys or such lines extended and/or corporate limit lines.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.057 DIVIDED LOTS; EXTENSION OF DISTRICTS.
   Where a district boundary lines established on the zoning map divides a lot
of single ownership which was a lot of record at the time of the passage of
this chapter, then the least restrictive district requirements under which the
lot was divided shall be applied to the entire lot.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.058 VACATED STREETS OR ALLEY.
   Whenever any public way is vacated through legal action, portions of it
shall immediately, without further action, assume, and be a part of, the zoning
district(s) through which they formerly passed.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.059 ANNEXED LANDS.
   In every case where land becomes a part of a city through annexation, such
annexed land shall automatically be zoned according to the said city’s zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND BASIC REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.070 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS.
   Land dedicated to agricultural purposes, including row cropping, plant
nurseries, greenhouses, commercial kennels, riding stables and fishing lakes
shall be permitted in agricultural districts within the political boundaries of
the county, as allowed by KRS Ch. 413.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Within the A-1 District, the following agricultural
activities are permitted: animal husbandry; egg and poultry production;
dairying; farrowing; and other agricultural activities, which do not constitute
noise and/or waste nuisances.
   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses. Subject to the approval of the Board of
Adjustment, the following uses of land may be approved within an agricultural
district: churches; Sunday school buildings; parish houses; hospitals;
convalescent or nursing homes; public and parochial schools and colleges and
private schools for academic instruction; public buildings and properties;
public parks; public utilities; public and private sewage disposal plants; and
wireless transmitting stations. Travel-trailer parks and/or campground sites
may also be established in an agricultural district as a special exception.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.071 LOW DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Principal permitted uses. Single-family dwellings and planned
residential development projects as described herein.
   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses requiring Board of Adjustment
authorization. The following permitted uses are exceptions in R-1 District, and
require the written approval of the Board of Adjustment: churches and other
places of worship; parish houses; public libraries; schools offering general or
specialized education courses; day care and/or nursery services; public parks
and non-commercial public recreational facilities; nursing homes; hospitals for
the care of humans; philanthropic institutions and clubs of which the chief
activity is customarily carried on as a business.
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses shall be
permitted as customarily incidental to the conditional use.
   (D)   Lot area, frontage and yard requirements. The minimum width of side
yards along intersecting streets shall be the same, as the front yard setback
required for the residential district on such side street.
Minimum Dimensional Requirements
Minimum Dimensional Requirements
Lot area    20,000 feet or as required by the county’s Health Department for minimum lot
            size for septic tanks
Lot width
at building 200 feet
line
Yard space (excepting unattached accessory buildings)
   Front 45 feet
depth
   Fronta50 feet
   Rear  35 feet
depth
   Side  15 feet
yards
 
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.072 MEDIUM AND HIGH DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT MEDIUM DENSITY (R-2).
   The requirements for the district shall be the same as those for the R-
1 District with the following exceptions.
   (A)   Lot area and yard requirements.
 
Dimensional Minimums
Front depth 45 feet
Frontage    50 feet
Lot area    40,000 feet
Rear depth  35 feet
Side depth  12 feet
 
   (B)   Principal permitted uses. Single and multi-family residences and
planned residential development subject to §
153.071  of this chapter; mobile home parks, which meet requirements of §§
153.130  through
153.141  of this chapter.
   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses requiring Board of Adjustment
authorization.
      (1)   The following uses are special exceptions in an R-2 District and
require the written approval of the Board of Adjustment: churches and other
places of worship; parish houses; public libraries; schools; daycare and/or
nursery services; public parks and public recreational facilities; public
utilities; funeral homes; cemeteries; nursing homes; clinics and hospitals for
human care; philanthropic institutions and clubs (except clubs of which the
chief activity is customarily carrying on as a business).
      (2)   Other conditionally permitted uses within an R-2 District may
include: an office in the residence of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer,
architect, realtor, insurance agent; the studio of an artist or a teacher of
music (limited to one pupil at a time). Such uses must not involve more than
one-quarter of the area of one floor of the dwelling and no more than one
person on the premises may be employed, not including the resident. It is
further required that such use shall not require structural alteration, or
features not customary in dwellings. An indirectly lighted sign or nameplate
not more than one square foot in area may be attached flat against the side of
the building.
      (3)   Additional conditionally permitted uses may include such customary
home occupations as handicraft, dressmaking, laundering, beauty and barbershops
and the like. These occupations must be conducted exclusively by resident
occupants in their places of residence, and not more than one-fourth of the
area of one floor of the residence shall be used for such purpose.
      (4)   It is further required that with the exception of handicrafts, no
more than 20% of the revenue of home occupations shall be derived from the sale
of items at retail. The use of a residence for home occupations shall not
require alteration, or structural features not customarily found In a dwelling.
An indirectly lighted sign of not more than one square foot may be affixed
against the wall of the building. The Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions, as it deems necessary to preserve and protect the nature of the
district.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incidental to the conditional uses shall be permitted.
   (E)   Height requirements. No principal structure in an R-2 District shall
exceed three stories or 36 feet in height.
   (F)   Lot area, frontage and yard requirements; where public sewer service
is available. The minimum required lot size in an R-2 District shall be 8,000
square feet for a single-family dwelling and 6,000 square feet for the first
family when the dwelling is for mufti-family use with 2,000 square feet
additional being required for each additional family occupying the building.
Minimum width of side yards along intersecting streets shall be the same as the
front yard setback required for the residential district on such side street.
Other Dimensional Minimums
Other Dimensional Minimums
Width at building line
   Multi-famil100 feet
   Single-fami85 feet
Yard space (except unattached buildings)
   Front depth35 feet
   Rear depth 35 feet
   Side widths12 feet
 
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.073 BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (B-1).
   (A)   Principal permitted uses. Any consumer and personal service and/or
retail establishment.
   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses requiring Board of Adjustment
authorization.
      (1)   The following uses are special exceptions in a B-1 District and
require written approval of the Board of Adjustment: apartments; townhouses;
and single-family dwellings; churches and other places of worship; parish
houses; schools; day care centers and nurseries; funeral homes; hospitals or
clinics for human care industry; and philanthropic institutions and clubs
(except those whose principal activities are carried on as a business or
commercial activity suitable to the district).
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to its approval
as are deemed essential to the preservation of the character of the district as
an historical area.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Any accessory use or building customarily incidental
to permitted uses may be permitted.
   (D)   Signs. As permitted in §§
153.110  through
153.116  of this chapter.
   (E)   Required conditions.
      (1)   Screening. Where a commercial lot adjoins a residential lot, a
well-maintained compact hedge, a solid fence or similar solid screening device
at least six feet in height shall be installed to screen the business use from
the adjoining lot in the residential district. The screen shall begin at the
front building line and extend along the common side lot line to the rear
property line.
      (2)   Access to streets and highways. As required in §
153.093  of this chapter.
   (F)   Lot area, frontage and yard requirements. All buildings on corner lots
adjoining a residential district shall be located so as to conform to corner
lot side yard requirements of said residential district.
 
Minimum Dimensional Requirements
                 No set dimensions (In commercial districts along federal aid
Frontage         highways, buildings may be no closer to the highway right-of-
                 way than 50 feet.)
Lot area         No set dimensions
                 No set dimensions (However, if the lot bounds on an alley,
Rear yard depth  there shall be a rear depth sufficient for loading, unloading
                 and access for emergency vehicles such as fire trucks.)
                 No set dimensions (However, if the lot adjoins a residential
Side yard widths district, buildings shall be so located as to comply with the
                 requirements of the adjoining residential district as to lot
                 coverage, width and side yards.)
 
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.074 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1).
   For the purpose of this chapter, INDUSTRY is defined as the activity of
assembly, conversion or change of form or appearance of physical materials or
chemical elements, natural or human-made, in anticipation of enhanced economic
value or usefulness. In addition to such activity, certain types of commercial
operations of sales, service and warehousing are deemed to be especially suited
for location in an industrial district. Commercial or business enterprises
other than those specifically noted may be permitted with the approval of the
Board of Adjustment.
   (A)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Manufacturing. Permitted uses include any manufacturing activity:
assembly, fabrication or processing, which does not, by its nature create a
public nuisance. A new industry locating in an industrial district must furnish
to the Planning Commission through the Chairperson of the Planning Commission
or his or her designee, assurances that it will comply with all federal, state
and local regulations with regard to air pollution, noise pollution and solid
waste and hazardous waste disposal prior to the issuance of building and
construction permits.
      (2)   Sale firms. Sales lots, display and stocking areas for the
following types of businesses are deemed to be suitable for industrial
districts: automobiles; trailers and mobile homes; farm implements; lumber and
building materials; and wholesale or jobbing firms.
      (3)   Service establishments. The following types of service
establishments are designated as suitable for industrial districts: automobile
rental agencies; animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and associated kennels;
motorcycle repair; and carpet cleaning.
      (4)   Warehousing and storage. Warehousing and storage facilities as a
general category are permitted in industrial districts.
      (5)   Public facilities. Public water and sewage treatment plants and
other public facilities and utility plants are permitted in industrial
districts.
   (B)   Conditionally permitted uses requiring Board of Adjustment
authorization. The following manufactures require the written approval of the
Board of Adjustment for conditional permitting In an industrial zone: slaughter
house; acids; acetylene gas; refining; blast furnaces; bricks; charcoal;
chemicals; creosote treatment and production; exterminator or insect poisons;
rendering; fertilizer; leather curing and tanning; lime; monuments; plaster of
Paris; quarrying, rock crashing, sawmills, sulfur, sulfuric acid and
derivatives; tar distillation and terra cotta. Other conditional uses include:
refuse dump; scrap iron and salvage yards; junk car lots; coal washing; and
wrecking material yards.
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses. Any accessory building or use
customarily incidental to the above permitted or conditionally permitted use
shall be permitted.
   (D)   Required conditions. On lots adjacent to a residential district, all
buildings shall be located so as to provide a minimum side yard of 500 feet on
the side adjoining the residential property.
      (1)   Loading docks. Where possible, loading docks should be located so
as not to front on a public way or roadway.
      (2)   Storage facilities. No materials or supplies shall be stored or
permitted to remain on any part of the property outside of the buildings
constructed thereon without proper screening and adequate distance from
adjoining properties.
      (3)   Waste disposal. No waste material or refuse may be dumped upon, or
be permitted to remain upon any part of an industrial site outside of the
buildings erected thereon, except as it may be required for pretreatment of
waste prior to its being discharged into the municipal sewage system. No
property shall be used for industrial purposes unless an existing treatment
facility agrees to accept its sewage or the industry constructs its own
approved facilities.
   (E)   Lot area, frontage and yard requirements.
 
Dimensional Minimums
Front depth 45 feet
Frontage    None
Lot area    None
Rear depth  250 feet
Side yards  250 feet
 
      (1)   No yard shall be required for that part of a lot which abuts upon a
railroad siding.
      (2)   All buildings on corner lots adjoining a residential district shall
be so located as to conform to corner lot requirements of said district.
   (F)   Signs and billboards. As permitted in §§
153.110 through
153.116 of this chapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.085 PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, land which is
used solely for agricultural use as defined in this chapter shall have no
regulations imposed as to building permits, certificates of occupancy, height,
yard or location requirements for agricultural buildings; except that, setback
lines may be required for the protection of existing and proposed streets and
highways and that buildings or structures in a designated floodway or
floodplain or which tend to increase flood heights or obstruct the flow of
flood water may be fully regulated.
   (B)   Except as specified, the following provisions shall apply within all
zoning districts.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.086 ACCESS CONTROL.
   (A)   Residential districts.
      (1)   Lots of less than 100 feet in width shall have no more than one
point of access to any one public street. Lots wider than 100 feet shall be
allowed one additional point of access for each additional 100 feet of width or
major fraction thereof.
      (2)   No point of access shall be allowed within 20 feet of the
intersection of the right-of-way of intersecting streets. A point of access
shall not exceed 20 feet in width for one-way and/or one-land entrance or exit.
No two-way exit and/or entrance access shall exceed 35 feet in width.
   (B)   Business and commercial districts.
      (1)   In all commercial districts, points of access to highways and
streets shall be controlled by the regulations of the Planning Commission.
Before any building permit for any structure in a business or commercial zone
may be issued, the prospective builder or operator of the proposed activity
shall submit a sketch of the layout and design of the proposed structure(s)
and/or the access points to the highway or street to the Chairperson of the
county’s Joint City County Planning Commission for review as to their
conformity with the regulations of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may require that when two or more consumer
commercial establishments adjoin, or are so located along one side of a street
as to make a single point of access practical, the establishments should share
such access.
      (3)   Planned shopping areas of four or more establishments which adjoin,
or are located in close proximity to each other on any major street, may be
required by the Planning Commission to be served by a road parallel to the
highway or street which has no more than two points of entry or exit. Such
roadway shall be constructed at the expense of the owner(s).
      (4)   In a planned commercial district, entrance and exit shall be so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion. No more than one entry/exit way
shall be constructed for every 150 feet of highway frontage or bordering
roadway.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.087 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Accessory buildings must be at least six feet from other buildings
situated on the same lot and six feet from the boundary line of all adjoining
lots.
   (B)   An accessory building in a residential district shall not be used for,
or be involved with the conduct of any business, trade or industry on the
premises.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.088 DWELLINGS IN REAR OF MAIN BUILDINGS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No building in the rear of a principal building shall be used for
residential purposes unless it conforms to all yard, open space and off-street
parking requirements for a rear dwelling, measured from the required rear yard
line of the principal building. A certificate of occupancy must be obtained
before a rear dwelling can be used for residential purposes.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.089 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas, domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water
towers, observation and transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks,
derricks, conveyors, flag poles, masts and aerials.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.090 LOTS OF RECORD.
   The owner of a vacant lot of official record, which at the time of this
adoption of this chapter did not include sufficient area of land to conform to
the yard or other dimensional requirements of this chapter, may make
application to the Board of Adjustments for a variance from the terms of this
chapter. Such lot may be used as a building site to conform with the district
in which it is located; provided, however, that, the yard and other
requirements of this district are complied with as closely as it is possible to
achieve in the opinion of the Board.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.091 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off the street automobile storage or standing space shall be provided on any
lot on which, any of the following uses are hereafter established. Such space
shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley. (For purposes of
computing the number of parking spaces available in a given area, the ratio of
400 square feet per parking space shall be used). The following are the minimum
requirements for specific use:
Apartment      1-1/2 spaces for each housing unit
buildings
Commercial or
business       4 spaces for the first 1,000 square feet of floor space, and 1
buildings in   additional space for each 250 square feet of space above that
B-1 District
Dwellings      1 space for each family dwelling unit
               1 parking space for each 4 employees at maximum employment on a
Industrial     single shift, plus 1 space for each car or truck operated by the
plant          plant. The Planning Commission may require additional parking
               spaces, as it deems necessary
Restaurants    1 space for each 5 service seats at full capacity, plus 1 space
and boarding   for each three employees
houses
Rooming houses 1 space for each 2 rooms occupied, or intended for occupancy by
               roomers, in addition to the requirements of “Dwellings” above
Theater,
auditorium,
church or      1 space for each 5 seats available at maximum capacity
other place of
public
assembly
Tourist        1 space for each room offered for tourist accommodation, plus 1
accommodations space for each employee on duty at any time
Trailer or     1 space for each mobile home lot or unit, plus 1/4 space for each
mobile home    mobile home lot the additional parking may be in a central
parks          location. Combined uses (such as tourist accommodation and
               restaurant) shall meet minimum requirements for both or all uses
 
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.092 UNLOADING SPACE.
   Every new building or structure intended for business or trade shall provide
not less than one loading and unloading space, which will accommodate large
trucks, tractors and semi-trailers for the delivery and receipt of merchandise
off the street. Such spaces shall have access to a public alley, or if there is
no alley, to a public street.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.093 SETBACK LINES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Front yard setback lines shall be measured from the centerline of the
street facing the property line to the outermost protrusion of the building or
structure.
   (B)   (1)   Front yard setback lines may be varied where the average depth
of principal buildings on adjoining properties is less or greater than the
depth prescribed elsewhere in this chapter.
      (2)   In such case, the front yard in question shall not be less than the
average depth of existing front yards on the two lots immediately adjoining.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.094 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED.
   Except as permitted by other provisions of this chapter, no lot shall
contain any building which is used in whole or in part for residential purposes
unless such lot abuts for at least 50 feet on a street or public way.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.095 SUBDIVISION COORDINATION REQUIRED.
   In all cases where the ownership of land is divided for the purpose of
eventual development of building lots, the provisions of the subdivision
regulations shall be applicable in addition to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.096 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ACROSS CORNER LOTS.
   (A)   On a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerlines of the
intersecting streets and a line joining points on such centerlines at a
distance of 90 feet, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height
of three and one-half feet and a height of ten feet above the average elevation
of the existing surfaces of each street, at the centerline thereof.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to the central business
district, nor shall the requirements of this section be deemed as prohibiting
any necessary retaining wall.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustments may either increase or reduce the
requirements of this section, where unusual or special conditions warrant
consideration.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.097 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct any residential or commercial
building without water supply and sewage facilities, which have been approved
by the county’s Health Officer.
   (B)   Wherever water and sewer mains are accessible, buildings shall be
connected to such mains.
   (C)   In every case, individual water supply and sewage disposal must meet
the requirements set by the County Health Officer’s certificate approving
proposed and/or complete water and sewage facilities must accompany
applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
SIGNS
§ 153.110 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To assume maximum visibility along streets and to prevent
unreasonable distraction for motor vehicle operators;
      (2)   To preserve and enhance natural scenic beauty and historical sites
by the avoidance of unsightly cluttering of advertising signs and devices;
      (3)   To promote pedestrian safety and to facilitate police and fire
protection; and
      (4)   To provide for orderly and visible informative advertising
opportunities for all businesses
and attractions, which benefit from appropriate signs and attractions.
   (B)   Scope of this section.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction,
erection, use, location and maintenance of signs in all districts. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to signs existing on the effective date
of this chapter. Signs in legal existence on the effective date of this
chapter, but not in conformity with it, and not obstructing traffic visibility,
may remain in place; but the non-conforming use shall not be extended, enlarged
or moved to occupy a portion of land or a structure, except in conformity with
this chapter. Only routine maintenance may be performed on the sign and its
structure until such time as the sign is brought into conformance with these
regulations. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, no new sign may be
erected, constructed or displayed within the planning area after the effective
date of this chapter unless all the provisions of this chapter are met.
      (2)   Signs and billboards placed along the Federal Aide Highway U.S. 431
must conform to the regulations of the commonwealth’s Department of
Transportation in accordance with KRS Ch. 177.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.111 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Residential districts.
      (1)   Unlighted real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease
of only the premises on which they are maintained. Such signs must not exceed
ten square feet in area, and are to be used only temporarily. Real estate signs
must be displayed at least five feet from all lot boundaries. Signs advertising
home occupations may not exceed one square foot in area and must be affixed to
the front of the building in which the activity is carried on.
      (2)   Churches, schools and other public and semi-public institutions may
erect bulletin boards not exceeding 20 square feet in area.
      (3)   Subdivisions may be identified by one non-illuminated sign at each
entrance. These signs shall not exceed 30 square feet in area.
      (4)   Apartment complexes containing eight or more housing units may be
identified by a permanent sign of no more than 30 square feet in area.
   (B)   Business and commercial districts.
      (1)   In the central business district advertising signs are permitted,
but care must be taken to preserve the historical nature of the district. The
use of lighting is permitted, but signs and advertising devices shall be placed
on buildings in a flat manner and shall not extend more than 12 inches from the
building. However, this provision may be waived if it is determined that a
proposed sign will be in keeping with the historic nature of the area and will
not detract or interfere with any surrounding buildings, with said
determination being made by a four person committee consisting of the county’s
Judge Executive, the Chairperson of the Planning Commission and a Planning
Commission member to be appointed by the county’s Planning Commission and a
Fiscal Court member to be appointed by the Judge Executive. No flashing lights
of any kind shall be permitted.
      (2)   Outside of the central business district, individual establishments
in a commercial district which are not within a shopping center or a planned
commercial district may choose to display either a free-standing sign, or to
hang a sign perpendicular to the front of the establishment. Such signs must
not exceed 100 square feet in area, and the outermost edge of the sign must be
at least ten feet from the property line. These signs may be lit so long as
they are not illuminated in such a way as to constitute a hazard inhibiting the
vision of vehicle operators. Retail gasoline sales establishments may also have
one additional sign to display its prices and said sign shall not exceed 50
square feet. The committee established pursuant to division (B)(1) above shall
have the authority to approve non-conforming signs outside of the central
business district if it is determined that a sign will not detract from, or
interfere with any surrounding buildings and will comply with the general
planning of the area.
   (C)   Shopping centers.
      (1)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a SHOPPING CENTER is defined
as two or more commercial establishments, which share a common place name such
as “shopping center”, “market place” or similar identification.
      (2)   A shopping center may have one free-standing sign not exceeding 100
square feet in area and a directory of occupants not exceeding 100 square feet.
Signs on stores or service establishments within the center shall be placed on
buildings in a flat manner, extending no more than 12 inches outward from the
building.
   (D)   Planned commercial developments. Each planned commercial development
shall be permitted two free-standing signs not over 25 feet in height, or more
than 150 square feet In area, and a directory of firms not exceeding 100 square
feet. Other signs in the development shall be attached to the buildings in a
flat manner and shall not extend from the building more than 12 inches.
   (E)   Industrial districts.
      (1)   Industrial parks designed for multiple occupancy shall be permitted
one free-standing sign or billboard not to exceed 250 square feet in area for
each-roadway or street, which borders the park. No sign may be located closer
to the street right-of-way than 20 feet.
      (2)   Individual industry locations shall be permitted one sign not
exceeding 150 square feet in area for each roadway or street, which borders its
property. Such sign(s) shall not be located closer than 20 feet from the
property borderline(s). Other signs shall be affixed fiat against the building.
      (3)   Each industry, whether in a park, or occupying a separate lot,
shall be permitted one free-standing sign of not more than 20 square feet for
directional purposes to assure the convenience of vendors and visitors.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.112 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The following signs shall be permitted in all districts and shall not
require a permit unless otherwise noted:
   (A)   Construction signs, which identify the architects, engineers,
contractors and other individuals or firms which, are involved in a permitted
project. Product logos may be displayed, but no additional advertising shall be
allowed. Such signs shall be restricted to an area of 16 square feet for each
firm. The signs must be restricted to the construction site, and shall be
placed at least five feet inward from the property line. They must be removed
within 14 days after the completion of the advertised project;
   (B)   (1)   Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of
premises shall be restricted to a total of 35 square feet for properties other
than residential. For residential properties the limit shall be ten square
feet. These signs shall not be illuminated, and must be placed at least five
feet inward from the property line. They must be removed within 14 days after
the sale, lease or rental by the seller, lessor or his or her agent.
      (2)   Signs advertising an auction shall be limited to 32 square feet in
size, and shall be removed within seven days after the auction occurs.
   (C)   Political campaign signs announcing the candidacy of individuals, or
those which seek support for or against a proposition to be voted on may be
placed upon private property with the consent of the owner(s). Such political
signs must not exceed 20 square feet in area, and must be removed within seven
days after the vote is taken; and
   (D)   Street banners advertising public entertainment or an event requires
the approval of the Chairperson of the planning Commission or his or her
designee. Such approval may be given for a period of 30 days prior to the
event. The banners must be taken down within seven days after the event takes
place.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.113 PORTABLE SIGNS.
   (A)   In locations other than planned commercial developments, or shopping
centers, mobile/portable signs shall be permitted for periods of 30 days for
the purpose of advertising special events or safe specials which may be offered
by an enterprise. Such signs must be placed so as not to obstruct the
motorist’s view of the right-of-way, and must be setback at least to the
midpoint of the required setback line and the traveled portion of the roadway.
In no instance shall such sign be closer than ten feet to the roadway.
   (B)   A permit for the placement of portable signs must be obtained from the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee. Permits will be
valid for a period of 30 days from the date of issue.
   (C)   The fee for the issuance of a portable sign permit shall be set by the
county’s Planning Commission for a 30-day period.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.114 PERMANENT SIGNS; BILLBOARDS.
   (A)   Permanent signs, such as billboards, are classified as structures
within the meaning of this chapter and require that a permit be obtained prior
to erection or construction. (As previously noted, billboards along federal aid
highways are subject to state and federal regulation. However, the regulations
of this chapter may be more stringent than those of the commonwealth’s
Department of Transportation.)
   (B)   No billboards shall be permitted in any residential district.
   (C)   Unless otherwise proscribed in other sections of this chapter, the
following maximum dimensions apply to billboards:
 
Maximum area                          400 feet
                                      40 feet, measured from the average grade
                                      level at the base of the sign; however,
                                      If the average level at the base of the
Maximum height                        sign is lower than the average grade
                                      level of the adjacent highway, then the
                                      maximum height shall be 30 feet, measured
                                      from the average grade level of the
                                      highway
Minimum distance from right-of-way or 20 feet
property line
 
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.115 PERMITS FOR SIGN CONSTRUCTION OR ERECTION.
   Applications for the construction or erection of new permanent signs, or for
modification of existing billboards and signs shall be made to the Chairperson
of the Planning Commission or his or her designee, on forms to be provided by
him or her. A fee set by the Planning Commission, per square foot, subject to a
minimum fee of $25 shall accompany the application to defray the cost of
issuing a permit and for the inspection of the sign after its installation.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.116 AMORTIZATION OF NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   All non-conforming signs must either be altered to conform to this chapter
or be removed.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 153.130 DEFINITIONS.
   The definition of terms used in this subchapter shall be those set forth in
§
153.006  of this chapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.131 WHEN MOBILE HOMES ARE CONSIDERED STANDARD HOUSING.
   (A)   Mobile homes shall be considered standard housing when the following
conditions are met.
      (1)   A building permit is obtained.
      (2)   The home is anchored to a solid continuous foundation of concrete,
concrete blocks or other permanent material.
   (B)   The above conditions must be met within 90 days from the date the
permit is issued, and a performance bond shall be required.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.132 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   (A)   General. Mobile home parks are permitted in R-2 Zones subject to the
provisions of this subchapter. (By definition, the permanent placement of
recreational vehicles is prohibited. Vehicles used for the purpose of travel
which do not exceed the length of 24 feet may be stored in the rear yard of any
residential lot; provided that, yard lot requirements of this chapter are
maintained.)
   (B)   Area and density requirements. The developer may be permitted to
develop the park in stages so long as he or she compiles with the overall plan
approved for the entire tract, and initially has a minimum of two mobile home
lots developed for use. The number of mobile home lots permitted In a park
shall not exceed 12 per net acre. (A NET ACRE is defined as being the land
remaining to be subdivided into lots after the street and other required
improvements are installed.)
   (C)   Lot size. Individual lots within a mobile home park shall not be less
than 4,000 square feet in area, and in no instance shall more than one mobile
home be permitted on a single mobile home lot. The minimum width of a mobile
home lot shall be 40 feet.
   (D)   Setback. No mobile home shall be located closer than 15 feet to any
building within the park, or to any property or road line. The setback
requirements for R-1 and R-2 Districts must be met.
   (E)   Spacing. No mobile home shall be located within 25 feet of another
mobile home; except that, minimum end-to-end clearance of not less than 15 feet
may be permitted.
   (F)   Streets. All mobile homes shall abut on a street. All streets within a
mobile home park shall have a right-of-way of not less than 25 feet and a
pavement of not less than 20 feet in width. All of the streets within a mobile
home park must be hard surfaced, as set forth in §
152.067  of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Maintenance of streets. The owner of the park shall maintain the
streets and roadways of a mobile home park. Should the lots within the park be
sold to individual owners, the county may take over the maintenance of the
streets as county streets upon the following conditions.
      (1)   Upon the first sale of a lot within the park to an individual
purchaser, the owner(s) of the park must post a security bond assuring the
county that the streets and roads within the park meet the standards of
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances. Upon the sale of 60% of the lots within the
park to individual owners, the county will assume a proportional cost of the
maintenance if the standards have been met.
      (2)   If all of the lots are sold to individual owners, and the streets,
and/or roadways meet acceptable standards, the streets within the park shall
become city/county streets.
      (3)   The cost of engineering studies and tests to determine the
acceptability of streets and roads of a mobile home park shall be borne by the
developer, or the owner(s) of lots within the park.
   (H)   Access to public streets and roadways. Each mobile home park shall
have one street, which gives access to a public street, highway or roadway.
   (I)   Lighting. All streets within a mobile home park must be well-lighted,
and such lighting shall meet the standards of street lighting in the county.
   (J)   Drainage. Adequate drainage must be provided to assure that there will
be no property damage or health hazard due to standing water or flooding
conditions.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.133 PARKING.
   Parking spaces must be provided as detailed in §
153.091  of this chapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.134 UTILITIES.
   All lots within a mobile home park must be provided with water, sewer,
electrical and/or gas facilities meeting the standards specified by the county
and state regulations. Each mobile home shall be properly connected with said
utilities.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.135 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Water mains serving mobile home parks shall not be less than six
inches in diameter, including hydrant branch connections installed in
conformity with the minimum requirements of the servicing utility.
   (B)   Fire hydrants shall meet minimum specifications and shall be installed
no farther apart than 500 feet. In no instance shall the distance of any mobile
home from a fire hydrant exceed 300 feet.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.136 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No accessory structure, including patios and pads shall be located
within five feet of any mobile home or trailer lot line.
   (B)   The maximum floor area of accessory structures shall not exceed 100
square feet, and the maximum height shall be no greater than ten feet.
   (C)   All structures shall be built in compliance with the Building Code.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.137 PROCEDURE FOR PERMITTING.
   Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile home park shall submit a copy of
the application submitted to the Kentucky Cabinet for Human Resources as
required by KRS 219.350 as amended, and in addition shall furnish the following
information:
   (A)   Dimensions and locations of all proposed lot lines, roads and
easements, number for each mobile home lot;
   (B)   Contour lines to indicate slope and drainage;
   (C)   Location of all utilities, public and private water, sewer, drainage,
electrical and gas facilities and easements;
   (D)   The location of public areas such as visitor parking, recreational
areas and the like;
   (E)   A large-scale plan of one typical mobile home lot showing location,
automobile parking and the like; and
   (F)   The location of plantings for landscape purposes, or as may be
required for protective screening by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.138 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   The Planning Commission may attach reasonable conditions to its approval of
a mobile home or trailer park and may direct the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission or his or her designee to issue a permit subject to such conditions.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.139 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee shall
issue a certificate of occupancy only after he or she has determined that the
mobile home park has been developed according to all applicable regulations and
special conditions, and that the applicant has received a valid permit to
operate from the state’s Department of Health as required by KRS 219.330.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.140 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee shall
ensure that all mobile home and trailer parks maintain valid permits to
operate, and that they maintain conformance with all the applicable regulations
and special conditions.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.141 EXCEPTION.
   The Planning Commission may reject any proposed mobile home or trailer park
application even though it meets all requirements if the Planning Commission
determines that existing conforming mobile home and trailer parks are not fully
occupied and/or utilized and, therefore, that the development of more land for
such use is not in accord with the public welfare of the community.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
§ 153.155 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   (1)   The development of land exceeding one acre in size for
residential and commercial uses (other than for one single-family dwelling on a
lot of such size), and for industrial parks shall be subject to the specific
review of the Board of Adjustments. The developer(s) of such acreage shall
submit a plan for the proposed development showing metes and bounds and a plat
showing proposed usage.
      (2)   This plat must be accompanied by a survey by a certified land
surveyor.
   (B)   If the tract of land proposed to be developed is not appropriately
zoned for the requested use, a zoning amendment must be requested. All legal
procedures must be followed, and a map amendment duly authorized prior to the
start of the proposed development.
   (C)   In approving proposals for planned developments, the Board of
Adjustments must be satisfied that the proponents of the planned development
project(s) are financially able to carry out the proposed project(s) and that
construction will begin within one year after approval of the plan.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.156 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A planned commercial development is defined as a proposal for the
utilization of an area exceeding one acre in size for the construction of
building(s) and/or facilities to house two or more commercial establishments
either in separate or a common structure.
      (2)   The owner(s) of the land, or the developer(s) shall be required to
submit to the Board of Adjustments for its review a preliminary plan for the
use and development of the tract of land and survey accurately describing its
metes and bounds.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Adjustments to investigate,
and to ascertain, whether the proposed location and plan comply with the
following:
         (a)   The project is at a location where traffic congestion does not
exist at present on the streets to be used for access to the proposed
commercial development, and where such congestion is not likely to be created
by the proposed development;
         (b)   The plan provides for a project consisting of two or more
establishments in a building, or in buildings of unified and harmonious design
together with adequate, and properly arranged traffic and parking facilities
and landscaping, and will have no adverse effect upon adjoining or surrounding
development; and
         (c)   The uses proposed are consistent with those permitted within the
district.
   (B)   Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the planned
commercial development.
      (1)   Tract coverage. The area around occupied by all buildings shall not
exceed, in aggregate, 50% of the total area of the lot or tract.
      (2)   Customer parking space. Notwithstanding any other requirement of
this chapter, there shall be provided one off-street parking space for each 400
square feet of retail or customer service floor space.
      (3)   Loading space.
         (a)   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, there
shall be provided one off-street loading space for each 10,000 square feet of
building floor space, or major fraction thereof.
         (b)   At least one-third of the loading spaces shall be significant in
area and offer vertical clearance for the accommodation of trucks of the
tractor-trailer type.
      (4)   Signs. Signs shall be permitted as per §§
153.110  through
153.116  of this chapter.
   (C)   Special conditions. The Board of Adjustments may attach reasonable
special conditions to ensure that there will be no departure from the intent of
this chapter. The proposed commercial development shall comply with all such
conditions, and a final plat shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustments for
its review prior to the start of construction.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.157 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK.
   (A)   General. When a development is defined as a planned industrial park,
it shall be subject to the following. The owner or owners of land in an
industrial district co-owning not less than four acres shall submit to the
Board of Adjustments for its review a preliminary plan for the use and
development of such land as a planned industrial park.
   (B)   Conditions. It shall be the duty of the Board to investigate, and to
ascertain, whether the proposed location and plan comply with the following
conditions:
      (1)   The proposed industrial park is located where traffic congestion
does not exist at present on the streets to be utilized for access to the
proposed park and where congestion will not be likely to be created by the
development;
      (2)   That the plan provides for an industrial park consisting of one or
more buildings of unified and harmonious design, together with the required
parking facilities and landscaping, and that the development will have no
adverse effect upon adjoining or nearby developments; and
      (3)   The uses permitted shall be those, which are authorized for an
industrial district as set forth in §
153.074  of this chapter.
   (C)   Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to a planned
industrial park.
      (1)   Building heights. No building shall exceed six stories or 75 feet
in height.
      (2)   Fumes and odors. No noxious or offensive trade or activity shall be
carried on, nor shall anything be done which may be or become an annoyance or
nuisance by reason of unsightliness, or the excessive emission of odor, dust,
fumes or smoke. Signs shall be permitted as per §
153.111  of this chapter.
      (3)   Landscaping. The area between the building lines and the property
lines is to be used either for open landscaped and green areas or for off-
street parking. Any landscaped area shall be properly maintained in a sightly
condition. Parking areas shall also be maintained in good condition.
      (4)   Building setbacks. No building may be erected within an industrial
park nearer than 100 feet to the street right-of-way upon which it faces, nor
nearer than 25 feet to the right-of-way of any other existing or proposed
streets, nor shall any such building be erected nearer than 25 feet to the side
or rear property lines.
      (5)   General provisions. Other provisions as set forth in §§
153.070  through
153.074  of this chapter dealing with loading docks, parking, storage, signs,
screening and waste disposal shall apply to an industrial park.
      (6)   Other conditions. The Board of Adjustments may attach reasonable
conditions to ensure that there shall be no departure from the intent of this
chapter. The proposed industrial park shall comply with all such conditions,
and a final plat shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustments for its review
and approval before construction begins.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.158 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A planned residential development is a large-scale development
constructed by a single owner or a group of owners acting jointly, located on a
single tract of land and involving a related group of residences and associated
uses, planned as an entity and, therefore, constituting one complex land use
unit.
      (2)   A planned residential development project plat and plan must be
presented to the Planning Commission for review and approval.
   (B)   Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to a planned
residential development.
      (1)   Zoning. The proposed site must be located in a residential
district.
      (2)   Plat plan. A plat shall be presented for Planning Commission
review, which shows the following:
         (a)   Kind, location, build and capacity of structures and uses;
         (b)   General floor plan of buildings;
         (c)   Location and identification of open spaces, streets and all
other means for pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parks recreational areas
and other non-building sites;
         (d)   Provision for automobile parking; and
         (e)   General nature and location of public and private utilities and
other community facilities and services.
   (C)   Intensity of land use. The intensity of land use shall be no higher,
and the standard for open space shall be no lower than that permitted by this
chapter.
   (D)   Zoning restrictions to apply. In no case shall the Planning Commission
authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the housing is located, or
a smaller gross lot area per family than the minimum required for said
district, or a greater height, or a larger coverage than required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWERS
§ 153.170 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the safest and most
efficient integration of cellular antenna towers for cellular
telecommunications services or personal communications services within the
community; to provide for such facilities in coordination with the
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan; and to allow for such facilities
with the intention of furthering the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.171 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. Human-made trees, clock towers, bell
towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that accommodate, camouflage, minimize or conceal the presence of
cellular antennas or cellular antenna towers and that are constructed primarily
for the purpose of accommodating cellular antennas or cellular antenna towers
or are reconstructed for the purpose of accommodating cellular antennas or
cellular antenna towers. This does not include existing structures erected for
another primary purpose, but which subsequently have cellular antennas attached
to or located within them, without any reconstruction of the original
structure. For the provisions of these regulations, an ALTERNATIVE CELLULAR
ANTENNA TOWER is considered a cellular antenna tower.
   ANTENNAS OR RELATED EQUIPMENT. Transmitting, receiving or other equipment
used to support cellular telecommunications service or personal communications
service. This definition does not include towers.
   CELLULAR ANTENNA, ROOFTOP. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on, or attached to, the rooftop of a building through gravity mounts or
other surface attachments used for cellular wireless or other cellular
telecommunications signals; integrated into the natural rooftop profile of a
building so that it resembles a permissible rooftop structure, such as a
ventilator, cooling equipment, solar equipment, water tank, chimney or parapet.
   CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A tower constructed for, or an existing facility
that has been adapted for, the location of transmission or related equipment to
be used in the provision of cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services.
   CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER HEIGHT. The distance from the anchored base of the
tower, whether on the top of another building or at grade, to the highest point
of the antenna structure.
   CELLULAR EQUIPMENT CABINET. A cabinet designed to house radio equipment
similar in size to a traffic signal cabinet, not designed for human occupancy.
Any maintenance to radio equipment can only be done from outside the cabinet,
as opposed to a larger-sized equipment shelter that can be totally accessed by
service personnel.
   CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. A retail telecommunications service
that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and mobile switching
stations.
   CELLULAR TELEPHONE TRANSMITTING FACILITY, TEMPORARY. Any system of wires,
poles, rods, reflecting disks, or similar devices used for the transmission or
reception of electromagnetic waves, not meeting the definition of a “structure”
as defined by this chapter. TEMPORARY FACILITIES shall be subject to issuance
of a locational permit from the Planning Commission prior to being located on a
property.
   CO-LOCATION. Locating two or more transmission antennas or related equipment
on the same cellular antenna tower.
   ENVIRONMENTALLY-SENSITIVE AREAS. Significant wildlife habitat and migration
corridors, unique vegetation and critical plant communities and ridgelines.
   GEOLOGIC HAZARDS. Unstable or potentially unstable slopes, undermining,
faulting, landslides, rockfalls, flood, wildfire or similar naturally occurring
dangerous features or soil conditions or natural features unfavorable to
development.
   GUYED CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A type of wireless transmission tower that is
supported by thin guy wires.
   LATTICE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A self-supporting tower with multiple legs
and cross-bracing of structural steel.
   MONOPOLE CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A slender self-sup porting tower on which
wireless antennas can be placed.
   PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Has the meaning as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
332(c).
   SEARCH RING. The necessary search area within which a site for a cellular
antenna tower should, pursuant to radio frequency requirements, be located.
   UNIFORM APPLICATION. An application to construct a cellular antenna tower
submitted to the Planning Commission in conformity with KRS 100.985 through KRS
100.987.
   UTILITY. Has the meaning as defined in KRS 278.010(3).
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.172 PERMITTED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   To the greatest extent feasible, applicants are encouraged to consider
properties owned by the local government for the location of cellular towers.
Whenever possible, cellular antenna towers, whether temporary or permanent,
shall be sited at locations that minimize their adverse effect on residential
uses in the immediate area. Only when no other adequate site is available shall
a cellular antenna tower be permitted in a residential zone, unless located on
a property not used or intended for residential purposes.
   (B)   In accordance with the procedures established by this subchapter,
cellular antenna towers may be permitted in any zone when approved by the
Planning Commission, with the following exceptions.
      (1)   No cellular antenna tower shall be constructed on land that is
environmentally sensitive or a geologic hazard area as delineated in the
county’s Comprehensive Plan and the definitions herein, unless the tower has
received approval or necessary permits from the appropriate state or federal
governmental regulatory agency charged with permitting activities in these
areas.
      (2)   No cellular antenna tower shall be located along a scenic byway, as
designated by the commonwealth, so as to have a negative impact on the scenic
qualities of the roadway and the views from the roadway. When approved by the
Planning Commission, any wireless communications facility proposed to be
located along a state and/or federally designated scenic byway, or within a
scenic view corridor, shall be located on an existing tower structure or
utility pole, or shall be designed as an alternative tower, as described
herein. Any tower or antenna that is not an alternative tower design shall be
designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color
and/or other camouflaging architectural treatments, except in instances where
color is dictated by federal or state authorities, such as the Federal Aviation
Administration. In addition, the base of the tower and any supporting equipment
shall be located either 300feet from the right-of-way or beyond the view shed
of the designated scenic byway, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.173 UNIFORM APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services may be allowed in any zone after a Planning Commission
review in accordance with the following procedures to ascertain agreement with
the adopted Comprehensive Plan and the regulations contained within this
chapter.
   (A)   Applicability. Every utility, or company that is engaged in the
business of providing the required infrastructure to a utility, that proposes
to construct a cellular antenna tower shall submit a completed uniform
application to the Planning Commission. Where the Planning Commission finds
that circumstances or conditions relating to the application of an alternative
cellular antenna tower are such that one or more of the requirements of the
uniform application listed below are not necessary or desirable for the
protection of surrounding property or the public health, safety and general
welfare, and that such special conditions or circumstances make one or more
said requirements unreasonable, the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized
representative, may modify or waive such requirement of the uniform
application, either permanently or on a temporary basis. Any such modification
or waiver shall be requested by the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a
written justification for each requested modification or waiver. The Planning
Commission shall not regulate the placement of antennas or related equipment on
an existing structure.
   (B)   Uniform application requirements. Applications for the construction of
cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall include the following:
      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The applicant’s articles of Incorporation, if applicable;
      (3)   A geotechnical investigation report signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the commonwealth that includes boring logs
and foundation design recommendations;
      (4)   A written report, prepared by a professional engineer or land
surveyor registered in the commonwealth, of findings as to the proximity of the
proposed site to flood hazard areas;
      (5)   The lease or sale agreement for the property on which the tower is
proposed to be located, except that if the agreement has been filed in
abbreviated form with the County Clerk, an applicant may file a copy of the
agreement as recorded by the County Clerk and, if applicable, the portion of
the agreement that specifies. In the case of abandonment, a method that the
utility will follow in dismantling and removing the proposed cellular antenna
tower, including a timetable for removal;
      (6)   The identity and qualifications of each person directly responsible
for the design and construction of the proposed tower;
      (7)   A site development plan or survey, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the commonwealth, that shows the proposed
location of the tower and all easements and existing structures within 500 feet
of the proposed site on the property on which the tower will be located, and
all easements and existing structures within 200 feet of the access drive,
including the intersection with the public street system;
      (8)   A vertical profile sketch of the tower, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the commonwealth, indicating the height of
the tower and the placement or all antennas;
      (9)   The tower and foundation design plans and a description of the
standard according to which the tower was designed, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the commonwealth;
      (10)   A map, drawn to a scale no less than one inch equals 200 feet,
that identifies every structure and every owner of real estate within 500 feet
of the proposed;
      (11)   A statement that every person who, according to the records of the
property valuation administrator, owns property within 500 feet of the proposed
tower or property contiguous to the site upon which the tower is proposed to be
constructed has been:
         (a)   Notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
proposed construction, which notice shall include a map of the location of the
proposed construction;
         (b)   Given the telephone number and address of the local Planning
Commission; and
         (c)   Informed of his or her right to participate in the Planning
Commission’s proceedings on the application.
      (12)   A list of the property owners who received the notice, together
with copies of the certified letters sent to the listed property owners;
      (13)   A copy of the notice that the chief executive officer of the
affected local government and the legislative body (i.e., City Mayors; City
Commissioners; County Judge Executive; and County Fiscal Court), have been
notified, in writing, of the proposed construction;
      (14)   A statement that the applicant has considered the likely effects
of the installation on nearby land uses and values and has concluded that there
is no more suitable location reasonably available from which adequate service
to the area can be provided, and that there is no reasonably available
opportunity to locate its antennas and related facilities on an existing
structure, including documentation of attempts to locate Its antennas and
related facilities on an existing structure, if any, with supporting radio
frequency analysis, where applicable, and a statement indicating that the
applicant attempted to locate its antennas and related facilities on a tower
designed to host multiple wireless service providers’ facilities or on an
existing structure, such as a telecommunications tower or other suitable
structure capable of supporting the applicant’s antennas and related
facilities;
      (15)   A map of the area in which the tower is proposed to be located,
that is drawn to scale, and that clearly depicts the necessary search area
within which an antenna tower should, pursuant to radio frequency requirements,
be located; and
      (16)   A grid map that shows the location of towers or other structures
(including buildings) located within the search ring for the subject facility
and which are capable of its support within an area that includes:
         (a)   All of the planning unit’s jurisdiction (McLean County,
Kentucky);
         (b)   A one-half-mile area outside of the boundaries of the planning
unit’s jurisdiction, if that area contains either existing or proposed
construction sites for cellular antenna towers; and
         (c)   All information contained in the application and any updates,
except for any map or other information that specifically identifies the
proposed location of the cellular antenna tower then being reviewed, shall be
deemed confidential and proprietary within the meaning of KRS 61.878. The
Planning Commission shall deny any public request for the inspection of this
information, whether submitted under the commonwealth’s Open Records Act, being
KRS 61.870 et seq. or otherwise, except when ordered to release the information
by a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person violating this division (B)
(16)(c) shall be guilty of official misconduct in the second degree as provided
under KRS 522.030. The confidentiality of the applications and any updates of
the application can be waived by the written authorization of the applicant.
   (C)   Application fee. An applicant for the construction of cellular antenna
towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal communications
services shall pay an application fee in the amount set by the Planning
Commission upon submission of a uniform application.
   (D)   Processing of application. Applications for the construction of
cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall be processed as follows.
      (1)   At least one public hearing on the proposal shall be held, at which
hearing interested parties and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once,
in the highest circulation newspaper in the city-county; provided that, one
publication occurs not less than seven calendar days nor more than 21 calendar
days before the occurrence of such hearing. A public notice sign will also be
placed on the property by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days in advance of
the hearing to the owner of every parcel of property within 500 feet of the
proposed tower or property contiguous to the site upon which the tower is
proposed to be constructed. Records maintained by the property valuation
administrator may be relied upon conclusively to determine the identity and
address of said owner. In the event a property is in condominium or cooperative
forms of ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or
chairperson of the owner group that administers property commonly owned by the
condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may be mailed to two or more
co-owners of an adjoining property who are listed in the property valuation
administrator’s records as having the same address.
      (3)   Upon holding the hearing, the Planning Commission shall, within 60
days, commencing from the date that the application is received by the Planning
Commission, or within a date specified in a written agreement between the
Planning Commission and the applicant, make its final decision to approve or
disapprove the uniform application. If the Planning Commission fails to issue a
final decision within 60 days, and if there is no written agreement between the
Planning Commission and the utility to a specific date for the Planning
Commission to issue a decision. It shall be presumed that the Planning
Commission has approved the utility’s uniform application.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.174 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   An applicant shall provide information demonstrating compliance with the
requirements contained herein. Potential sites that should be considered (in
order from most preferred to least preferred) include street rights-of-way,
existing utility towers, industrial zones, commercial zones and government
buildings. Where the Planning Commission finds that circumstances or conditions
relating to the particular application are such that one or more of the
requirements listed below are not necessary or desirable for the protection of
surrounding property or the public health, safety and general welfare, and that
such special conditions or circumstances make one or more said requirements
unreasonable, the Planning Commission, or its duly authorized representative,
may modify or waive such requirement, either permanently or on a temporary
basis. Any such modification or waiver shall be requested by the applicant, and
the applicant shall submit a written justification for each requested
modification or waiver.
   (A)   Permitted by zone. Monopole cellular antenna towers shall be permitted
in any zone. Lattice and guyed cellular antenna towers shall be permitted in
any zone, except for residential zones.
   (B)   Distance. Lattice and guyed cellular antenna towers distance from
residential buildings when constructed in an agricultural zone, said towers
shall be located a minimum distance of not less than 250 feet from all existing
residential structures. Distance shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the nearest wall of the residential structure.
   (C)   Setbacks. All structures constructed in connection with guyed or
lattice cellular antenna towers, except fences and/or guy wires, shall be s
minimum distance from the property line or lease line equal to at least one-
half the height of the tower, but not less than 50 feet. All structures
constructed in connection with monopole or alternative cellular antenna tower
shall comply with the applicable setback requirements established for other
structures within the applicable zoning district. Alternative cellular antenna
towers that are to be located as part of a utility service facility (e.g.,
power pole or telephone pole) shall comply with setback requirements applicable
to such utility service facilities, if any.
   (D)   Height. A cellular antenna tower, or alternative antenna tower
structure, may be constructed to a maximum height of 200 feet, regardless of
the maximum height requirements listed in the specific zoning district. This
also applies to any tower taller than 15 feet constructed on the top of another
building or structure, with the height being the overall height of building/
structure and tower together, measured from the grade to the highest point. The
Planning Commission may allow antennas greater than 200 feet in height upon
review of the applicant’s justification that the additional height meets the
criteria identified herein.
   (E)   Construction. The cellular antenna tower shall be constructed in
compliance with the current ANSI/EIA/TIA 222-F standards and other applicable
state standards.
   (F)   Illumination. Cellular antenna towers shall not be illuminated, except
in accordance with other state or federal regulations.
   (G)   Site unstayed. Personnel may periodically visit the site for
maintenance, equipment modification or repairs to accommodate such visits,
ingress/egress shall be only from approved access points.
   (H)   Fencing. Woven wire or chain link (80% open) or solid fences made from
wood or other materials (less than 50% open) shall be used to enclose the site.
Such fences shall not be more than eight feet in height and may be located
within the front, side or rear yard. The use of barbed-wire or sharp pointed
fences shall be prohibited in or along any boundary adjoining residential or Ml
IP Zones.
   (I)   Screening. Screening shall be provided by evergreen trees, with a
minimum height of six feet, planted in a staggered pattern at a maximum
distance of 15 feet on center. The screening shall be placed in an area between
the property line, or lease line, and a ten-foot setback.
   (J)   Access drives. Surfacing of all driveways and off-street parking areas
shall comply with the requirements of the applicable local zoning ordinance;
the Planning Commission may allow gravel access drives in cases where it is
determined there is a hardship or other mitigating circumstances.
   (K)   Signs. There shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying
emergency information, owner contact information, warning or safety
instructions, or signs that are required by a federal, state or local agency.
Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area.
   (L)   Number of service providers. All new cellular antenna towers shall be
designed and constructed to accommodate a minimum of three service providers.
   (M)   Lease agreements. All option and site lease agreements shall not
prohibit the possibility of co-location, and in the case of abandonment, shall
include a method that the utility will follow in dismantling and removing the
proposed cellular antenna tower, including a timetable for removal.
   (N)   Approval. Approval of Federal Aviation Administration and the
commonwealth’s Airport Zoning Commission is required; or documentation where
approval is not required shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the construction of the cellular antenna tower.
   (O)   Mitigation design standards. Mitigating design standards for cellular
antenna towers in residential zones. When no adequate alternate site for a
cellular antenna tower is available, a site in a residential zone may be
permitted. The Planning Commission shall consider the following mitigating
design standards and may reduce or modify these standards in cases where it can
be demonstrated that there is extreme hardship.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall have the power to impose additional
landscaping requirements, which may include plantings, trees and fencing
designed to complement the character of the landscaping in the surrounding
residential area.
      (2)   Design and materials to be used in the accessory building or
buildings may be required to be submitted to the Planning Commission for review
and approval.
      (3)   Asphalt or other hard-surface paving shall be provided for
driveways and parking.
      (4)   A one to one (1:1) height-to-yard ratio shall be required. A
reduction in the height-to-yard ratio may be permitted if no other location for
the tower can be found.
      (5)   Monopole or alternative tower design shall be used in any
residential zone; and paint colors, such as light gray or light blue, shall be
used to minimize any negative visual impact the tower or antenna may have on
adjoining properties. The tower must be maintained on a regular basis by the
owner of the facility in order to ensure that it continues to have a minimal
visual impact on the surrounding area.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.175 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to hear and decide
requests by an applicant for a cellular antenna tower. The Planning Commission
may approve, disapprove or take no action on the request for a cellular antenna
tower.
   (B)   The burden shall be on the applicant to establish the following by a
clear preponderance of the evidence:
      (1)   The application is in agreement with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   The application meets all requirements of this chapter;
      (3)   Reasons why the site is appropriate for a cellular antenna tower
and why it will not have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of
the adjoining area;
      (4)   Reasons why the tower will not alter the essential character of the
surrounding area;
      (5)   Reasons why the applicant has been unsuccessful in its attempts to
co-locate on towers designed to host multiple wireless service providers’
facilities or other existing structures, such as a telecommunications tower or
another suitable structure capable of supporting the applicant’s facilities;
and
      (6)   The Planning Commission shall not regulate the placement of a
cellular antenna tower on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that the proposed facility complies with the
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission concerning radio frequency
emissions.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 153.190 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into
electric energy suitable for use. The area of the system includes all the land
inside the perimeter of the system, which extends to any fencing.
   (B)   For the purposes of these zoning regulations, solar energy systems are
divided into three classes.
      (1)   Level 1 Solar Energy System. A roof-mounted system on any code
compliant structure, an area of up to 50% of the footprint of the primary
structure on the parcel, but not more than one acre and not more than 25 feet
tall or any building integrated system (i.e., shingle, hanging solar, canopy
and the like).
      (2)   Level 2 Solar Energy System. Any ground-mounted system not included
in a Level 1 SES and meets the following area restrictions.
         (a)   In an agricultural zone, the area of the SES shall not exceed
one-half acre in size and shall require a building permit issued by the
Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee, in areas
exceeding one-half acre, a site plan shall be required by the county’s Planning
Commission.
         (b)   In an industrial zone, the SES shall not exceed ten acres in
size.
         (c)   In an industrial zone, an SES of any size shall require a site
plan approved by the county’s Planning Commission.
      (3)   Level 3 Solar Energy System. Any system that does not satisfy the
parameters for a Level 1 or Level 2 SES.
   (C)   A panel measuring less than 20 square feet for the primary purpose of
charging a battery(s) at a remote site shall be exempt from this regulation
(i.e., weather station, storm warning siren, communications tower and the
like).
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
§ 153.191 REQUIREMENTS.
   Solar energy systems (SES) shall comply with the following criteria.
   (A)   The height of any ground-mounted SES shall not exceed 25 feet as
measured from the highest natural grade below each solar panel (excludes
utility poles, substations and antennas constructed for the project).
   (B)   Setback requirements for Level 1 and Level 2 SES shall be in
compliance with the zoning classification for the parcel.
   (C)   Setback requirements for Level 3 SES shall be as follows.
      (1)   All equipment shall be at least 25 feet from the perimeter property
lines of the project area.
      (2)   No interior property line setbacks shall be required if the project
spans multiple contiguous properties.
      (3)   All equipment shall be located at least 100 feet from any
residential structure and the maximum height of any individual component will
be 25 feet measured from the local ground level of the component.
   (D)   All Level 3 SES shall be screened with a seven-foot tall fence and, to
the extent reasonably practicable, a visual buffer that provides reasonable
screening to reduce the view of the SES from residential dwelling units on
adjacent lots (including those lots located across a public right-of-way). A
vegetation screening plan to reduce the view of the SES from residential
dwelling units on adjacent lots will be submitted for approval of the county’s
Planning Commission. The existing natural tree growth and natural land forms
along the SES perimeter may create a sufficient buffer and shall be preserved
when reasonably practicable. When no alternative vegetation screening plan is
approved by the county’s Planning Commission, a double row of staggered
evergreen trees will be planted 15 feet on center from adjacent non-
participating residential dwellings including the outdoor living space
immediately near residential dwellings.
   (E)   Parcel boundaries with no proximity to residential dwellings shall not
require screening. The proposed evergreen trees shall be placed on the exterior
of security fencing. The use of barbed wire or sharp pointed fences shall be
prohibited in or along any boundary adjoining residential properties. There
shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying emergency information,
owner contact information, warning or safety instructions or signs that are
required by a federal, state or local agency. Such signs shall not exceed five
square feet in area.
   (F)   Excessive lighting shall be prohibited except that required by federal
or state regulations.
   (G)   Decommissioning of Level 3 SES shall be as follows.
      (1)   The developer shall post a surety bond, or other form of security
acceptable to the county, for the abandonment of the site and in the event the
Commission must remove the facility. Abandonment shall be when the SES ceases
to transfer energy on a continuous basis for 12 months. The surety bond or
other form or security shall be 1% of the total project cost recalculated every
five years during the project life.
      (2)   A decommissioning plan shall be submitted at the time of
application by the developer responsible for decommissioning and must include
the following:
         (a)   Defined conditions upon which the decommissioning will be
initiated (i.e., there has been no power production for 12 months, the land
lease has ended or succession of use of abandoned facility and the like);
         (b)   Removal of all non-utility owned equipment, conduit, structures,
fencing, roads and foundations to the depth of three feet;
         (c)   Restoration of the property to substantially similar physical
condition that existed immediately prior to construction of the SES;
         (d)   The time frame for completion of decommissioning activities;
         (e)   The party currently responsible for decommissioning; and
         (f)   Plans for updating the decommissioning plan.
(Ord. 20.920-1, passed 3- -2020)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed Description
                          Approving an agreement to create a Joint City-County
70-920.1      5-1-1970    Planning Unit with the cities of Calhoun, Island,
                          Livermore and Sacramento
87-450.2      3-24-1987   Granting a non-exclusive franchise agreement to Tele-
                          Media Company of Green River
                          Intent to enter into an interlocal agreement to
94-130.2      12-12-1994  create an Ethics Board with the cities of Calhoun,
                          Sacramento, Livermore and Island
98-320.1      5-28-1998   Participation in the Kentucky Law Enforcement
                          Foundation Program Fund
02-240.1      6-10-2002   Public safety and fire protection; procuring fire
                          apparatus from any qualified manufacturer
                          Rural development loan agreement; in favor of West
03-140.1      8-12-2003   Kentucky Regional Industrial Development Authority,
                          Inc.; for use in the 4Star Industrial Park
                          infrastructure
                          Amendment; interlocal cooperation agreement of 2-26-
2006-06-140.1 10-10-2006  1999 between the counties of Ohio, Muhlenburg,
                          Hancock, Daviess and McLean
                          Amendment; interlocal cooperation agreement of 2-26-
14-910.1      1-20-2015   1999 between the counties of Ohio, Muhlenburg,
                          Hancock, Daviess and McLean
21.220-39     9-23-2021   Approving a lease agreement; creating a sinking fund;
                          authorizing the execution of various documents
                          Changing the zoning of a 3.758 acre tract and a 3.611
25-153.1      8-28-2025   acre tract located at 3151 State Route 85 E., Island,
                          KY from Industrial (I) to Residential (R-1).
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cite Code Section
KRS Cite                  Code Section
Ch. 13A                   93.02
Ch. 13B                   93.06
16.220                    72.26
18A.225                   113.03
39A to 39F                32.02
39A.020                   95.01
Ch. 39B                   30.084
39B.020                   32.02
Ch. 39F                   32.02
51.250                    151.06
                          30.035;
Ch. 61                    30.040;
                          30.224
61.300                    90.12
61.394                    30.088
61.396                    30.088
61.810                    30.176;
                          31.56
61.823(2)                 91.20
61.823(3)                 91.20
61.823(4)                 91.20
61.825 et seq.            32.01
61.870 et seq.            153.173
61.870 through 61.884     31.65
61.872 through 61.884     31.20
61.878                    153.173
65.120                    Ch. 72
65.8801 to 65.8839        32.15
65.8815(5)                32.18
65.8840(1)(b)             92.01
65.8840(1)(e)             92.01
65.8840(1)(h)             92.01
65.8840(1)(j)             92.01
65.8840(3) - (14)         92.04
Ch. 65A                   30.190
66.660                    91.06
Ch. 67                    30.190
67.084                    151.01
67.710                    30.015
67.750(7)                 110.01
Ch. 68                    30.015
68.005                    30.001
82.082                    31.01
83A                       31.55
83A.010(6)                10.02
83A.010(8)                10.02
83A.060                   31.55
83A.065                   10.99
83A.080                   31.02
91A.010(4)                10.02
91A.010(8)                10.02
91A.080                   110.03
91A.080(2)                113.02
91A.080(3)                113.03
91A.080(7)                113.04
91A.080(8)                113.04;
                          113.05
91A.080(9)                113.04
91A.080(10)               113.03
91A.080(13)               113.03
91A.0804                  Ch. 113
                          152.008;
Ch. 100                   153.003;
                          153.023;
                          153.041
100.111                   152.005
100.217-261               153.021
100.347                   153.022
100.985 through 100.987   153.171
131.010(6)                113.04
139.200                   93.03
149.401                   93.22
Ch. 150                   90.01
Ch.151                    151.05
151.250                   151.05
154.20-250 to 154.20-284  110.03
174.100                   91.20
174.100(1)                91.21,
                          91.22
174.100(2)                91.22
174.100(3)                91.23
174.100(4)                91.24
174.100(5)                91.25
Ch. 177                   153.110
178.290                   91.06
Ch. 179                   30.140
179.020                   30.140
Ch. 186                   70.40
186.020                   72.26
186.240                   30.140
186.560                   71.30
186A.145                  72.26
186A.190                  72.26
189.020                   71.32
189.285                   73.02
189.287                   73.01
189.290                   71.30
189.330(8)                71.02
189.338                   70.20
189.450(5)                72.03
189.450(6)                72.03
189.580                   71.15
189.725                   72.08
189.930                   71.31
189.990                   71.15
189.990(1)                72.99
189.993(8)                71.99
190.010(6)                92.04
190.010(8)                92.04
190.010(11)               92.04
Ch. 198B                  32.03;
                          150.03
198B.070                  150.03
217.900                   30.120
217.900(1)                30.116
218A.010(5)               30.116
219.330                   153.139
219.350                   153.137
224.1-400                 95.02
224.1-400(2) through (27) 95.08
224.1-405                 95.08
224.1-410                 92.04
224.10-210                50.35
224.40-100                50.07
224.40-310                50.07
224.43-010                50.07
224.43-340                50.02
224.50-760                50.02
224.60-100 et seq.        95.01
227.330(6)                93.03
227.550                   92.02
227.700                   93.01
227.700 to 227.750        93.01;
                          93.06
227.702                   93.01
227.704                   93.01
227.706                   93.01
227.708                   93.01
227.710                   93.02
227.715                   93.02;
                          93.03
227.720                   93.04
227.730                   93.05
227.750                   93.06
227.990(1)                150.99
227.990(4)                93.99
244.1-020                 50.02
Ch. 246                   90.01
                          90.03;
Ch. 258                   90.04;
                          90.99
258.015                   90.05
258.915                   90.01
278.010(3)                153.171
281.010                   92.04
281.605(12)               72.26
281.920 to 281.936        72.26
281.926                   72.26
281.928                   72.26
281.928(1)                72.26
281.932                   72.26
Ch. 304                   113.03
318.990                   150.99
Ch. 342                   113.03
342.001 et seq.           50.26;
                          110.03
Ch. 350                   151.05
351.010                   30.116
359.230                   72.26
376.275                   72.26
376.275(1)                72.26
376.275(2)                72.26
376.275(3)                72.26
376.275(4)                72.26
411.500 through 411.570   Ch. 92
Ch. 413                   153.070
                          30.042;
Ch. 424                   30.055;
                          153.041
424.130(1)(b)             30.163
431.005                   32.28
431.015                   32.28
446.010(1)                10.02
446.010(2)                10.02
446.010(9)                10.02
446.010(10)               10.02
446.010(12)               10.02
446.010(13)               10.02
446.010(14)               10.02
446.010(15)               10.02
446.010(17)               10.02
446.010(18)               10.02
446.010(23)               10.02
446.010(25)               10.02
446.010(26)               10.02
446.010(27)               10.02
446.010(28)               10.02
446.010(30)               10.02
446.010(31)               10.02
446.010(33)               10.02
446.010(37)               10.02
446.010(39)               10.02
446.010(43)               10.02
446.010(46)               10.02
446.010(47)               10.02
446.010(49)               10.02
446.010(55)               10.02
446.020(1)                10.03
446.020(2)                10.03
446.030                   10.04
446.050                   10.05
446.060                   10.06
446.080(1)                10.03
446.080(3)                10.03
446.080(4)                10.03
446.090                   10.07
446.100                   10.08
446.110                   10.09
446.140                   10.01
522.030                   153.173
530.070(1)(a)             130.01
534.040(2)(c)             10.99
                          
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
20.920-17     - -         153.008
70-920.1      5-1-1970    TSO Table I
                          152.001—
                          152.008;
                          152.020—
                          152.022;
                          152.035—
-             10- -1977   152.038;
                          152.050—
                          152.052;
                          152.065—
                          152.072;
                          152.999
87-450.1      2-10-1987   115.01—
                          115.19
87-450.2      3-24-1987   TSO Table I
-             8-23-1988   152.005
                          31.01—
                          31.03;
                          31.15—
                          31.22;
94-130.1      12-12-1994  31.35—
                          31.40;
                          31.55—
                          31.65;
                          31.99
94-130.2      12-12-1994  TSO Table I
                          95.01—
95-330.1      3-13-1995   95.13;
                          95.99
                          152.001—
                          152.008;
                          152.020—
                          152.022;
                          152.035—
-             1-6-1998    152.038;
                          152.050—
                          152.052;
                          152.065—
                          152.072;
                          152.999
98-320.1      5-28-1998   TSO Table I
                          70.40—
98-220.8      10-12-1998  70.45;
                          70.99
98-220.8a     12-14-1998  70.41
99.330-1      6-29-1999   32.02;
                          32.99
00-610.1      8-18-2000   51.01—
                          51.06
                          152.001—
                          152.008;
                          152.020—
                          152.022;
                          152.035—
-             11-12-2001  152.038;
                          152.050—
                          152.052;
                          152.065—
                          152.072;
                          152.999
01-340.1a     1-2-2002    33.03
98-220.8B     3-25-2002   70.41
02-240.1      6-10-2002   TSO Table I
02-430.1      9-10-2002   112.01
03-140.1      8-12-2003   TSO Table I
04-610.1      2-10-2004   32.01
                          114.01—
06-430.1      6-13-2006   114.09;
                          114.99
2006-06-140.1 10-10-2006  TSO Table I
08-1010.1     4-8-2009    130.02;
                          130.99
                          151.01—
                          151.13;
                          151.25—
10.630.1      3-15-2011   151.27;
                          151.40—
                          151.46;
                          151.99
11-110.2      8-16-2011   33.02
2011-11.530-1 11-15-2011  Ch. 74, Schd. I
12.340-01     9-28-2012   32.03
12.1030-01    9-28-2012   130.01;
                          130.99
2014-530-1    6-24-2014   Ch. 74, Schd. I
14-910.1      1-20-2015   TSO Table I
2016.530-2    4-19-2016   Ch. 74, Schd. I
18.530-1      7-17-2018   Ch. 74, Schd. I
18.530-2      9-18-2018   Ch. 74, Schd. I
                          153.001—
                          153.008;
                          153.020—
                          153.023;
                          153.035—
                          153.042;
                          153.055—
                          153.059;
                          153.070—
                          153.074;
20.920-1      3- -2020    153.085—
                          153.097;
                          153.110—
                          153.116;
                          153.130—
                          153.141;
                          153.155—
                          153.158;
                          153.170—
                          153.175;
                          153.190;
                          153.191
20-920-1      7-21-2020   153.008
20.540-1      9-22-2020   150.15—
                          150.23
-             9-24-2020   150.19
-             11-24-2020  33.01
                          110.01—
20.220.7      12-22-2020  110.13;
                          110.99
21.530-1      2-15-2021   Ch. 74, Schd. I
                          110.03;
21-220.7A     2-25-2021   110.06;
                          110.99
                          30.001—
                          30.004;
                          30.015—
                          30.021;
                          30.035—
                          30.042;
                          30.055—
                          30.059;
                          30.070—30.103;
                          30.115—
                          30.127;
21.230-1      7-8-2021    30.140;
                          30.141;
                          30.155—
                          30.163;
                          30.175;
                          30.176;
                          30.190;
                          30.191;
                          30.205—
                          30.207;
                          30.220—
                          30.227
21.220-39     9-23-2021   TSO Table I
21.530-2      10-14-2021  Ch. 74, Schd. I
                          90.01—
21-480.1      11-22-2021  90.12;
                          90.99
21-230-4      12-9-2021   30.088;
                          30.091
22-920017     4-14-2022   153.008
-             5-26-2022   Adopting Ordinance
22.530-2      5-26-2022   Ch. 74, Schd. I
                          30.084,
                          30.088,
-             7-13-2022   30.090,
                          30.097,
                          30.102
22.530-2      7-28-22     Ch. 74, Schd. I
-             12-22-2022  93.22
                          30.057,
                          30.084,
23.230-1      7-13-2023   30.088,
                          30.097,
                          30.102,
                          30.156
24.530-1      3-28-2024   Ch. 74, Schd. I
                          32.15—
                          32.28,
                          50.01—
2024-830.1    5-23-2024   50.12,
                          50.25—
                          50.39,
                          50.99
25-153.1      8-28-2025   TSO Table I
25-340.1      10-23-2025  33.03
                         
 
