PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-9 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 4, 2024; and
State legislation current through KRS 2025 Pamphlet
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-8
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING PRIOR ORDINANCES AND ADOPTING REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, KRS 83A.060(l) provides that once every five years each city shall
examine all ordinances for consistency with state law and with one another, and
they shall be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent and
invalid provisions; and
WHEREAS, the city has conducted such an examination during the legal review,
codification and indexing of all its ordinances in conjunction with a local
records project with the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Department for Libraries and
Archives; and
WHEREAS, the city desires to repeal all its prior ordinances and replace them
in their entirety with the Revised Code of Ordinances of 2006, as amended.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY, that:
SECTION 1:   All ordinances enacted prior to passage of this ordinance are
hereby repealed.
SECTION 2:   The Revised Code of Ordinances of 2006, as amended, is hereby
adopted in its entirety.
SECTION 3:   This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage and
publication.
First Reading:   8/7/06
Second Reading and Passage: 10/2/06
Council Vote: Aye: Beach Craigmyle, Michael Logsdon, Bob Rogers, Dick Filippini
Nay: Suzy Walser
                           Clayton Stoess, Jr. /s/
                           Clayton Stoess, Jr., Mayor
Robin S. O’Bryan /s/
Robin S. O’Bryan, City Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 4, SERIES 2010
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDNANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2010 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pewee
Valley, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Pewee Valley:
SECTION 1.   That the 2010 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Pewee Valley, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
SECTION 2.   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
               First Reading:      July 7, 2010 
               Second Reading:      October 4, 2010
               Passed and Approved:   October 4, 2010
                           Bob Rogers /s/
                           Bob Rogers, Mayor
Laura Eichenberger /s/
Laura Eichenberger, City Clerk
ORDINANCE
AN ORDNANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pewee
Valley, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Pewee Valley:
SECTION 1.   That the 2018 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Pewee Valley, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
SECTION 2.   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed this 5th day of September, 2018.
Passed on First Reading      August 6, 2018
Adopted on Second Reading      September 6, 2018
Signed by Mayor         September 6, 2018
Published in the Paper      September 23, 2018
Recorded by Clerk         September 6, 2018
                            Bob Rogers /s/
                           Mayor
Denise Haney /s/
Denise Haney, City Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 6, SERIES 2019
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDNANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2019 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pewee
Valley, Kentucky, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Pewee Valley:
SECTION 1.   That the 2019 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Pewee Valley, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
SECTION 2.   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed this 2 day of December, 2019.
            First Reading:         December 2, 2019
            Adopted on Second Reading:   January 6, 2020
            Signed by Mayor:         January 8, 2020
            Published in the Paper:      January 31, 2020
            Recorded by Clerk:         January 21, 2020
                           Bob Rogers /s/
                           Bob Rogers, Mayor
Denise Haney /s/
Denise Haney, City Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 6, SERIES 2020
CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF PEWEE VALLEY, KENTUCKY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the 2020 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pewee
Valley, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature enacted
since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this municipality; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make references to sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes;
WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Pewee Valley:   
SECTION 1.   That the 2020 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Pewee Valley, Kentucky, as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
SECTION 2.   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and
after its date of passage, approval and publication as required by law.
Passed this 9th day of September, 2020.
            First Reading:         September 9, 2020
            Adopted on Second Reading:   October 5, 2020
            Signed by Mayor:         October 8, 2020
            Published in the Paper:      October 15, 2020
            Recorded by Clerk:         October 15, 2020
                           Bob Rogers /s/
                           Bob Rogers, Mayor
Denise Haney /s/
Denise Haney, City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Pewee Valley, Kentucky, Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code, title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic
code.” Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code shall
denote the City of PeWee Valley, irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(10))
   COUNCIL. The city legislative body.
(KRS 83A.010(5))
   COUNTY. Oldham County, Kentucky.
   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted.
(KRS 446.010(12))
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust, or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by authority
of the state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor.
(KRS 83A.010(6))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust, or
limited liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by
authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(18))
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Council member.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes,
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine, or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25)
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(KRS 446.010(26))
   MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Pewee Valley, Kentucky.
   OATH. Includes AFFIRMATION in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(28))
   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited partnerships.
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables granted police powers,
coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional
officers, marshals, police officers and other persons with similar authority to
make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected and the election in odd numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(KRS 446.010(39))
   SWORN. Includes AFFIRMED in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Such as exists when there is an unexpired part of a term
of office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person elected or
appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has
been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies
whether the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the
state, county, city or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to 1 person
or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied
to 1 person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
Council.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and
such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to the meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in
which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not 1 of the
days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than
7 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in
the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public
office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just
mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, the reasonable time or notice shall mean
the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or
compliance with such notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to 3 or more public officers or other persons
shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the officers or
other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include such acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides otherwise,
or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with
and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is apparent that Council
would not have enacted the remaining parts without the unconstitutional part,
or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of
being executed in accordance with the intent of Council.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of Council.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the effective
date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
Council which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council as long as the
repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original
amendment.
   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall
have the effect of reviving the original language of the repealer or amendment
as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, such provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such purpose effected
prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect
and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and
printed for inclusion herein. Any chapter, section or division repealed by
subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted
pages. Subsequent ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie
evidence of such subsequent ordinances until Council shall adopt a new code of
ordinances.
   (B)   The method of amendment set forth in §
32.37 should be used by the city to amend, add or repeal a chapter, section or
division of this code of ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed
1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads word-for- word the same as the statute. Example: (KRS
83A.090) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1985). If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY COUNCIL
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   PUBLIC RECORDS
      
35.   TAXATION
      
36.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
37.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
38.   CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Section
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Governing officers
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government provided for the city shall be known as the “Mayor-
Council Plan.”
(KRS 83A.130(1))
§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.
   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall be called
Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the City
Council, and by such other officers and employees as are provided for by
statute or city ordinance.
(KRS 83A.130(2))
   (B)   The City Council shall be composed of 6 members in cities of the fifth
and sixth classes.
(KRS 83A.030(1))
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Oath
   
31.02   Compensation
   
31.03   Removal from office
   
31.04   Bond
Elected Officials
   
31.20   Election procedure
   
31.21   Mayor
   
31.22   Council members
Nonelected City Officials
   
31.35   Establishment of nonelected city offices
   
31.36   City Clerk
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH.
   Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the discharge of duties
of his or her office, take the following oath: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm,
as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of this Commonwealth,
and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful and true to the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I continue a citizen thereof, and that I
will faithfully execute, to the best of my ability, the office of           ,
according to law; and I do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that, since the
adoption of the present Constitution, I being a citizen of this United States,
have not fought a duel with deadly weapons within this State, nor out of it,
nor have I sent or accepted a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons,
nor have I acted as a second in carrying a challenge, nor aided or assisted any
person thus offending, so help me God,” as established by § 228 of the Kentucky
Constitution.
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   City Council shall establish the compensation of every elected city
officer not later than the first Monday in May in the year in which the officer
is elected. An elected officer’s compensation shall not be changed after his or
her election or during his or her term of office.
      (1)   In order to equate the compensation of Mayors and Council members
with the purchasing power of the dollar, the Department of Local Government
computes by the second Friday in February of every year the annual increase or
decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding year by using 1949 as the
base year in accordance with § 246 of the Constitution of Kentucky, which
provides that the Mayor in cities of the first class shall be paid at a rate no
greater than $12,000 per annum and Mayors in cities other than the first class
and Council members shall be paid at a rate no greater than $7,200 per annum.
      (2)   The City Council shall set the compensation of these officers in
accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the
Department of Local Government.
   (B)   The legislative body shall fix the compensation of city employees and
nonelected city officers in accordance with a personnel and pay classification
plan, which shall be adopted by ordinance.
   (C)   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the city
treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by any officer
or employee.
(Prior Code KOC, § 230.26, passed 2-2-2004)
Case law reference:
   The limits on compensation contained in the Kentucky Constitution are not
absolute limits but rather increase or decrease in accordance with changes in
the consumer price index. See Matthews v Allen, 360 SW2d 248 (1948).
Editor’s note:
   Compensation ordinances are not set forth in this code, but are rather kept
on file and available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
Statutory reference:
   Compensation, see KRS 83A.070 and 83A.075
§ 31.03 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   (A)   Elected officers. Any elected officer, in case of misconduct,
inability, or willful neglect in the performance of the duties of his or her
office, may be removed from office by a unanimous vote of the members of the
City Council exclusive of any member to be removed, who shall not vote in the
deliberation of his or her removal. No elected officer shall be removed without
having been given the right to a full public hearing. The officer, if removed,
has the right to appeal to the circuit court of the county and the appeal shall
be on the record. No officer so removed is eligible to fill the office vacated
before the expiration of the term to which originally elected.
   (B)   Nonelected officers. Nonelected city officers may be removed by the
Mayor at will, unless otherwise provided by state law or ordinance.
Statutory reference:
   Removal of elected officers, see KRS 83A.040(9)
   Removal of nonelected officers, see KRS 83A.080(2)
§ 31.04 BOND.
   (A)   Official bonds shall, if required, meet the standards of KRS 62.060.
   (B)   All officers and employees of the city who handle public funds in the
execution of their duties shall give a good and sufficient bond to the city for
the faithful and honest performance of their duties, and as security for all
money coming into the officer’s hands or under the officer’s control. The
amount of the bond shall be established based on the amount of public funds the
officer handles at any point in time during the fiscal year and may be
satisfied by a blanket or umbrella bond covering all or a group of city
officers and employees. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Elected officials who post bond as required by statute, and employees
of their offices covered by a blanket or umbrella bond, shall be deemed to have
complied with division (A) of this section.
(KRS 65.067 )
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.20 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Election of city officers is governed by general election laws as
provided in KRS Chapters 116 through 121 unless City Council otherwise
prescribes by ordinance that election of city officers shall be under
nonpartisan city election laws as provided in KRS Chapter 83A. Such ordinance
shall become effective not later than 23 days prior to the date prescribed by
the election law generally for filing notification and declaration forms with
the County Clerk in a year in which a regular election is to be held in which
any city office is to be filled. Immediately subsequent to publication of any
ordinance prescribing that election of city officers be under nonpartisan city
election laws, a copy of the ordinance shall be filed with the County Clerk of
the county in which the city is located.
   (B)   The city may change the manner of election of city officers within the
provisions of division (A) of this section by ordinance, except that no change
shall be made earlier than 5 years from the last change.
   (C)   The city shall pay the costs of city elections only if city elections
are held at a time other than prescribed by law for elections generally.
   (D)   Each appointed and elected city office existing on July 15, 1980,
shall continue until abolished by ordinance, except that the offices of Mayor
and City Council members may not be abolished.
   (E)   No abolition of any elected office shall take effect until expiration
of the term of the current holder of the office.
   (F)   No ordinance abolishing any elected office shall be enacted later than
240 days preceding the regular election for that office, except in the event of
a vacancy in the office.
   (G)   The city may not create any elected office. Existing elected offices
may be continued under provision of divisions (D), (E) and (F) above, but no
existing elected office may be changed.
(Prior Code KOC, § 230.11, passed 3-4-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Creation, abolishment of city offices, see KRS 83A.080(3), (4)
   Election of city officers, see KRS 83A.050
§ 31.21 MAYOR.
   (A)   Election; term of office. The Mayor of this city shall be elected by
the voters of the city at a regular election. His or her term of office begins
on the first day of January following his or her election and shall be for 4
years and until his or her successor qualifies.
   (B)   Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be
a qualified voter in the city and shall reside in the city throughout his or
her term of office.
   (C)   Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council shall
fill the vacancy within 30 days. If for any reason, any vacancy in the office
of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall
promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve
for the same period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(1), (2), (6))
      (1)   When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a member of
the City Council shall not vote for himself or herself.
(KRS 83A.040(2)(c))
      (2)   When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation of the
Mayor, the resigning Mayor shall not vote on his or her successor.
(KRS 83A.040(3))
      (3)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the office of
Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the resignation
date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation may be submitted through
electronic mail if it originates from the official’s electronic mail address
and includes also the official’s handwritten signature. The resignation shall
be effective at the next regular or special meeting of the city legislative
body occurring on or after the date specified in the written letter of
resignation. If a resignation date is not specified, the written resignation
shall be deemed to become effective at the first regular or special meeting of
the legislative body occurring on or after its receipt.
(KRS 83A.040(7))
      (4)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is required by law
to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council shall immediately
notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary of State of the
vacancy.
(KRS 83A.040(8))
      (5)   The City Council shall elect from among its members an individual
to preside over meetings of the City Council during any vacancy in the office
of the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of KRS 83A.130.
(KRS 83A.040(2)(d))
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall
be exercised by the Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan, city
ordinances and orders and all applicable statutes. He or she shall supervise
all departments of city government and the conduct of all city officers and
employees under his or her jurisdiction and require each department to make
reports to him or her as required by ordinance or as he or she deems desirable.
      (2)   The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local
government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.
      (3)   The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the
condition and needs of city government as he or she finds appropriate or as
required by ordinance, but not less than annually. He or she shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council he or she finds in the public
interest.
(KRS 83A.130(3))
      (4)   Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate
procedures to insure orderly administration of the functions of city government
and compliance with statutes or ordinances. Upon promulgation or upon revision
or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the person
responsible for maintaining city records.
(KRS 83A.130(4))
      (5)   Any delegation of the Mayor’s power, duties or responsibilities to
subordinate officers and employees and any expression of his or her official
authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by executive order.
Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years and kept in a
permanent file.
(KRS 83A.130(7))
      (6)   All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the city
shall be made and executed by the Mayor or his or her agent designated by
executive order.
(KRS 83A.130(8))
      (7)   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint
and remove all city employees, including police officers, except as tenure and
terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance or contract and except
for employees of the Council.
(KRS 83A.130(9))
      (8)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the
functions of city government at any time he or she is unable to attend to the
duties of his or her office by delegating responsibility for any function to be
performed, in accordance with division (D)(5) above. However, the Mayor may not
delegate the responsibility of presiding at meetings of the Council, and the
authority to approve ordinances or promulgate administrative procedures may
only be delegated to an elected officer. With approval of the Council, the
Mayor may rescind any action taken in his or her absence under this section
within 30 days of the action. If for any reason the disability of the Mayor to
attend to his or her duties persists for 60 consecutive days, the office of
Mayor may be declared vacant by a majority vote of the Council and the
provisions of §
31.21(C) shall apply.
(KRS 83A.130(10))
§ 31.22 COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   For provisions concerning City Council, see
Chapter 32.
NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF NONELECTED CITY OFFICES.
   (A)   All nonelected city offices shall be created by ordinance which shall
specify:
      (1)   Title of office;
      (2)   Powers and duties of office;
      (3)   Oath of office;
      (4)   Bond, if required; and
   (B)   All nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with
approval of City Council.
   (C)   All nonelected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless
otherwise provided by statute or ordinance. Upon removal of a nonelected
officer at will, the Council shall give the officer a written statement setting
forth the reason or reasons for the removal. However, this requirement shall
not be construed as limiting in any way the at will dismissal power of the
Council.
(Prior Code KOC, § 230.25, passed 8-6-2001)
Statutory reference:
   Nonelected city offices, see KRS 83A.080(1), (2)
§ 31.36 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The office of City Clerk may, by ordinance, be combined with any other
nonelected city office by inclusion of the title and duties of such office.
   (C)   The duties and responsibilities of the Clerk shall include, but are
not limited to the following:
      (1)   Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the city;
      (2)   Performance of the duties required of the “official custodian” or
“custodian” pursuant to KRS 61.870 through 61.882;
      (3)   Possession of the seal of the city if used;
      (4)   No later than January 31 of each year, mail or electronically
submit to the Department for Local Government a list containing current city
information including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The correct name, telephone number and electronic mail address
of the Mayor, legislative body members, and the correct name, telephone number,
and electronic mail address for the city's appointed officials or employees who
are serving in the following roles or substantially similar roles as of January
1 of each year:
            1.   City Clerk;
            2.   City Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer;
            3.   City Manager or Administrator;
            4.   City Attorney;
            5.   Human Resources Director;
            6.   Police Chief;
            7.   Fire Chief;
            8.   Public Works Director;
            9.   Risk Manager;
            10.   Information Technology Manager;
            11.   Public Relations or Communications Officer; and
            12.   Planning and Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   The correct name of the city, mailing address for city hall and
telephone number of the City Hall; and
         (c)   The name and telephone number of either an elected or appointed
official to serve as a contact person that may be reached during normal
business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.;
      (5)   Performance of all other duties and responsibilities required of
the City Clerk by statute or ordinance.
(KRS 83A.085)
   (D)   Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City Council
from time to time as set forth in §
31.02.
   (E)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City Clerk unless such
person has taken the oath required by § 228 of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky and has provided bond, if required, with corporate
surety authorized to transact business in Kentucky and conditioned upon the
performance of the duties specified herein.
CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Members; election, qualifications, compensation
   
32.02   Vacancies
   
32.03   Powers and duties
Rules of Procedure
   
32.20   Mayor as Presiding Officer
   
32.21   Meetings
   
32.22   Quorum
Ordinances
   
32.35   One subject; title
   
32.36   Introduction; enacting clause
   
32.37   Form of amendment
   
32.38   Reading requirement; exception for emergency
   
32.39   Approval, disapproval by Mayor
   
32.40   Adoption of standard codes by reference
   
32.41   Official city records
   
32.42   Indexing and maintenance requirements
   
32.43   Publication requirements
   
32.44   Additional requirements for adoption may be established by city
   
32.45   Periodic review required
   
32.46   Municipal orders
   
32.47   Proved by Clerk; received in evidence
   
32.48   Legislative immunity
Budget Procedures
   
32.60   Application of standards
   
32.61   Details
   
32.62   Form
   
32.63   Annual budget proposal
   
32.64   Budget summary
   
32.65   Fund balance carry-forward
   
32.66   Anticipated revenue; comparison with other years
   
32.67   Proposed expenditures; comparison with other years
   
32.68   Anticipated transfer from other funds
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Election; term of office. Each Council member shall be elected at-
large by the voters of the city at a regular election. Terms of office begin on
the first day of January following the election and shall be for 2 years.
   (B)   Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a
qualified voter in the city and shall reside in the city throughout his or her
term of office.
(KRS 83A.040(4))
   (C)   Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see §
31.02.
§ 32.02 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Vacancies. If 1 or more vacancies on Council occur in a way that 1 or
more members remain seated, the remaining members shall within 30 days fill the
vacancies 1 at a time, giving each new appointee reasonable notice of his or
her selection as will enable him or her to meet and act with the remaining
members in making further appointments until all vacancies are filled. If
vacancies occur in a way that all seats become vacant, the Governor shall
appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies sufficient to constitute a
quorum. Remaining vacancies are filled as provided in this section.
(KRS 83A.040(5))
      (1)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a member of the
City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies a
resignation date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation may be
submitted through electronic mail if it originates from the official’s
electronic mail address and includes also the official’s handwritten signature.
The resignation shall be effective at the next regular meeting of the city
legislative body. If a resignation date is not specified, the written
resignation shall be deemed to become effective at the first regular or special
meeting of the legislative body occurring on or after its receipt.
(KRS 83A.040(7))
      (2)   If a vacancy occurs on the City Council which is required by law to
be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council shall immediately notify
in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary of State of the vacancy.
(KRS 83A.040(8))
   (B)   Failure to fill vacancies. If for any reason, any vacancy on Council
is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall promptly fill
the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve for the same
period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(6))
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancies for nonpartisan city office, see KRS 83A.175
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The legislative authority of the city is hereby vested in and shall be
exercised by the elected Council of the city. The Council may not perform any
executive functions except those functions assigned to it by statute.
(KRS 83A.130(11))
   (B)   The Council shall establish all appointive offices and the duties and
responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules and regulations for the
public health, safety and welfare.
(KRS 83A.130(12))
   (C)   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue to
operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a budget
which provides for the orderly management of city resources.
(KRS 83A.130(12))
   (D)   The Council may investigate all activities of city government. The
Council may require any city officer or employee to prepare and submit to it
sworn statements regarding the performance of his or her official duties. Any
statement required by the Council to be submitted or any investigation
undertaken by the Council, if any office, department, or agency under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted or undertaken
unless and until written notice of the Council’s action is given to the Mayor.
The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the Council and to
appear personally or through his or her designee on behalf of any department,
office, or agency in the course of any investigation.
(KRS 83A.130(13))
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 32.20 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council. The Council has
the authority to establish, by ordinance, the manner in which 1 of its number
may be selected to preside at meetings of the Council in the absence of the
Mayor.
   (B)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have a
vote, except that he or she may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.
(KRS 83A.130(5))
§ 32.21 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first Wednesday
of each month, at the Town Hall located at 312 Mt. Mercy Drive at the hour of
6:30 p.m.
   (B)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or upon
written request of a majority of the Council. In the call, the Mayor or Council
shall designate the purpose, time and place of the special meeting with
sufficient notice for the attendance of Council members and for compliance with
KRS Chapter 61.
   (C)   At a special meeting no business may be considered other than that set
forth in the designation of purpose.
   (D)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person responsible
for maintaining city records as provided under §
31.36 and by the officer presiding at the meeting.
(KRS 83A.130(11)) (Prior Code KOC, § 120.1, passed 1-3-1967; Am. Ord. passed
10-3-2005; Am. Ord. 2011-7, passed 10-3-2011; Am. Ord. 6, Series 2022, passed
10-5-2022)
§ 32.22 QUORUM.
   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council constitutes
a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum is sufficient to take action.
(KRS 83A.060(6))
ORDINANCES
§ 32.35 ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.
   Each ordinance shall embrace only 1 subject and shall have a title that
clearly states the subject.
(KRS 83A.060(1))
§ 32.36 INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.
   Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall have an enacting
clause styled “Be it ordained by the City of Pewee Valley.”
(KRS 83A.060(2))
§ 32.37 FORM OF AMENDMENT.
   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and ordinances
to amend shall set out in full the amended ordinance or section indicating any
text being added by a single solid line drawn underneath it. Text that is
intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning with an opening bracket
and at the end with a closing bracket. The text between the brackets shall be
stricken through with a single solid line.
(KRS 83A.060(3))
§ 32.38 READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no ordinance shall
be enacted until it has been read on 2 separate days. The reading of an
ordinance may be satisfied by stating the title and reading a summary rather
than the full text.
   (B)   In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the membership,
the Council may suspend the requirements of second reading and publication in
order for an ordinance to become effective by naming and describing the
emergency in the ordinance. Publication requirements of §
32.43 shall be complied with within 10 days of the enactment of the emergency
ordinance.
(KRS 83A.060(4), (7))
§ 32.39 APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL BY MAYOR.
   (A)   All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor
who, within 10 days after submission, shall either approve the ordinance by
affixing his or her signature or disapprove it by returning it to the Council
together with a statement of his or her objections.
   (B)   No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor’s approval unless he
or she fails to return it to the legislative body within 10 days after
receiving it or unless the Council votes to override the Mayor’s veto, upon
reconsideration of the ordinance not later than the second regular meeting
following its return, by the affirmative vote of 1 more than a majority of the
membership.
(KRS 83A.130(6))
§ 32.40 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.
   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide, or nationally
recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of local
legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by title, source
and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without setting
them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting ordinance and is made a
part of the permanent records of the city.
(KRS 83A.060(5))
§ 32.41 OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.
   (A)   Every action of the Council is hereby made a part of the permanent
records of the city and on passage of an ordinance the vote of each member of
the Council shall be entered on the official record of the meeting.
   (B)   The Council has provided, under the provisions of §§
31.36(C) and
32.42, for the maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the
city. The City Clerk and the presiding officer shall sign the official record
of each meeting.
(KRS 83A.060(8))
§ 32.42 INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   At the end of each month, all ordinances adopted in the city shall be
indexed and maintained by the City Clerk in the following manner:
   (A)   The city budget, appropriations of money and tax levies shall be
maintained and indexed so that each fiscal year is kept separate from other
years.
   (B)   All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or an
ordinance book in the order adopted and maintained in this code of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060(8))
§ 32.43 PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
32.38(B), no ordinance shall be enforceable until published pursuant to KRS
Chapter 424.
   (B)   Ordinances may be published in full or in summary as designated by the
legislative body. If the legislative body elects to publish an ordinance in
summary, the summary shall be prepared or certified by an attorney licensed to
practice law in the Commonwealth of Kentucky and shall include the following:
      (1)   The title of the ordinance;
      (2)   A brief narrative setting forth the main points of the ordinance in
a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a clear and understandable
manner of the meaning of the ordinance; and
      (3)   The full text of each section that imposes taxes or fees.
   (C)   Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may include a
sketch, drawing or map, including common landmarks, such as streets or roads in
lieu of metes and bounds descriptions.
(KRS 83A.060(9))
§ 32.44 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY CITY.
   The city may, by ordinance, specify additional requirements for adoption of
ordinances in greater detail than contained herein, but the city may not lessen
or reduce the substantial requirements of this chapter or any statute relating
to adoption of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060(10))
§ 32.45 PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.
   Not less than once every 5 years all ordinances in this code of ordinances
shall be examined for consistency with state law and with one another and shall
be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent and invalid
provisions.
(KRS 83A.060(11))
§ 32.46 MUNICIPAL ORDERS.
   (A)   The Council may adopt municipal orders. All municipal orders shall be
in writing and shall be adopted only at an official meeting. Orders may be
amended only by a subsequent municipal order or ordinance. All orders adopted
shall be maintained in an official order book.
   (B)   In lieu of an ordinance, municipal orders may be used for matters
relating to the internal operation and functions of the city and to appoint or
remove or approve appointment or removal of members of boards, commissions and
other agencies over which the Council has control.
(KRS 83A.060(12), (13))
§ 32.47 PROVED BY CLERK; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.
   All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of the
City Clerk; and when the ordinances are placed in this code of ordinances by
authority of the city, the printed copy shall be received in evidence by any
state court without further proof of such ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060(14))
§ 32.48 LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.
   For anything said in debate, Council members shall be entitled to the same
immunities and protections allowed to members of the General Assembly.
(KRS 83A.060(15))
Statutory reference:
   Privileges of members of General Assembly, see KRS 6.050 and Ky. Const. § 43
BUDGET PROCEDURES
§ 32.60 APPLICATION OF STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to the form and detail in which the
annual budget proposal of the city is to be prepared.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.61 DETAILS.
   The annual budget proposal shall detail the raising of revenue from all
sources, including grants and transfers, and the spending of money for
specified programs, functions, activities or objectives of the city, including
all principle and interest due on debt, for the budget year. The total of
anticipated revenues shall equal or exceed the total of proposed expenditures.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.62 FORM.
   The form of the annual budget proposal shall be consistent in form, to the
extent practical, with the accounting system of the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.63 ANNUAL BUDGET PROPOSAL.
   (A)   The annual budget proposal shall provide a complete program and
financial plan for all funds for the budget year.
   (B)   It shall contain:
      (1)   A budget message, as specified in KRS 91A.030(7); and
      (2)   A budget summary, as specified in §
32.64, supported by:
         (a)   An estimate of fund balance carry-forward, as specified in §
32.65;
         (b)   An estimate of all anticipated revenues of the city compared to
previous years, as specified in §
32.66;
         (c)   Proposed expenditures compared to previous years, as specified
in §
32.67; and
         (d)   An estimate of anticipated transfers, as specified in §
32.68.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.64 BUDGET SUMMARY.
   At the head of the annual budget proposal, there shall appear a summary of
the budget, which need not be itemized further than by principal sources of
anticipated revenue, and proposed expenditures by program, function, activity
or objectives of the city, in such a manner as to present a simple and clear
summary of the detailed estimates of the budget components.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.65 FUND BALANCE CARRY-FORWARD.
   Each fund balance available for appropriation shall be limited to the amount
by which assets are estimated to exceed liabilities at the beginning of the
budget year.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.66 ANTICIPATED REVENUES; COMPARISON WITH OTHER YEARS.
   In parallel columns opposite the several items of anticipated revenue there
shall be placed:
   (A)   The amount of each such item actually received during the next
preceding fiscal year;
   (B)   The total of the amount of each item actually received to the time of
preparation of the annual budget proposal, plus anticipated receipts for the
remainder of the current fiscal year estimated as accurately as possible; and
   (C)   The amount of each item anticipated to be received during the budget
year, estimated as accurately as possible.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.67 PROPOSED EXPENDITURES; COMPARISON WITH OTHER YEARS.
   In parallel columns, opposite the several items of proposed expenditures,
there shall be placed:
   (A)   The amount of each such item actually expended during the next
preceding fiscal year;
   (B)   The total of the amount actually expended to the time of preparation
of the annual budget proposal plus the expenditures for the remainder of the
current fiscal year estimated as accurately as possible; and
   (C)   The amount of each item to be appropriated for the budget year.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 32.68 ANTICIPATED TRANSFER FROM OTHER FUNDS.
   Any anticipated excess revenues, if legally available for general purposes
and to the extent such excess is to be used to support other funds, shall be
stated as a transfer item in the annual budget proposal.
(Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Financial Administration
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Accounting records and financial reports
   
33.03   Annual budget ordinance
   
33.04   Annual audit of city funds
   
33.05   Official depositories; disbursement of city funds
   
33.06   Standards for competitive bidding
Improvements
   
33.10   Definitions
   
33.11   Financing of improvements
   
33.12   Apportionment of cost
   
33.13   Comprehensive report required
   
33.14   Public hearing required
   
33.15   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners
   
33.16   Affected owner may contest
   
33.17   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien
   
33.18   Effect of additional property or change in financing
Cross-reference:
   Budget procedures, see §§
32.60 et seq.
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply.
   BUDGET. A proposed plan for raising and spending money for specified
programs, functions, activities or objectives during a fiscal year.
   DEBT SERVICE. The sum of money required to pay installments of principal and
interest on bonds, notes and other evidences of debt accruing within a fiscal
year and to maintain sinking funds.
   ENCUMBRANCES. Obligations in the form of purchase orders or contracts that
are chargeable to an appropriation. An obligation ceases to be an encumbrance
when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.
   FISCAL YEAR. The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS. Those standards for
audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and functions issued
by the Comptroller General of the United States.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING. Those standards
and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board.
(KRS 91A.010)
§ 33.02 ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render financial
reports in such a way as to:
      (1)   Determine compliance with statutory provisions;
      (2)   Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial operations
of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity with
generally accepted governmental accounting principles; and
      (3)   Readily provide such financial data as may be required by the
federal revenue sharing program.
   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and operated on a
fund basis.
(KRS 91A.020)
§ 33.03 ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The city shall operate under an annual budget ordinance adopted and
administered in accordance with the provisions of this section. No moneys shall
be expended from any governmental or proprietary fund except in accordance with
a budget ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Moneys held by the city as a trustee or agent for individuals, private
organizations or other governmental units need not be included in the budget
ordinance.
   (C)   If in any fiscal year subsequent to a fiscal year in which the city
has adopted a budget ordinance in accordance with this section, no budget
ordinance is adopted, the budget ordinance of the previous fiscal year has full
force and effect as if readopted.
   (D)   The budget ordinance of the city shall cover 1 fiscal year.
   (E)   Preparation of the budget proposal shall be the responsibility of the
Mayor.
   (F)   The budget proposal shall be prepared in such form and detail as
prescribed by ordinance.
   (G)   The budget proposal together with a budget message shall be submitted
to Council not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year it
covers. The budget message shall contain an explanation of the governmental
goals fixed by the budget for the coming fiscal year; explain important
features of the activities anticipated in the budget; set forth the reasons for
stated changes from the previous year in program goals, programs and
appropriation levels; and explain any major changes in fiscal policy.
   (H)   (1)   Council may adopt the budget ordinance making appropriations for
the fiscal year in such sums as it finds sufficient and proper, whether greater
or less than the sums recommended in the budget proposal. The budget ordinance
may take any form that Council finds most efficient in enabling it to make the
necessary fiscal policy decisions.
      (2)   No budget ordinance shall be adopted which provides for
appropriations to exceed revenues in any 1 fiscal year in violation of § 157 of
the Kentucky Constitution.
   (I)   The full amount estimated to be required for debt service during the
budget year shall be appropriated, for all governmental fund types.
   (J)   Council may amend the budget ordinance at any time after the
ordinance’s adoption, so long as the amended ordinance continues to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
   (K)   Administration and implementation of an adopted budget ordinance shall
be the responsibility of the Mayor. The responsibility includes the preparation
and submission to Council of operating statements, including budgetary
comparisons of each governmental fund for which an annual budget has been
adopted. The reports shall be submitted not less than once every 3 months in
each fiscal year.
   (L)   To the extent practical, the system utilized in the administration and
implementation of the adopted budget ordinance shall be consistent in form with
the accounting system called for in §
33.02.
   (M)   No city agency, or member, director, officer or employee of any city
agency, may bind the city in any way to any extent beyond the amount of money
at that time appropriated for the purpose of the agency. All contracts,
agreements and obligations, express or implied, beyond such existing
appropriations are void; nor shall any city officer issue any bond, certificate
or warrant for the payment of money by the city in any way to any extent,
beyond the balance of any appropriation made for the purpose.
(KRS 91A.030) (Prior Code KOC, § 220.5, passed 8-3-1981)
§ 33.04 ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   Each city shall, after the close of each fiscal year, cause each fund
of the city to be audited by the Auditor of Public Accounts or a certified
public accountant. The audit shall be completed by March 1 immediately
following the fiscal year being audited. The city shall forward an electronic
copy of the audit report to the Department for Local Government for information
purposes by no later than April 1 immediately following the fiscal year being
audited.
   (B)   If a city is required by another provision of law to audit its funds
more frequently or more stringently than is required by this section, the city
shall also comply with the provisions of that law.
   (C)   The Department for Local Government shall, upon request, make
available electronic copies of the audit reports and financial statements
received by it under division (A) of this section to the Legislative Research
Commission to be used for the purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975 or to the Auditor
of Public Accounts.
   (D)   Each city required by this section to conduct an annual or biennial
audit shall enter into a written contract with an auditor, who shall be a
certified public accountant or the Auditor of Public Accounts. The contract
shall set forth all terms and conditions of the agreement which shall include
but not be limited to requirements that:
      (1)   The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial statements,
which shall include the government-wide and fund financial statements;
      (2)   The auditor shall include in the annual or biennial city audit
report an examination of local government economic assistance funds granted to
the city under KRS 42.450 to 42.495. The auditor shall include a certification
with the annual or biennial audit report that the funds were expended for the
purpose intended;
      (3)   All audit information be prepared in accordance with generally
accepted governmental auditing standards which include tests of the accounting
records and auditing procedures considered necessary in the circumstances.
Where the audit is to cover the use of state or federal funds, appropriate
state or Federal guidelines shall be utilized;
      (4)   The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed report
embodying:
         (a)   The basic financial statements and accompanying supplemental and
required supplemental information;
         (b)   The auditor's opinion on the basic financial statements or
reasons why an opinion cannot be expressed; and
         (c)   Findings required to be reported as a result of the audit;
      (5)   The completed audit and all accompanying documentation shall be
presented to the city legislative body at a regular or special meeting; and
      (6)   Any contract with a certified public accountant for an audit shall
require the accountant to forward a copy of the audit report and management
letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon request of the city or the
Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall have the
right to review the certified public accountant's work papers upon request.
   (E)   A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this section
shall be considered satisfactory and final in meeting any official request to a
city for financial data, except for statutory or judicial requirements, or
requirements of the Legislative Research Commission necessary to carry out the
purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.
   (F)   Each city shall, within thirty (30) days after the presentation of an
audit to the city legislative body, publish an advertisement in accordance with
KRS Chapter 424 containing:
      (1)   The auditor's opinion letter;
      (2)   The “Budgetary Comparison Schedules-Major Funds,” which shall
include the general fund and all major funds;
      (3)   A statement that a copy of the complete audit report, including
financial statements and supplemental information, is on file at city hall and
is available for public inspection during normal business hours;
      (4)   A statement that any citizen may obtain from city hall a copy of
the complete audit report, including financial statements and supplemental
information, for his or her personal use;
      (5)   A statement which notifies citizens requesting a personal copy of
the city audit report that they will be charged for duplication costs at a rate
that shall not exceed $0.25 per page; and
      (6)   A statement that copies of the financial statement prepared in
accordance with KRS 424.220, when a financial statement is required by KRS
424.220, are available to the public at no cost at the business address of the
officer responsible for preparation of the statement.
   (G)   Any resident of the city or owner of real property within the city may
bring an action in the Circuit Court to enforce the provisions of this section.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than $500. In addition, any officer who fails
to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall, for each failure,
be subject to a forfeiture of not less than $50 nor more than $500, in the
discretion of the court, which may be recovered only once in a civil action
brought by any resident of the city or owner of real property within the city.
The costs of all proceedings, including a reasonable fee for the attorney of
the resident or property owner bringing the action, shall be assessed against
the unsuccessful party.
   (H)   In the event of extenuating circumstances that prevent a city from
completing and submitting a required audit or financial statement in compliance
with the applicable deadlines in division (A) of this section, the city may
submit a written request for an extension of time to the Department for Local
Government on a form prescribed by the Department for Local Government. The
Department for Local Government shall approve the request if, in the judgment
of the Department for Local Government, the request is warranted by extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the city or other factors that justify the
city’s noncompliance with the required deadlines. The Department for Local
Government may consider any evidence it deems appropriate, including, but not
limited to, proof of the city’s progress towards compliance. Extensions granted
under this division shall not exceed 18 months from the original due date of
the audit or financial statement. If the Department for Local Government
approves an extension for a city and the city fails to complete and submit the
required audit or financial statement in compliance with that extended
deadline, then the provisions of division (I) of this section shall apply.
   (I)   If a city fails to complete an audit or financial statement and submit
it to the Department for Local Government as required in divisions (A) and (H)
of this section, the Department for Local Government shall notify the Finance
and Administration Cabinet that the city has failed to comply with the audit
requirements of this section, and that any funds in the possession of any
agency, entity, or branch of state government shall be withheld from the city
until further notice. The Department for Local Government shall immediately
notify the Finance and Administration Cabinet when the city complies with the
requirements of divisions (A) and (H) of this section for all prior fiscal
years it has failed to comply with the audit requirements of this section, and
the Finance and Administration Cabinet shall direct the reinstatement of
payments to the city, including any funds that were withheld due to the
noncompliance. This division shall not be interpreted or construed to permit
the state to withhold any nondiscretionary payments to a city that are due the
city for the provision of services by the city to the state or any of its
agencies, including for the use of city utilities.
   (J)   Within a reasonable time after the completion of a special audit or
examination conducted pursuant to KRS 43.050, the Auditor shall bill the city
for the actual expense of the audit or examination conducted. The actual
expense shall include the hours of work performed on the audit or examination
as well as reasonable associated costs, including, but not limited to, travel
costs. The bill submitted to the city shall include a statement of the hourly
rate, total hours, and total costs for the entire audit or examination.
(KRS 91A.040)
Statutory reference:
   Department for Local Government to provide assistance, see KRS 91A.050
§ 33.05 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall designate as the city’s official depositories one or
more banks, federally insured savings and loan companies or trust companies
within the Commonwealth. The amount of funds on deposit in an official
depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or surety bonds.
   (B)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which the city
is responsible, which has not been otherwise invested or deposited in a manner
authorized by law, shall be deposited in official depositories. All city funds
shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the Mayor which states
the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the purpose of the payment,
and the fund out of which the funds are payable. Each authorization shall be
numbered and recorded.
(KRS 91A.060)
§ 33.06 STANDARDS FOR COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
   Whatever federal funding is to be used in any city project, the city shall
use the Construction Contract Letting and Contract Award Procedures set forth
in 23 C.F.R. 635.
(Ord. 2009-10, passed 10-5-2009)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 33.10 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following definitions shall apply:
   ASSESSED VALUE BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according
to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property bears to the
total assessed value of all such properties.
   BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to equitable determination by Council of the special benefit received
by property from the improvement, including assessed value basis, front foot
basis and square foot basis, or any combination thereof, and may include
consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for different classes
of property based on nature and extent of special benefits received, and other
factors affecting benefits received.
   COST. All costs related to an improvement, including planning, design,
property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and legal fees,
financing costs and publication expenses.
   FAIR BASIS. Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot basis or
benefits received basis.
   FRONT FOOT BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to
the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual parcels of
property bears to such front footage of all such properties.
   IMPROVEMENT. Construction of any facility for public use or services or any
addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific properties in the
area served by the facility.
   PROPERTY. Any real property benefitted by an improvement.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT or ASSESSMENT. A special charge fixed on property to
finance an improvement in whole or in part.
   SQUARE FOOT BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to
the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property bears to the
square footage of all such property.
(KRS 91A.210)
§ 33.11 FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city may not finance any improvement in whole or in part through
special assessments except as provided in this subchapter and in any applicable
statutes.
(KRS 91A.200)
   (B)   Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a fair basis.
   (C)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing.
(KRS 91A.220)
Statutory reference:
   Improvements; alternate methods, see KRS Ch. 107
§ 33.12 APPORTIONMENT OF COST.
   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government or any educational, religious or charitable organization. Council
may assess the property in the same manner as for privately owned property or
it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.
(KRS 91A.230)
§ 33.13 COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.
   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the city
shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:
   (A)   The nature of the improvement;
   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the boundaries
or other description of the area to be assessed;
   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;
   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;
   (E)   If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and
   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects of the
improvement, assessments or financing.
(KRS 91A.240)
§ 33.14 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   (A)   After preparation of the report required by §
33.13, the city shall hold at least 1 public hearing on the proposed
improvement at which all interested persons shall be heard.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing shall be published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424,
and mailed to each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall include:
      (1)   The nature of the improvement;
      (2)   Description of area of the improvement;
      (3)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in
whole or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;
      (4)   Time and place the report may be examined; and
      (5)   Time and place of the hearing.
(KRS 91A.250)
§ 33.15 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.
   Within 90 days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall determine
whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and if it
determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and containing all
necessary terms, including the items referred to in §
33.13 and a description of all properties. Promptly upon passage the city shall
publish such ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by certified
mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to proceed with
the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the estimated cost to
the property owner and the ratio the cost to each property owner bears to the
total cost of the entire project.
(KRS 91A.260)
§ 33.16 AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the mailing of the notice provided for in §
33.15, any affected property owner may file an action in the circuit court of
the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by special assessment,
the inclusion of his or her property in the improvement, or the amount of his
or her assessment. If the action contests the undertaking of the improvement by
the special assessment method of the inclusion of the property of that property
owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it relates to any
property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the final judgment has
been entered.
   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution are final and binding with respect to the
property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments. After the lapse
of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties are forever
barred.
(KRS 91A.270)
§ 33.17 WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   (A)   After the passage of time for the action provided for in §
33.16, or after favorable final judgment in any such action, whichever comes
later, the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof stayed by the
action, including notice requiring payment of special assessment or installment
thereon and bonds or other method proposed to finance the improvement. The
first installment may be apportioned so that other payments will coincide with
payment of ad valorem taxes.
   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments thereof on
any property, and accrued interest and other charges, constitutes a lien on the
property to secure payment to the bondholders or any other source of financing
of the improvement. The lien takes precedence over all other liens, whether
created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the ordinance, except a
lien for state and county taxes, general municipal taxes and prior improvement
taxes, and is not defeated or postponed by any private or judicial sale, by any
mortgage, or by any error or mistake in the description of the property or in
the names of the owners. No error in the proceedings of the Council shall
exempt any benefitted property from the lien for the improvement assessment, or
from payment thereof, or from the penalties or interest thereon, as herein
provided.
(KRS 91A.280)
§ 33.18 EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.
   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the improvement
or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§
33.13 through
33.17 applies if additional property is included in the improvement or if
change is made in the method or period of financing; but additional property
may be included in the improvement with the consent of the owner thereof
without compliance with other sections if it does not increase the cost
apportioned to any other property, or any other change may be made without the
compliance if all property owners of the improvement consent.
(KRS 91A.290)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Definitions
Procedures for Requesting Public Records
   
34.05   Initial request with immediate inspection
   
34.06   Referral to proper custodian
   
34.07   Public records not immediately available
   
34.08   Refusal of unreasonable requests
   
34.09   Time limitation; denial of inspection
   
34.10   Concealing or destroying records prohibited
   
34.11   Access to records relating to particular individual
   
34.12   Format of copies
   
34.13   Fees for copies
   
34.14   Misstatement of purpose prohibited
   
34.15   Online access to public records in electronic form
   
34.16   Public records protected from disclosure
   
34.17   Notification of the Attorney General
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   CITY. The city government of this city.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The direct or indirect use of any part of a public
record or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent or lease
of a service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary or fee. COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not include:
      (1)   Publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or
periodical;
      (2)   Use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news
or other informational programs; or
      (3)   Use of a public record in the preparation for prosecution or
defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to the action, or
the attorneys representing the parties.
   CUSTODIAN. The official custodian or any authorized person having personal
custody and control of public records. The CUSTODIAN having personal custody of
most of the public records of this city is the City Clerk.
   MECHANICAL PROCESSING. Any operation or other procedure which is transacted
on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to a copier, computer,
recorder or tape processor or other automated device.
   MEDIA. The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include, but is not limited to paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes and cards.
   OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN. The chief administrative officer or any other officer or
employee of a public agency who is responsible for the maintenance, care and
keeping of public records, regardless of whether such records are in his or her
actual personal custody and control. The OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN of this city shall
be the Mayor.
   PERSON. A human being who makes a request for inspection of public records.
   PRESCRIBED FEE or FEE. The fair payment required by the city for making
copies of public records and for mailing public records, which shall not exceed
the actual cost thereof and shall not include the cost of required staff time.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. The city, including its legislative body and every officer,
department and division of the city; every entity created by authority of the
city; any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc committee,
advisory committee, council or agency created and controlled by the city; and
any interagency body in which the city participates.
   PUBLIC RECORDS. All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs,
diskettes, recordings, software or other documentation regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the possession of
or retained by the public agency. PUBLIC RECORDS shall not include any records
owned or maintained by or for the public agency that are not related to
functions, activities, programs or operations funded by the public agency nor
any records that may be excluded by §
34.16.
   REQUEST. An oral or written application by any person to inspect public
records of the agency.
   SOFTWARE. The program code which makes a computer system function, but does
not include that portion of the program code which contains public records
exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific addresses of
files, passwords, access codes, user identifications or any other mechanism for
controlling the security or restricting access to public records in the public
agency’s
computer system. SOFTWARE consists of the operating system, application
programs, procedures, routines and subroutines such as translators and utility
programs, but does not include that material which is prohibited from
disclosure or copying by a license agreement between a public agency and an
outside entity which supplied the material to the agency.
(KRS 61.870)
PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 34.05 INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of the city
shall make a request for inspection at the office of the City Clerk during
regular office hours, except during legal holidays. The official custodian, or
the custodian acting under the authority of the official custodian, may require
a request to inspect public records to be in writing, signed by the applicant
and with the applicant’s name printed legibly on the application. A written
request to inspect public records may be presented by hand delivery, mail or
via facsimile, if 1 is available.
   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person’s request is in compliance
with this chapter and the open records law, and the requested public records
are immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection. A person may inspect public records at the designated office of the
city during the regular office hours, or in appropriate cases, by receiving
copies of the records through the mail.
   (C)   If the public records are to be inspected at the offices of the city,
suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of the City Clerk or
in another office of the city as determined by the official custodian or
custodian for the inspection. No person shall remove original copies of public
records from the offices of the city without the written permission of the
official custodian of the record. When public records are inspected at the city
offices, the person inspecting the records shall have the right to make
abstracts and memoranda of the public records and to obtain copies of all
written public records. When copies are requested, the custodian may require
advance payment of the prescribed fee.
   (D)   Upon proper request, the city shall mail copies of the public records
to a person whose residence or principal place of business is located outside
of the county after the person precisely describes the public records which are
readily available and after the person pays in advance the prescribed fee.
§ 34.06 REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.
   If the City Clerk does not have custody or control of the public record or
records requested, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant and shall furnish
the name and location of the official custodian of the agency’s public records.
(KRS 61.872(4))
§ 34.07 PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.
   If the public record is in active use, in storage or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately notify the applicant and
shall designate a place, time and date for inspection or mailing of the public
records, not to exceed 3 days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays)
from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of the cause is
given for further delay and the place, time and earliest date on which the
public record will be available for inspection or duplication.
(KRS 61.872(5))
§ 34.08 REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.
   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof. However, refusal under this section must be sustained by
clear and convincing evidence.
(KRS 61.872(6))
§ 34.09 TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.
    The official custodian, upon any request for records made under this
chapter, shall determine within five days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays) after the receipt of any request whether to comply with the
request and shall notify in writing the person making the request within the
five-day period of its decision. Any agency response denying, in whole or in
part, inspection of any record shall include a statement of the specific
exception authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief explanation of
how the exception applies to the record withheld. The response shall be issued
by the official custodian or under his or her authority and shall constitute
final agency action.
(KRS 61.880)
§ 34.10 CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.
   No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any record with
the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.
§ 34.11 ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.
   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or her or
in which he or she is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of §
34.16 of these rules and regulations.
(KRS 61.884)
§ 34.12 FORMAT OF COPIES.
   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make abstracts
of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies of all public
records not exempted by the terms of §
34.16. When copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request
and advance payment of the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate.
If the applicant desires copies of public records other than written records,
the custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the
applicant to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that
such duplication will not damage or alter the original records.
   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public records
used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy format
where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not
required to convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not
less than 8-1/2 inches x 11 inches in at least 1 color on white paper, or for
electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard Code for
Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public agency maintains
electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and the format conforms
to the requestor’s requirements, the public record may be provided in this
alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified by the public
agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than the forms
described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(1) through (3))
§ 34.13 FEES FOR COPIES.
   (A)   The public agency may prescribe a reasonable fee for making copies of
nonexempt public records requested for use for noncommercial purposes which
shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction, including the costs of the
media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by the public agency, but not
including the cost of staff required. If a public agency is asked to produce a
record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor the format to meet the request
of an individual or a group, the public agency may at its discretion provide
the requested format and recover staff costs as well as any actual costs
incurred.
   (B)   (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.
      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are
requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the
requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may
require the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency. The contract
shall permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.
      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section may be
based on 1 or both of the following:
         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing and
staff required to produce a copy of the public record or records;
         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation, purchase or other
acquisition of the public records.
(KRS 61.874(3), (4))
§ 34.14 MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a public
record for a:
   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a
certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to §
34.13;
   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of
the public record for a different commercial purpose; or
   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use
of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical, radio
or television station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed the
use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for
that commercial use.
(KRS 61.874(5)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.15 ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.
   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be provided and
made available at the discretion of the public agency. If a party wishes to
access public records by electronic means and the public agency agrees to
provide online access, a public agency may require that the party enter into a
contract, license or other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for
these agreements.
   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:
      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost
of computer time access charges; and
      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable
fee based on the factors set forth in §
34.13.
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 34.16 PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application of this
chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to inspection only
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except as provided in KRS
61.878(1) that no court shall authorize the inspection by any party of any
materials pertaining to civil litigation beyond that which is provided by the
Rules of Civil Procedure governing pretrial discovery:
      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal nature where
the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy.
      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and compiled and
maintained for scientific research. This exemption shall not, however, apply to
records the disclosure or publication of which is directed by other statute.
      (3)   (a)   Records confidentially disclosed to the agency, or required
by an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial
advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records.
         (b)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an
agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:
            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of a loan or a grant;
            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of assessments, incentives, inducements and tax credits as described in KRS
Chapter 154;
            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of commercial enterprise,
including mineral exploration records, unpatented, secret commercially valuable
plans, appliances, formulae or processes, which are used for the making,
preparing, compounding, treating or processing of articles or materials which
are trade commodities obtained from a person; or
            4.   For the grant or review of a license to do business.
         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a) and (b)
above, shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is
directed by statute.
      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a business
or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the business’
or industry’s interest in locating in, relocating within, or expanding within
the Commonwealth. This exemption shall not include those records pertaining to
applications to agencies for permits or licenses necessary to do business or to
expand business operations within the state, except as provided in division (A)
(2) above.
      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in conjunction with
the regulation or supervision of financial institutions, including, but not
limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions, which
disclose the agency’s internal examining or audit criteria and related
analytical methods.
      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to the acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has been
acquired. The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision.
      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys and other examination data used to
administer a licensing examination, examination for employment or academic
examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again.
      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved in
administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting and
investigating statutory or regulatory violations, if the disclosure of the
information could pose an articulable risk of harm to the agency or its
investigation by revealing the identity of informants or witnesses not
otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication. Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action; however, records or information compiled
and maintained by county attorneys or Commonwealth’s attorneys pertaining to
criminal investigations or criminal litigation shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain exempted after enforcement action,
including litigation, is completed or a decision is made to take no action. The
exemptions provided by this subdivision shall not be used by the custodian of
the records to delay or impede the exercise of rights granted by this chapter.
      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes, correspondence with private individuals,
other than correspondence which is intended to give notice of final action of a
public agency;
      (10)   Preliminary recommendations, and preliminary memoranda in which
opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended;
      (11)   All public records or information the disclosure of which is
prohibited by federal law or regulation;
      (12)   Public records or information the disclosure of which is
prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of the
General Assembly, including any information acquired by the Department of
Revenue in tax administration that is prohibited from divulgence or disclosure
under KRS 131.190;
    (13)      (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would have a
reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to a
terrorist act and limited to:
            (i)   Criticality lists resulting from consequence assessments;
            (ii)   Vulnerability assessments;
            (iii)   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
            (iv)   Counter-terrorism measures and plans;
            (v)   Security and response needs assessments;
            (vi)   Infrastructure records that expose a vulnerability referred
to in this subparagraph through the disclosure of the location, configuration,
or security of critical systems, including public utility critical systems.
These critical systems shall include but not be limited to information
technology, communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water,
wastewater, sewage, and gas systems;
            (vii)   The following records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division: detailed drawings, schematics,
maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor plans, and operating,
utility, or security systems of any building or facility owned, occupied,
leased, or maintained by a public agency; and
            (viii)   Records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability
referred to in this subparagraph and that describe the exact physical location
of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological materials.
         (b)   As used in this paragraph, “terrorist act” means a criminal act
intended to:
            (i)   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all or part of the
civilian population;
            (ii)   Disrupt a system identified in division (1)(f) of this
section; or
            (iii)   Cause massive destruction to a building or facility owned,
occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.
         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a request to inspect
a public record for a reason identified in this paragraph, the public agency
shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request, referred to in KRS
61.880(1), to the executive director of the Kentucky Office of Homeland
Security and the Attorney General;
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall affect the obligations of the city
with respect to disclosure and availability of public records under estate,
environmental, health, and safety programs;
         (e)   The exemption established in this section shall not apply when a
member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a public record
identified in this section under the Open Records Law.
      (14)   Public or private records, including books, papers, maps,
photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other
documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having historic,
literary, artistic, or commemorative value accepted by the archivist of a
public university, museum, or government depository from a donor or depositor
other than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to the extent that
nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or depositor of such
records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which
is mandated by another statute or by federal law.
      (15)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chapters 45A or 56.
This exemption shall not apply after:
         (a)   A contract is awarded; or
         (b)   The procurement process is cancelled without award of a contract
and there is a determination that the contract will not be resolicited.
      (16)   Client and case files maintained by the Department of Public
Advocacy or any person or entity contracting with the Department of Public
Advocacy for the provision of legal representation under KRS Ch. 31.
      (17)   Communication of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function.
      (18)   Except as provided in KRS 61.168, photographs or videos that
depict the death, killing, rape, or sexual assault of a person. However, such
photographs or videos shall be made available by the public agency to the
requesting party for viewing on the premises of the public agency, or a
mutually agreed upon location, at the request of:
         (a)   1.   Any victim depicted in the photographs or videos, his or
her immediate family, or legal representative;
            2.   Any involved insurance company or its representative; or
            3.   The legal representative of any involved party;
         (b)   Any state agency or political subdivision investigating official
misconduct; or
         (c)   A legal representative for the person under investigation for,
charged with, pled guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the
underlying incident. The person under investigation for, charged with, pled
guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the underlying incident or
their immediate family shall not be permitted to have access to the photographs
or videos.
   (B)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.
   (C)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny, abridge,
or impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for employment, or an
eligible on a register to inspect and copy any record, including preliminary
and other supporting documentation, that relates to him or her. The records
shall include, but not be limited to work plans, job performance, demotions,
evaluations, promotions, compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers,
layoffs, disciplinary actions, examination scores and preliminary and other
supporting documentation. A city employee, applicant or eligible shall not have
the right to inspect or copy any examination or any documents relating to
ongoing criminal or administrative investigations by any agency.
(KRS 61.878)
   (D)   When material is made available pursuant to a request under division
(A)(18) of this section, the public agency shall not be required to make a copy
of the recording except as provided in KRS 61.169, and the requesting parties
shall not be limited in the number of times they may view the material.
(KRS 61.878(6))
§ 34.17 NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the city in circuit court regarding the enforcement of the open
records law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
   
35.01   County assessment adopted
   
35.02   Due date; payment
   
35.03   Delinquency
   
35.04   Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles
   
35.05   Bank franchise and local deposit tax
   
35.06   Disposition of funds
§ 35.01 COUNTY ASSESSMENT ADOPTED.
   (A)   January 1 is hereby designated as the assessment date for all real and
personal property subject to city taxation within the corporate limits of the
city. Pursuant to the authority granted in KRS 132.285, the city hereby adopts
the county assessment for all real and personal property situated within the
city as the basis of all ad valorem tax levies ordered or approved by the City
Council.
   (B)   The assessment as finally determined for county tax purposes shall
serve as the basis for all city levies for the fiscal year commencing after the
assessment date.
(Am. Ord. 3, Series 2024, passed August 7, 2024)
§ 35.02 DUE DATE; PAYMENT.
   (A)   All taxes, except ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles or as otherwise
provided in this chapter, shall become due on December 1.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who pays his or her city taxes before November 1 after
they become due shall be entitled to a 10% discount thereon, and the Clerk
shall allow the discount and give a receipt in full to the taxpayer.
(Am. Ord. 3, Series 2024, passed August 7, 2024)
§ 35.03 DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   All city taxes, except ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles or as
otherwise provided in this chapter, shall become delinquent on December 1.
   (B)   Any taxes not paid by the date when they become delinquent shall be
subject to a penalty of 7% on the taxes due and unpaid plus interest of 1% per
month beginning January 1 following their due dates until paid in full. The
delinquent taxpayer shall also pay all costs and expenses incidental to any
action taken by the city for collection of the delinquent tax bill, including a
reasonable attorney’s fee.
   (C)   Delinquent taxes shall be collectable under the provisions of the
state law relating to the collection of delinquent taxes by cities of the fifth
class.
(Am. Ord. 3, Series 2024, passed August 7, 2024)
§ 35.04 AD VALOREM TAXES ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   All ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles shall be collected by the
County Clerk in accordance with KRS 134.800.
   (B)   Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles shall become due and delinquent as
set forth in KRS 134.810 and any such taxes not paid by the date when they
become delinquent shall be subject to the penalty and interest specified in KRS
134.810.
§ 35.05 BANK FRANCHISE AND LOCAL DEPOSIT TAX.
   (A)   There is imposed on all financial institutions, as defined in KRS Ch.
136, located within the corporate limits of the city, a franchise tax at the
rate of $0.25 on all deposits, as defined in KRS Ch. 136, maintained by such
financial institutions.
   (B)   The city will issue tax bills to financial institutions no later than
December 1 of each year. Payment of the tax shall be due with a 2% discount by
December 31 of each year, or without the discount by January 31 of each year.
   (C)   The city shall have a lien for taxes upon any and all property subject
to the tax imposed by these sections, which lien shall be superior to all
encumbrances prior or subsequent.
   (D)   All taxes due in accordance with this section which are not paid
before January 31 shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty
of 10% and shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
(Ord. 2005-10, passed 8-1-2005)
§ 35.06 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All monies collected from the taxes levied in this chapter shall be paid
into the General Fund of the city to be used for the payment of proper
expenditures as determined by the City Council.
CHAPTER 36: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
36.01   General duties; responsibilities
   
36.02   Equipment; evidence
   
36.03   Fiscal responsibility
   
36.04   Discipline
   
36.05   Standard operating procedures
   
36.06   Jurisdiction
§ 36.01 GENERAL DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Pewee Valley Police Department shall consist of 1 police officer,
who shall be the Chief of Police. If the city wishes to expand the Police
Department to include additional officers, this section of this chapter must be
amended or repealed. Except as limited in §
36.06, members of the Pewee Valley Police Department shall have all regular
powers of police under Kentucky law.
   (B)   The full duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police shall be
set out in the Pewee Valley Police Department Standard Operating Procedures
Manual adopted pursuant to §
36.05, but, at a minimum, the Chief shall perform the following general duties:
      (1)   Protect and serve the people of Pewee Valley;
      (2)   Patrol within the city limits by cruiser, bicycle or foot to
provide security for persons and property;
      (3)   Respond to complaints and calls for help from citizens or other
persons within the city;
      (4)   Control traffic and enforce ordinances and the law within the city;
      (5)   Report crimes and violations occurring within the city;
      (6)   Sponsor crime prevention and public safety programs for education
and civic groups;
      (7)   Maintain proper records pertaining to warnings, violations,
arrests, investigations and evidence;
      (8)   Backup and assist other law enforcement agencies as reasonably
necessary under §
36.06;
      (9)   Generally keep the peace in and about the city.
   (C)   The Chief of Police is responsible for scheduling patrol and shift
coverage, subject to the direction of the Mayor, who is authorized to make
directives for coverage of specific areas, events and times. The Chief shall
provide adequate coverage using his or her discretion how to best allocate
resources of the Department, utilizing staggered, or irregular, shifts so as to
maximize the perception of actual or apparent coverage. The Mayor has
supervisory authority over the Chief of Police, who shall serve in a non-
elected position at the will of the Mayor. Neither the Chief, nor Mayor, may
use their authority in a punitive or abusive fashion.
   (D)   If the City Council shall expand the Police Department pursuant to
division (A) above, the Chief of Police shall perform reasonable background
checks and make recommendations for candidates to the Mayor, who shall
determine whether such candidate shall be hired, subject to the advice and
consent of the City Council, who shall have authority to inquire as to
background and qualifications of the candidate.
   (E)   Police operations shall only be conducted by properly trained and
certified police officers, who shall be required to take the mandatory
continuing education required for all police officers in the Commonwealth of
Kentucky.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.10, passed 1-5-2004)
§ 36.02 EQUIPMENT; EVIDENCE.
   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the allocation, care and
maintenance of the equipment of the Pewee Valley Police Department, including
the police vehicle, in accordance with this chapter, state law and the Standard
Operating Procedures Manual. The Chief of Police shall also be responsible for
the custody and preservation of evidence collected in connection with crimes
occurring within the jurisdiction of the Pewee Valley Police Department, in
accordance with this chapter, state law and the Standard Operating Procedures
Manual.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.10, passed 1-5-2004)
§ 36.03 FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations
of the Police Department; provided that, the Mayor and City Council are
entitled to a full accounting how all funds are spent. Notwithstanding,
purchase requests and regular monthly bills for the Police Department shall be
submitted for approval at the City Council meeting, in the same manner and
procedure as other city expenditures.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall submit to the Mayor a proposed budget by
April 1 for the fiscal year starting July 1 and ending June 31. The police
budget shall include specific line-item requests for all resources necessary to
run the department, including a request for officer man-hours and rate of pay
(including the Chief), plus benefits. The police budget proposal shall then be
reviewed and submitted to the City Council for consideration, modification,
approval or rejection according to its authority under Kentucky law.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.10, passed 1-5-2004)
§ 36.04 DISCIPLINE.
   (A)   Any disciplinary action of any officer, including the Chief, shall
occur in accordance with procedures set out in the Standard Operating
Procedures Manual, but at a minimum any termination, suspension or reduction in
grade may only be imposed after a hearing or appeal before the City Council.
All officers, including the Chief, are subject to an initial 6-month
probationary period, which may be extended up to 12 months by the Mayor in his
or her sole discretion.
   (B)   The City of Pewee Valley has not established a civil service system
under KRS Chapters 95 or 90; therefore the “Policeman’s Bill of Rights”
contained in KRS 15.520 will only apply to an officer after the probationary
period has ended and the city has elected to participate in the Kentucky Law
Enforcement Foundation Program (KLEFPF) and all other prerequisites of KRS
15.520 have been met.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.10, passed 1-5-2004)
§ 36.05 STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Police Department, as part of the Executive branch of government,
shall report to the Mayor as the city’s chief executive. The Mayor shall
supervise the Police Department and all its officers and employees, who shall
submit regular reports to him or her as set out in the Standard Operating
Procedures Manual, or as the Mayor may otherwise direct. The Chief shall file
with the Mayor on Monday of each week all patrol sheets from the preceding
week, as well as a written summary of all police operations from the preceding
week, including pay sheets showing hours worked for each pay period and each
patrol scheduled.
   (B)   The Mayor shall promulgate Standard Operating Procedures, which may be
amended from time to time, to insure the orderly administration of the
functions of the Police Department, subject to approval of the Council. The
Standard Operating Procedures Manual shall be filed with the person responsible
for maintaining city records as provided under KRS 83A.060 and a copy given to
each member of the Police Department. The Standard Operating Procedures cannot
vary any term of this chapter.
   (C)   The City Council, having legislative authority only, shall not perform
any executive functions, including the direction or discipline of the Police
Department or officers, without the prior consent of the Mayor. City Council
members may not direct police operations or officers but must take their
requests and concerns to the Mayor as the Chief Executive of the city.
   (D)   Physical fitness being necessary to perform the essential functions of
the job, every police officer shall undergo and pass a physical examination,
including hearing, vision and drug tests as a condition of initial employment,
and shall have such examinations performed at least annually, including random
drug testing, as a condition of continued employment.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.10, passed 1-5-2004)
§ 36.06 JURISDICTION.
   No regular police operations shall be conducted outside the boundaries of
the city, except to backup or assist other police or law enforcement agencies
requesting emergency assistance outside the city limits, including, but not
limited to life threatening emergencies, conditions of eminent danger,
incidents of domestic violence or the pursuit of suspected felons, as described
in detail in the Standard Operating Procedures Manual.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.10, passed 1-5-2004)
CHAPTER 37: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Cable Rate Commission
   
37.01   Creation; Commissioners’ terms
   
37.02   Functions; administration
   
37.03   By-Laws adopted by reference
Board of Adjustments
   
37.15   Members
   
37.16   Powers
Cross-reference:
   Overlay Commission, see §§
151.22,
151.23
CABLE RATE COMMISSION
§ 37.01 CREATION; COMMISSIONERS’ TERMS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Cable Rate Commission. The Commission shall
consist of 3 members appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the
City Council.
   (B)   One of the 3 members shall serve as Commissioner.
      (1)   The term of office for the members for the Cable Rate Commission
shall be 3 years. In order to establish staggered terms, the first 3
individuals appointed to the Commission shall serve 1-, 2- and 3-year terms
respectively. The term for each position thereafter shall be a full 3-year
term.
      (2)   Each member and/or Commissioner shall be resident of the city
during his or her term of office.
      (3)   Vacancies occurring in the office a member, whether by expiration
of term, moving from the city, or otherwise, shall be filled by appointment as
in the first instance and such appointee shall serve either for the ensuing
term or the remainder of the then current unexpired term for such office, as
the case may be.
(Prior Code KOC, § 230.15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 37.02 FUNCTIONS; ADMINISTRATION.
   The functions of the Cable Rate Commission shall be to administer and
enforce the provisions of the city’s Cable Rate Regulation Ordinance and aid
the City Council in complying with the applicable state and federal laws
including the rules and orders set forth by the Federal Communications
Commission.
(Prior Code KOC, § 230.15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 37.03 BY-LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The specific organization and functions of the Cable Rate Commission shall
be set forth in the by-laws to be established by the Commission and approved by
the City Council.
(Prior Code KOC, § 230.15, passed 11-1-1993)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 37.15 MEMBERS.
   There is hereby established the Pewee Valley Board of Adjustments which
shall consist of 5 members.
(Prior Code KOC, § 150.2, passed 1-4-1974)
§ 37.16 POWERS.
   The Pewee Valley Board of Adjustment shall have all powers granted to Boards
of Adjustment by both the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of Oldham County,
Kentucky, and by the Kentucky Revised Statutes and shall have exclusive
jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 150.2, passed 1-4-1974)
CHAPTER 38: CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Title
   
38.02   Definitions
   
38.03   Effective date
Standards of Conduct
   
38.15   Conflicts of general interest
   
38.16   Conflicts of interest in contracts
   
38.17   Receipt of gifts
   
38.18   Nepotism
Financial Disclosure
   
38.30   Who must file
   
38.31   Contents of the financial interests statement and filing requirements
   
38.32   Noncompliance with filing requirements
Enforcement
   
38.45   Board of Ethics created
   
38.46   Power and duties of Board
   
38.47   Filing and investigation of complaints
   
38.48   Notice of hearings
   
38.49   Hearing procedure
   
38.50   Appeals
   
38.51   Limitation of actions
 
   
38.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Pewee Valley,
Kentucky Code of Ethics.”
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation, limited liability company or any legal entity through which
business is conducted for profit.
   BOARD OF ETHICS. The City of Pewee Valley Board of Ethics which is created
and vested by this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing the
requirements of the city’s code of ethics.
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city office.
An individual is a candidate when the individual files a notification and
declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a declaration
of intent to be a write-in candidate with the county clerk or secretary of
state.
   CITY. The City of Pewee Valley, Kentucky.
   CITY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, nonstock corporation or other
entity created, either individually or jointly, by the city.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the city, except those
persons who perform professional services as a physician, attorney, accountant,
engineer, architect or editor of the city. The term EMPLOYEE shall not include
any contractor or subcontractor or any of their employees.
   FAMILY MEMBER. Spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in the
officer’s or employee’s household, or a person claimed by the officer or
employee, or the officer’s or employee’s spouse, as a dependent for tax
purposes.
   OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is 1 of the following: Mayor, Council Member, City Clerk, City
Treasurer, any person who occupies a nonelected office created under KRS
83A.080, a. member of the governing body of any city agency who has been
appointed to the governing body of the agency by the city, except those persons
who perform professional services as a physician, attorney, accountant,
engineer, architect or Editor of the Call of the Pewee.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.03 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take full force and effect on January 1, 1995 and
publication shall be as required by KRS 83A.060.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 38.15 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.
   Every officer and employee of the city and every city agency shall comply
with the following standards of conduct:
   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any officer
or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any business,
transaction or activity, which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of the officer’s or employee’s public duties.
   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to use his
or her official position with the city to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself or herself or others.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in
any matter where he or she, a member of his or her immediate family, or a
business organization in which he or she has an interest, has direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be expected to
impair his or her objectivity or independence of judgment.
   (D)   No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service, for
compensation or not, which might reasonably be expected to prejudice his or her
independence of judgment in the exercise of his or her official duties.
   (E)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any provision
in this section if, by reason of the officer’s or employee’s participation,
vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit accrues to the officer
or employee, a family member, an outside employer, or a business as defined
herein as a member of any business, occupation, profession or other group, to
any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of the business, occupation, profession or other group.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.16 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly
or through others undertake, execute, hold or enjoy, in whole or in part, any
contract made, entered into, awarded or granted by the city or a city agency,
except as follows:
      (1)   The prohibition in division (A) of this section shall not apply to
contracts entered into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for city
office, before an appointed officer was appointed to a city or city agency
office, or before an employee was hired by the city or a city agency. However,
if any contract entered into by a city or city agency officer or employee
before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to office, or was hired as
an employee before he or she became a candidate, was appointed to office, or
was hired as an employee, is renewable after he or she becomes a candidate,
assumes the appointed office, or is hired as an employee, then the prohibition
in division (A) of this section shall apply to the renewal of the contract.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (A) of this section shall not apply if
the contract is awarded after public notice and competitive bidding, unless the
officer or employee is authorized to participate in establishing the contract
specifications, awarding the contract or managing contract performance after
the contract is awarded. If the officer or employee has any of the authorities
set forth in the preceding sentence, then the officer or employee shall have no
interest in the contract, unless the requirements set forth in division (A)(3)
below are satisfied.
      (3)   The prohibition in division (A) of this section shall not apply in
any case where the following requirements are satisfied:
         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature
of the officer’s or employee’s interest in the contract are publicly disclosed
at a meeting of the governing body of the city or city agency.
         (b)   The disclosure is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the city or city
agency that the contract with the officer or employee is in the best interests
of the public and the city or city agency because of price, limited supply or
other specific reasons.
         (d)   The finding is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor,
and upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered into in violation
of this section. Additionally, a violation of this section shall be grounds for
removal from office or employment with the city in accordance with any
applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules or regulations of the
city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.17 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly, or
indirectly through any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift,
favor, loan or promise under circumstances in which it could reasonably be
inferred that the gift was intended to influence, or could reasonably be
expected to influence the officer or employee in the performance of his or her
or public duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or
acceptance of campaign contributions for an elective public office as governed
by the Kentucky Revised Statutes.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.18 NEPOTISM.
   No city officer or city employee shall act in his or her official capacity
to hire or cause to be hired any member of his or her immediate family to any
paid position at an hourly pay rate or with benefits in excess of any other
employee with similar job duties, responsibilities and qualification
requirements.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 38.30 WHO MUST FILE.
   The following individuals shall be required to file a financial interests
statement with the Board of Ethics: elected officers; candidates for elected
office; nonelected officers and employees of the city with procurement
authority exceeding $1,000 per purchase; members of the Board of Ethics.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.31 CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT AND FILING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall be on a form prescribed by
the Board of Ethics and include the following information for the current
calendar year, with the first statement to be due on April 15, 1996.
      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone number and
home address of the filer;
      (2)   The title of the filer’s office, office sought or position of
employment;
      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the filer’s spouse;
      (4)   Information that identifies each source of net income of the filer
and filer’s immediate family members exceeding $10,000 during the current
calendar year, and the nature of the income (e.g. salary, commission,
dividends, retirement fund distribution and the like);
      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the state in
which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had at any time
during the current calendar year an interest of $10,000 at fair market value of
5% ownership interest or more;
      (6)   The name and address of any business located outside of the state,
if the business has engaged in any business transactions with the city during
the past 3 years, or which is anticipated to engage in any business
transactions with the city, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s
immediate family had at any time during the current calendar year an interest
of $10,000 at fair market value or 5% ownership interest or more;
      (7)   A designation as commercial, residential or rural, and the location
of all real property within the county, other than the filer’s primary
residence, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had
during the current calendar year an interest of $10,000 or more;
      (8)   Each source by name and address of gifts or honoraria, having an
aggregate fair market value of $100 or more from any single source (excluding
gifts received from family members and inheritances), received by the filer or
any member of the filer’s immediate family during the current calendar year;
and
      (9)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than $10,000 except
debts arising from the purchase and/or refinance of a primary residence or the
purchase of consumer goods which are bought or used primarily for personal,
family or household purposes.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer or
employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of individual
clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.
   (C)   The financial disclosure statement shall be filed annually by officers
and employees no later than April 15, beginning April 15, 1996. Candidates
shall be required to file the statement no later than 21 days after the filing
date or the date of nomination. Newly appointed officers and employees should
be required to file their initial statement no later than 21 days after date of
appointment, or April 15, 1996, whichever shall last occur.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994; Prior Code KOC, § 160.2, passed 1-
12-1995)
§ 38.32 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative official, shall
notify by certified mail each person required to file a statement of financial
interests who fails to file the statement by the due date, files an incomplete
statement, or files a statement in a form other than that prescribed by the
Board. The notice shall specify the type of failure or delinquency, shall
establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall be remedied and
shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.
   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who fails or
refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the notice under
division (A) within the time period established in the notice shall be guilty
of a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board in
an amount not to exceed $25 per day, up to a maximum total civil fine of $500.
Any civil fine imposed by the Board under this section may be recovered by the
city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses
to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time. Court costs and
reasonable attorney fees may also be recovered.
   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial interests
which he or she knows to contain false information or intentionally omits
required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 38.45 BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of 3 members who shall be appointed
by the Mayor subject to the approval by the City Council. The initial members
of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed within 60 days of the effective date
of this chapter. No member of the Board of Ethics shall hold any elected or
other appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment
with the city or any city agency. The members shall serve for a term of 3
years; except that with respect to the members initially appointed, 1 member
shall be appointed for a term of 1 year, 1 member shall be appointed for a term
of 2 years and 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 3 years. Thereafter,
all appointments shall be for a term of 3 years. Each member of the Board of
Ethics shall be a resident of the city and shall reside in the city throughout
the term in office. The members may be re-appointed for any number of
consecutive terms.
   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the Mayor subject to
the approval by the City Council for misconduct, inability or willful neglect
of duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed from office
under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing
before the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the
Mayor subject to the approval by the City Council. If a vacancy is not filled
by the Mayor within 60 days, the remaining members of the Board of Ethics shall
fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation,
unless otherwise approved by the City Council, but shall be reimbursed for all
necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter, elect a chairperson from among the
membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.
   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary, upon the
call of the Chairperson or at the written request of a majority of the members.
   (H)   The presence of 2 or more members shall constitute a quorum and the
affirmative vote of 2 or more members shall be necessary for any official
action to be taken. Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a conflict of
interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board shall
disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or herself from
voting on the matter, and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a
quorum.
   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics and
the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in
the minutes.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.46 POWER AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   The Board of Ethics is established to enforce the provisions of this
code of ethics. The Board of Ethics shall, on the written request of any
official, candidate, nominee or employee coming under the code of ethics,
render advisory opinions concerning the provisions of this code of ethics. The
Board may, at its discretion, publish its advisory opinion with such deletions
as may be necessary to prevent disclosure of the individual or individuals
involved or concerned.
   (B)   The Board shall receive, hear and investigate complaints concerning
violations of this code of ethics. In any instance in which the Board of Ethics
finds that a violation of the code of ethics exists, the Board may impose the
appropriate penalty. In hearing and investigating complaints concerning
violations of this code of ethics, the Board shall have the power to subpoena
witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require other productions of
evidence. The Board shall also control and maintain all statements of financial
interests and make sure that they are available for public inspection in
accordance with the Kentucky Open Records Act.
   (C)   Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the
exercise of these powers by the Board of Ethics shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.47 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant, and shall meet any other requirements established by
the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge receipt of a
complaint to the complainant within 10 working days from the date of receipt.
The Board shall forward within 10 working days to each officer or employee of
the city or city agency who is the subject of the complaint a copy of the
complaint and a general statement of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board of
Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations contained
in the complaint. The Board shall afford a person who is the subject of the
complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the complaint. The
person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear and be
heard under oath and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.
   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being
conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board except:
      (1)   The Board may turn over to the Commonwealth’s attorney or county
attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings.
      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly disclose the
existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board may publicly confirm the
existence of the inquiry, and, at its discretion, make public any documents
which were issued to either party.
   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary inquiry
whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether it alleges
a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this chapter. If the Board
concludes that the complaint is outside of its jurisdiction, frivolous or
without factual basis, the Board shall immediately terminate the inquiry,
reduce the conclusion to writing, and transmit a copy of its decision to the
complainant and to all officers or employees against whom the complaint was
filed.
   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry,
that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains allegations
sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation, the
Board shall notify the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint
and may:
      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances such as, lack of significant
economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee, lack of economic loss to
the city and its taxpayers or lack of significant impact on public confidence
in city government issue, in writing, a confidential reprimand to the officer
or employee concerning the alleged violation and provide a copy of the
confidential reprimand to the Mayor and City Council; and
      (2)   Initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation.
   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false complaint
alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer or employee
of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.48 NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order setting
the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the order is issued, unless
the alleged violator petitions for and the Board consents to a later date. The
order setting the matter for hearing, along with a copy of any pertinent
regulations of the Board relating to the hearing shall be sent to the alleged
violator within 24 hours of the time the order setting a hearing is issued.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.49 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules of
Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics; however,
the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in
accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board so as
to afford all parties the full range of due process rights required by the
nature of the proceedings.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged violator, or his
or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine all
documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board in connection with the
matter to be heard. The Board shall inform the alleged violator, or his or her
representative, of any exculpatory evidence in its possession.
   (C)   All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to call
and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses, to
submit evidence and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall have the
right to be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who may be
adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the Board, with or
without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention, or may file
a written statement regarding the adverse mention for incorporation into the
record of the proceeding.
   (E)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless the
members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.
   (F)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall, as
soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for the purpose
of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination whether a
violation of this chapter has been proven. Within 30 days after completion of
the hearing, the Board shall issue a written report of its findings and
conclusions.
   (G)   If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this chapter
has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this determination to
the officer or employee who was the subject of the complain and to the party
who filed the complaint.
   (H)   If the Board concludes in its report that in consideration of the
evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of
violation of this chapter, the Board may:
      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the
violation;
      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the violations and
provide a copy of the reprimand to the Mayor and City Council;
      (3)   In writing, recommend to the Mayor and City Council that the
violator be sanctioned as recommended by the Board, which may include a
recommendation for discipline or dismissal, or removal from office;
      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty of not
more than $1,000; and
      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this ordinance or state
laws to the County Attorney or Commonwealth’s Attorney of the jurisdiction for
prosecution.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.50 APPEALS.
   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court of
the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board. The Board shall
transmit to the clerk of the court all evidence considered by the Board at the
public hearing.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.51 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law,
an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within 1 year after
the violation is discovered.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this chapter,
any officer or employee of the city or city agency who is found by the Board of
Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall deemed guilty of a
civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board of Ethics
not to exceed $1,000, which may be recovered by the city in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed
period of time. Court costs and attorney fees may also be recovered.
   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found by
the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the economic benefit
or gain which the officer or employee is determined by the Board to have
realized as a result of the violation. The amount of any forfeiture may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender
fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.
Court costs and attorney fees may also be recovered.
   (C)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, a finding by the Board of Ethics than an officer or employee of the
city or any city agency is guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action
by the Mayor subject to the approval by the City Council, or by any other
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline. Any action to
remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of this chapter
shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the city and all applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Prior Code KOC, § 160.1, passed 11-5-1994)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   TRASH AND GARBAGE
      
51.   SEWERS AND DRAINAGE
CHAPTER 50: TRASH AND GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Garbage and litter
   
50.02   Garbage collection
   
50.03   Transportation of trash and garbage
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 GARBAGE AND LITTER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to place or cause
to be placed in any of the streets or alleys of the city any dead animals or
fowl or any slops or garbage or to throw any offensive article in any street or
alleys.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to obstruct any of
the streets or alleys of the city so as to interfere with the free passage over
and the natural use of same.
(Prior Code, § 1020.3) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the activity of garbage collection,
including dumpster type collection, within the city between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 6:30 a.m. on any day.
   (B)   As used herein, GARBAGE COLLECTION shall mean any of the following
activities:
      (1)   Emptying of cans or into a garbage collection truck;
      (2)   Loading, unloading, maneuvering, positioning or emptying a dumpster
or other type container; and
      (3)   Using a garbage collection truck to compact garbage by any process.
   (C)   The registered owner of a garbage collection truck being used in
violation of this section shall be prima facie evidence of ownership of the
vehicle and of violation of this section by the owner.
(Prior Code KOC, § 830.2, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 TRANSPORTATION OF TRASH AND GARBAGE.
   In order to protect the environment within the corporate limits of the city,
all vehicles carrying trash, garbage or refuse through the city limits must
cover or have enclosed the trash, garbage or refuse while the vehicle is moving
through the city limits.
(Prior Code KOC, § 830.1, passed 2-7-1972) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or corporation found guilty of a violation of this chapter
for which no other specific penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the provisions of §
10.99 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 1020.3)
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of §
50.02 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50, nor more than $500,
for each offense and each collection container so collected in violation of §
50.02 shall be deemed a separate offense, and each day on which an offense
occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for which a separate
fine may be levied.
      (2)   Any violation of §
50.02 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in an amount equal to the
minimum fine prescribed by division (B)(1) above. The civil penalty may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender
does not pay the penalty within 20 days after the offender has been cited for
the ordinance violation. The civil penalty may be used as an alternative to or
in conjunction with the criminal penalties authorized in division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code KOC, § 830.2, passed 12-7-1998)
   (C)   Any owner of a vehicle, any person or other legal entity owning,
operating or leasing such a vehicle which is in violation of §
50.03 will be subject to a minimum fine of $10 for each violation or a maximum
fine of $50 for each violation, or a penalty requiring the persons in violation
of §
50.03, both owner and operator of the vehicle operated in violation of the
ordinance, to collect from the road rights-of-way within the city limits a full
vehicle of trash and other debris and remove same beyond the city limits, or
both penalties.
(Prior Code KOC, § 830.1, passed 2-7-1972)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS AND DRAINAGE
Section
   
51.01   Dumping and draining sewage
   
51.02   Obstruction of natural drainage
Cross-reference:
   Water quality management and stormwater drainage, see
Ch. 150
§ 51.01 DUMPING AND DRAINING SEWAGE.
   (A)   Whoever is guilty of dumping or draining on the property of any other
person, or upon any public property or public street or sidewalk in the city,
any sewage or any offensive waste matter or may impure water from any sewer, or
from any drain pipe or drain ditch, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each day within which the offense continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Prior Code KOC, § 820.1, passed 9-15-1914) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.02 OBSTRUCTION OF NATURAL DRAINAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or alter the natural
drainage or free flow of surface water drainage along or adjacent to any public
road within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 620.3, passed 11-1-1966) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions
   
70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department
   
70.04   Authority for enforcement
   
70.05   Temporary regulations
   
70.06   Weight limits
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Signal legends
   
70.16   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
   
70.17   Obedience to signals
   
70.18   Interference with signals
   
70.19   Unauthorized signals or markings
   
70.20   Device to be legible and in proper position
   
70.21   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers
 
   
70.99   General penalty
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or Police
Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney’s office when on official
business and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
   BOULEVARD. Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is required
to stop before entering or crossing the boulevard.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between 2 consecutive
intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the street
is used for business purposes.
   CROSSWALK. That portion of the roadway included within the extension of the
sidewalk across any intersection, and such other portions of the roadway
between 2 intersections, as may be legally designated as crossing places and
marked by stanchions, paint lines or otherwise.
   CURB. The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles whether
marked by curbstones or not.
   INTERSECTION. That part of the public way embraced within the extensions of
the street lines of 2 or more streets which join at an angle whether or not 1
such street crosses the other.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, warnings, directions,
markings and devices placed or erected or maintained by authority of the Chief
of Police.
   ONE-WAY STREET or 1-WAY STREET. A street on which vehicles are permitted to
move in 1 direction only.
   OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance,
starting and stopping of a vehicle.
   PARK. When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PLAY STREET. Any street or portion thereof so designated by the Chief of
Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all traffic is
barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of §
70.03 or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this traffic code.
   PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between property lines of every way, dedicated
passway or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths and foot
paths.
   REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed
in the opposite direction.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the
street.
   ROADWAY. That portion of any street, improved, designated or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb and the property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is actually
necessary to receive or discharge passengers.
   STREET. Every public way, including alleys.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses and other
conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for the
purpose of travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on any street except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction given by a uniformed police officer, or
to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations of this traffic
code.
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government, the
state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate
any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in
this traffic code or by state statute.
   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of
this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no
application.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of the city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department, and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle or any other signal.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate
unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police or other authorized city official
shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to impose such traffic
regulations as he or she may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed
two weeks. If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended
order.
§ 70.06 WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate on any street or road in Pewee Valley any
vehicle, object or contrivance other than a motor truck or a semitrailer truck
which weighs more than 36,000 pounds, including the weight of the vehicle,
object, contrivance and load.
   (B)   Trucks, semitrailers trucks and tractor trailer units. No person shall
operate on any street or road in Pewee Valley any of the following trucks,
trailers, manufactured homes, or vehicles:
      (1)   Any motor truck, semitrailer, trailer, manufactured home, or
vehicle which exceeds 11-1/2 feet in height or 96 inches in width, including
any part of the body or load;
      (2)   Any motor truck, except a semitrailer truck, which exceeds 26-1/
2 feet in length, including any part of the body or load;
      (3)   Any semitrailer truck which exceeds 30 feet in length, including
any part of the body or load;
      (4)   Any truck, semitrailer truck or truck and trailer unit which
exceeds , 36,000 pounds gross weight, including the load.
      (5)   Any truck, semitrailer truck or tractor-trailer unit which exceeds
a gross weight equal to the sum of 600 pounds per inch of the combined width of
the tires upon which the vehicle may be propelled, but in no event more than
36,000 pounds; and
      (6)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any truck hauling
building materials under KRS 189.2226, or to a road construction project on a
highway rated less than the maximum weight provided above, may haul up to
80,000 pounds gross weight, including the load, without a permit.
(KRS 189.221)
   (C)   The weight limit enumerated above shall be conspicuously posted on the
streets, and roads of Pewee Valley.
   (D)   (1)   Whenever severe weather conditions exist such that certain
streets are more vulnerable to heavy weighted vehicles than when severe weather
conditions exist, the Mayor shall have the authority to close the streets to
all vehicles weighing in excess of 6,000 pounds.
      (2)   The street or streets, as the case may be, that are closed shall
remain closed until the Mayor ascertains that the severe weather conditions
have subsided enough to allow normal vehicle traffic without damaging the
street or streets in question.
   (E)   (1)   Whenever it is anticipated that construction or other projects
will result in a series of trips over the streets and roads of Pewee Valley,
the owner or operator of the vehicle, object or contrivance may be required to
post a bond to cover potential damages.
      (2)   The bond may be set at the time a building permit is issued and the
amount set by the City council member, designated as Road and Street
Commissioner.
   (F)   This section does not apply to vehicles run upon tracks or fire
apparatus belonging to the city or other fire departments, emergency vehicles,
fuel trucks or garbage collecting trucks.
(Prior Code KOC, § 520.4, passed 6-5-1978; Prior Code KOC, § 520.5, passed 9-5-
1978) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control
sign or signs exhibiting the words “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop,” or exhibiting
different colored lights for purposes of traffic control, the following colors
only shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be obeyed as
follows:
   (A)   Green alone or “Go”. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either the turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time
the signal is exhibited.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or
“Go” signal. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal may enter and
clear the intersection.
   (C)   Red alone or double red or “Stop.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such
other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain
standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
   (D)   Flashing red alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point
as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not again proceed
until it can do so without danger.
   (E)   Flashing amber alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce
its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection controlled by such
signal.
   (F)   “Yield Right-of-Way.” Vehicular traffic facing the “Yield Right-of-
Way” sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within such primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle facing a “Yield Right-of-Way”
sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess
of 15 mph, except that this speed limit shall not apply to vehicles entering an
expressway.
   (G)   Lane lights. When lane lights are installed over any street for the
purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular traffic
shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. However, when
flashing amber lights appear above a lane all left turns shall be made from
that lane. Where red arrows appear above such lanes, vehicles shall not move
against them. If flashing amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be
used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at such place prohibits
the turn.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338
§ 70.16 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control devices
necessary within the city. All traffic-control devices, including signs, shall
be employed to indicate 1 particular warning or regulation, shall be uniform,
and as far as possible shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control devices
and signs shall conform to required state specifications.
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
signal of any official traffic- control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any
of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any electric
signal, gate or watchman at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity for the barrier
or sign must be approved by the city.
   (B)   The sign, signal, marking or barrier shall have the same authority as
the personal direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
   No person shall without authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official control device or any railroad sign
or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
Penalty see §
70.99
§ 70.19 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or
display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or
device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic device or railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct
the movement of traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes
with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
      (2)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit on any street, any traffic sign or signal any commercial advertising.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting any
public department or public utility of the city in any emergency or temporarily
from marking or erecting any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been
approved by the city.
   (B)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a
public nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to
be removed.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.20 DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.
   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other traffic-
control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator if
at the time and place of the alleged violation the required device was not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person.
§ 70.21 TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   In an emergency any police officer may at his or her discretion disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.
§ 70.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this traffic code where no
other penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not less than $20, nor more than $500.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
70.06 shall, be punished by a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $500.
(Prior Code KOC, § 520.4, passed 6-5-1978; Prior Code KOC, § 520.5, passed 9-5-
1978)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
   
71.01   Obstructing traffic
   
71.02   Reverse or U turns
   
71.03   Backing vehicles
   
71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks
Accidents
   
71.15   Duty of operator
   
71.16   Accident report
Prohibitions
   
71.25   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully
   
71.26   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency vehicles;
driving over fire hose
   
71.27   Smoke emission or other nuisance
Parades
   
71.40   Definitions
   
71.41   Permit required
   
71.42   Application for permit
   
71.43   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.44   Notice of rejection of permit
   
71.45   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.46   Alternative permit
   
71.47   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
   
71.48   Contents of permit
   
71.49   Duties of permittee
   
71.50   Public conduct during parades
   
71.51   Revocation of permit
 
   
71.99   Penalty
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain
standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of
any traffic-control signal which may be located at the intersection or
crosswalk.
   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or critical
importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in a distinctive manner
in order to indicate its importance. Should the operator of any vehicle enter
any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other side of
the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-
control signal notwithstanding, he or she shall be deemed to have violated this
division rather than division (B) above.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 REVERSE OR U TURNS.
   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety without
interfering with other traffic.
(KRS 189.330(8)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 BACKING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the vehicle at
any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning movement. A vehicle
from any parking position shall be backed by the operator in such manner as to
proceed on the same side of the roadway in the lawful direction of travel.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within
any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special
permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the
vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building or lot and across a sidewalk, or
its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On
entering the roadway from the alley, driveway or building the operator shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator
of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an alley from the
roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Penalty, see §
71.99
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.15 DUTY OF OPERATOR.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of or passenger in any motor
vehicle which is involved in an accident in which any person is injured or
property damaged to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the injury or
damage and render the assistance as may be needed.
Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580
§ 71.16 ACCIDENT REPORT.
   The operator, owner or passenger involved in an accident resulting in the
injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is damaged,
shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the Police
Department.
Penalty, see §
71.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.25 OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the vehicle
in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of pedestrians
and other vehicles upon the highway.
   (B)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure the highway.
   (C)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure vehicles or equipment located in or near a highway
work zone.
   (D)   A person shall not operate any vehicle in a reckless or negligent
manner as to endanger persons or property in or near a highway, or in or near a
highway work zone.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty, an operator who violates division
(C) or (D) of this section shall be subject to revocation of his or her
operator’s license under KRS 186.560.
(KRS 189.290) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and
operating, one or more flashing, rotating, or oscillating red or blue lights
visible under normal conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
emergency vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as
possible to, the edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
stop and remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer or firefighter.
   (B)   Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in conformity with
the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every vehicle shall
immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall remain stopped until the
emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by a police officer or
firefighter.
   (C)   No operator of any vehicle, unless he or she is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than 500 feet, nor shall he or she
drive into, park the vehicle into, or park the vehicle within the block where
the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm, unless he or
she is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.
   (D)   No vehicle, train or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when the hose is laid down on any street,
private driveway or track for use at any fire alarm unless the Fire Department
official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
   (E)   The provisions of division (F) of this section shall apply to any
driver approaching a stationary:
      (1)   Emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately
flashing yellow, red, red and white, red and blue, or blue lights; or
      (2)   Disabled vehicle, when the disabled vehicle is displaying some type
of warning signal, such as emergency flashers, flares, or retroreflective
signals.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle that is approaching a vehicle described in
division (E) of this section shall, while proceeding with due caution:
      (1)   Yield the right-of-way by moving to a lane not adjacent to that of
the vehicle, if:
         (a)   The person is driving on a highway having at least four lanes,
with at least two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching
vehicle; and
         (b)   It is possible to make the lane change with due regard to safety
and traffic conditions; or
      (2)   Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed to road
conditions, if the road has less than four lanes or if changing lanes would be
impossible or unsafe.
   (G)   This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an
emergency vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.
(KRS 189.930) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.27 SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.
   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a minimum of
noise, smoke or other nuisance, to protect the rights of other traffic and to
promote the public safety.
(KRS 189.020) Penalty, see §
71.99
PARADES
§ 71.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park or
other public place in the city.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
§ 71.41 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions; or
      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.42 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police or other authorized city official on forms provided by such
officer.
   (A)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his or her behalf; and/or
      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.
   (C)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade
permit a fee in an amount as established by the City Council.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.43 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall issue a permit
when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of fire
fighting equipment enroute to a fire;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.44 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within 3 days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
excepted, after filing thereof. If he or she disapproves the application, he or
she shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice
of his or her action stating the reasons for his or her denial of the permit.
§ 71.45 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30 days after
its receipt.
§ 71.46 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit
under this subchapter.
§ 71.47 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the following persons:
   (A)   The Mayor;
   (B)   The City Attorney;
   (C)   The Fire Chief;
   (D)   The general manager or responsible head of each public utility, the
regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed
parade.
§ 71.48 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public place to be
traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement
of this subchapter.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.49 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his or
her person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.50 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or
other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising
a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
Cross reference:
   Parking on parade routes, see §
72.07
§ 71.51 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder
on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $20, nor more than $500.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
71.26 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $60,
nor more than $500, or be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30
days, or both. (KRS 189.993(8))
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
   
72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking
   
72.02   Manner of parking
   
72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking
   
72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
   
72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
   
72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing
authorized
   
72.07   Parking on parade route
   
72.08   Parking on off-street facility
   
72.09   Owner responsibility
   
72.10   Parking in parks
   
72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale
   
72.12   Parking with handicapped permits
Impounding
   
72.20   Impoundment of vehicles authorized; redemption
   
72.21   Reserved
   
72.22   Sale of vehicle
Snow Emergency
   
72.35   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.36   Termination of emergency
   
72.37   Snow emergency routes
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Revenues from fees, fines and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS 65.120
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other
thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction or hindrance in or on any street,
alley or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the
roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward and parallel
with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the left side of a 1-
way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked, and except for commercial
loading and unloading on 1-way streets.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless its 2
right wheels are within 6 inches of and parallel with the curb, except that on
1-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side the 2 left wheels are
to be within 6 inches of and parallel with the curb.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street, except that
wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading provided that the
loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not consume
more than 30 minutes. The backing of trucks or wagons is prohibited at all
times and on all streets in the city where any truck or wagon so backed
interferes with the use of the roadway by moving vehicles or occupies road
space within ten feet of the center line of the street.
   (D)   The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places, requiring
the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a certain
portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking shall not be
established where the roadway space required therefor would be within 10 feet
of the center line of any street. The diagonal parking places shall be
designated by suitable signs, and shall indicate by markings on the pavement
the required angle and the width of the roadway space within which the vehicle
shall park.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park the
vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the side or
the rear of the space assigned for 1 vehicle.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park the
vehicle except in a case of real emergency or in compliance with the provisions
of this Traffic Code or when directed by a police officer or traffic sign or
signal at any time in the following places:
   (A)   On the mainly-traveled portion of any roadway or on any other place in
the roadway where vehicles stand in any manner other than as specified in §
72.02;
   (B)   On a sidewalk;
   (C)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with disabilities;
   (D)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (E)   Within an intersection or crosswalk;
   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking; (This
does not apply to police officers when operating properly identified vehicles
during the performance of their official duties.)
   (G)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, traffic sign or traffic-control
device;
   (H)   On any controlled access highway;
   (I)   Within a highway tunnel;
   (J)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (K)   In an area between the roadways of a divided highway;
   (L)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area; and
(KRS 189.450(5), (6))
   (M)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, unless it be an authorized
emergency vehicle, within 10 feet of a fire hydrant within the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 540.2, passed 4-7-1964) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from his or her duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.
   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time on
any street so marked by official signs.
   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent
to any curb so marked.
   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified by official signs on any day except Sundays on any
street so marked.
   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions thereof
stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever under authority
of or by this Traffic Code or any other ordinance any parking limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are restricted
to handicapped parking, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice
thereof.
      (2)   However, in lieu of erecting the signs or in conjunction therewith,
the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to which parking is
prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.
      (3)   No such regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the
signs have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted yellow at the
time of any alleged offense, except in the case of those parking restrictions
which by their very nature would not require the signs and markings.
   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time longer
than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any street so
marked.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
   (A)   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall
provide suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting
parking on that particular day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop on any
street so designated.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle
on any of the public ways or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or
longer.
   (B)   Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of the public ways or
streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed
abandoned, and shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city
pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles.
Penalty, see §
72.99
Cross-reference:
   Removal of abandoned vehicles, see §
72.22 et seq.
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall have the
authority, whenever in his or her judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a
part of the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic signs
to that effect, and to prohibit and prevent such parking.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of the signs or directions.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or
abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another’s property, or
on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of
the owner, lessee or person in charge of such property or facility.
   (B)   If at any time a vehicle is parked, abandoned, or otherwise trespasses
in violation of division (A) of this section, the owner, lessee or person in
charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized motor vehicle
removed in accordance with the provisions of §§
72.20 through
72.22.
   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility
shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or facility
is privately owned and that unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the owner’s
expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B).
Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of
this subchapter regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any
section of any public park, playground, play lot or tot lot within the city not
designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a roadway.
However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and regularly
maintained roadway in any such park or playground where at least 2 wheels of
the motor vehicle are resting on the roadway.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a motor
vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 PARKING WITH HANDICAPPED PERMITS.
   (A)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor vehicle
bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk pursuant to
appropriate county ordinances for handicapped persons, when operated by a
handicapped person or when transporting a handicapped person, may be parked in
a designated handicapped parking place, or when parked in a metered parking
space may be parked for 2 hours for no fee, or when parked where any parking
limit is imposed may be parked for 2 hours in excess of the parking limit. The
motor vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for that period of time necessary
to permit entrance or exit of the handicapped person to or from the parked
vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than 30 minutes.
   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a “no stopping” or “no
parking” zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a
fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or evening
hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.
Penalty, see §
72.99
IMPOUNDING
§ 72.20 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   All police officers are empowered to authorize the impoundment of a
vehicle violating vehicle- related ordinances after a citation has been issued.
   (B)   A vehicle slated for impoundment will be tagged and placed under
control of the Police Department. Should a vehicle be moved without the consent
and approval of the Police Department a warrant shall be issued immediately for
the violator’s arrest.
   (C)   All fines, fees and charges must be paid in full before a release of
impoundment can be issued for the vehicle’s release.
§ 72.21 RESERVED.
§ 72.22 SALE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor
vehicles, who has complied with the notification requirements of this section,
shall have a lien on the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in
division (B) of this section, for the applicable and reasonable charges
assessed in accordance with state law reasonable or agreed charges for towing,
recovery, storage, transporting, and other applicable charges due on the
vehicle, as long as it remains in his or her possession.
      (2)   If after a period of 45 days, the applicable and reasonable charges
assessed in accordance with state law have not been paid, the motor vehicle and
its contents, except as set forth in division (B) of this section, may be sold
to pay the charges after the owner and any lienholder have been notified by
certified mail at the address specified in state law, ten days prior to the
time and place of the sale. If the proceeds of the sale of any vehicle pursuant
to this section are insufficient to satisfy accrued charges, the sale and
collection of proceeds shall not constitute a waiver or release of
responsibility for payment of unpaid charges by the owner or responsible
casualty insurer of the vehicle. A lien on a vehicle under this subsection
shall be subject to prior recorded liens, unless released by any existing
lienholder pursuant to (A)(3) of this section.
      (3)   (a)   A lienholder having a prior recorded lien listed on the title
issued by the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall be notified by certified mail
within the first ten days of impoundment in accordance with state law.
         (b)   The notification, in addition to the requirements of state law
shall include the make, model, license number, vehicle identification number,
owner’s name and last known address, and tentative date of sale for the
vehicle, and state that the towing company or storage facility seeks to obtain
a new title free and clear of any liens, excluding tax liens.
         (c)   If the certified letter required under this division is not sent
within the ten days by the towing and storage company, then only ten days of
storage may be charged.
         (d)   The lienholder has the right to take possession of the motor
vehicle after showing proof of lien still enforced, and paying the reasonable
or agreed towing and storage charges on the motor vehicle.
         (e)   If a lienholder does not exercise the right to take possession
of the motor vehicle under this division within 45 days of notification, the
towing company or storage facility may obtain a new title under state law free
and clear of all liens, excluding tax liens.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall allow the transfer of a vehicle
subject to a lien, except as provided in KRS 186A.190 or division (A)(3)(e) of
this section.
      (4)   If there are no lienholders required to be notified under state
law, and the owner does not exercise the right to take possession of the motor
vehicle under this section within 45 days of notification required under state
law, the tow company or storage facility may obtain a new title under state law
free and clear of all liens, excluding tax liens.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to the following contents
of a motor vehicle, which shall be released to the vehicle owner or the owner’s
designated agent upon request, if the request is made within 45 days of the
date the vehicle was towed:
      (1)   Prescription medication in its proper container;
      (2)   Personal medical supplies and equipment or records;
      (3)   Educational materials, including but not limited to calculators,
books, papers, and school supplies;
      (4)   Documents, files, electronic devices, or equipment which may be
able to store personal information or information relating to a person’s
employment or business;
      (5)   Firearms and ammunition. Notwithstanding the provisions of division
(C) of this section, firearms and ammunition which are not claimed by the owner
of the vehicle within 45 days of the date the vehicle was towed shall be
transferred to the Department of Kentucky State Police for disposition as
provided by KRS 16.220;
      (6)   Cargo in the possession of persons engaged in transportation in
interstate commerce as registered under KRS 186.020;
      (7)   Cargo in the possession of an integrated intermodal small package
carrier as defined by KRS 281.605(12);
      (8)   Child restraint systems or child booster seats; and
      (9)   Checks, checkbooks, debit or credit cards, money orders, stocks, or
bonds.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (B)(5) of this section, any contents
exempted under division (B)(3), (4), (6) and (7) of this section that are not
claimed by the owner of the vehicle within 45 days of the date the vehicle was
towed may be sold or otherwise legally disposed of by the storage or towing
company. Any contents exempted under divisions (B)(1), (2), (8), and (9) of
this section that are not claimed by the owner of the vehicle within 45 days of
the date the vehicle was towed shall not be sold, but shall be otherwise
legally disposed of by the storage or towing company.
   (D)   The storage or towing company shall not be responsible for contents in
a vehicle’s trunk or other locked compartment to which the storage or towing
company is without access, unless the towing company intentionally opens the
area without the owner’s consent.
(KRS 376.275(1)-(4))
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.35 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official finds that
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain will create a condition which makes it
necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency routes be
prohibited, or whenever he or she finds on the basis of a firm forecast of
snow, sleet or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may
create a condition making it necessary that the parking be prohibited, he or
she is authorized to announce the prohibition, to become effective at a time
specified by him or her. After the effective time of the prohibition no person
shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow
emergency route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain occurs
after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on
snow emergency routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle
parked on a snow emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following
the fall. The prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of Police or other
authorized city official under the authority of this section shall remain in
effect until he or she announces the termination of the snow emergency, in part
or in which the prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no
longer be in effect.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.36 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Chief of Police or other authorized city official shall find
that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency
prohibition no longer exist, he or she is authorized to declare the termination
of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement.
If such announcement is made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it
shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.37 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Chief
of Police or other authorized city official. On the street or highway
designated as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be posted to this
effect.
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city shall
be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be fined in an amount not
less than $20, nor more than $100.
(KRS 189.990(1))
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
   
73.01   Operation of bicycles
   
73.02   Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters
   
73.03   Skating and coasting
   
73.04   Clinging to vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public park,
playground, play lot or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on such bicycle.
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Bicycles; safety regulations and standards, see KRS 189.287
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.
   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall carry another person except on a seat attached thereto or in a side car
attached to the vehicle.
   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate such vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or in a
parking area.
   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate such vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulations for operating and riding on motorcycles, see KRS 189.285
§ 73.03 SKATING AND COASTING.
   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as “play streets”
by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be unlawful
for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle of any
kind, to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates or
any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten or
attach the vehicle on which he or she is riding thereto.
   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board or fenders of
any vehicle.
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   One-way traffic
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
Street or Location Speed Limit Prior Code  Date Passed
                               KOC Section
Street or Location                   Speed Limit Prior Code  Date Passed
                                                 KOC Section
Railroads                            35 mph                  11-6-1989
School Zone                          20 mph      520.3       10-5-1970
(Mon. - Fri., 7:30 a.m. - 3:00 p.m.)
Ash Avenue (State Hwy)               35 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Bentbrook Place                      25 mph
Castlewood Drive                     **                      12-4-2024
Central Avenue (State Hwy)           35 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Central Court                        15 mph                  12-4-2024
Cherry Grove Lane                    15 mph                  12-4-2024
Cherry Hill Road                     15 mph                  12-4-2024
Cherry Lane                          25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Colonel Way                          25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Dogwood Lane                         25 mph
Eberle Drive                         **                      12-4-2024
** Private driveway on private property not a city street. No signage
required
Edgewood Way                         15 mph
Elm Avenue                           25 mph      520.2
Friendship Drive                     15 mph
Houston Lane                         25 mph
LaGrange Road (State Hwy)            35 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Locust Lane                          25 mph
Maple Avenue                         25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Mt. Mercy Drive                      15 mph      520.2
Mt, Mercy Place                      15 mph                  12-4-2024
Muirs Lane                           15 mph      520.2
Oak Terrace                          15 mph                  12-4-2024
Old Floydsburg Road                  25 mph
Old Forrest Road                     25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Peace Lane                           15 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Pollock Avenue                       15 mph                  12-4-2024
Powhatan Lane                        15 mph                  12-4-2024
Poplar Terrace                       15 mph                  12-4-2024
Rebel Road                           25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Red Plum Terrace                     15 mph
Rest Cottage                         15 mph                  12-4-2024
Ridgewood Drive                      15 mph                  12-4-2024
Rollington Road                      25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Rosswoods Drive                      25 mph
Sedley Court                         15 mph                  12-4-2024
Shadowood Lane                       15 mph                  12-4-2024
Shagbark                             15 mph                  12-4-2024
Stoney Creek Court                   15 mph                  12-4-2024
Sunnyside Court                      15 mph                  12-4-2024
Tulip Avenue                         25 mph      520.2       11-4-1968
Woolridge Avenue                     15 mph      520.6       6-3-1985
Woolridge Drive                      15 mph
Woodridge Place                      15 mph                  12-4-2024
 
(Am. Ord. 5, Series 2024, passed 12-4-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.
 
Street       Location              Comments              Ord. No. Passage Date
             The point where       Signage shall be as
             Houston Lane crosses  shown on Exhibit One,
Houston Lane the railroad adjacent attached to Ord. No.  2009-9   9-10-2009
             to Highway 146        2009-9, and adopted
                                   herein by reference
 
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Prohibited parking
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
 
Street            Location              Direction(s) Prior Code KOC Date Passed
                                                     Section
Mount Mercy Drive 140 feet on each side North        540.5          10-6-1986
                  of Mount Mercy Place
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   LITTERING
      
95.   TREES
      
96.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals running at large
   
90.03   Cruelty to animals in the second degree
   
90.04   Dyeing or selling dyed chicks or rabbits
   
90.05   Abandoning domestic animals prohibited
   
90.06   Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal
Dogs
   
90.15   Definition
   
90.16   Reserved
   
90.17   Reserved
   
90.18   Reserved
   
90.19   Noise disturbance
   
90.20   Impoundment
   
90.21   Reclaiming impounded dog
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. Shall constitute the relinquishment of all rights and claims by the
owner to the animal.
(KRS 257.100(4))
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the
owner or his or her agent either by leash, cord, chain, command or otherwise.
   OWNER. Every person having a right of property to an animal and every person
who keeps or harbors an animal, has it in his or her care, or permits it to
remain on or about the premises owned or occupied by him or her.
§ 90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner of any animal shall permit it to run at
large in any public road, highway, street, lane or alley, or upon or enclosure
without the consent of the owner of the yard, lot or enclosure.
   (B)   The owner of an animal who permits it to run at large in violation of
this section is liable for all damages caused by the animal upon the premises
of another.
§ 90.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.
   (A)   A person is guilty of cruelty to animals in the second degree when,
except as authorized by law, he or she intentionally or wantonly:
      (1)   Subjects any animal to or causes cruel or injurious mistreatment
through abandonment, participates other than as provided in §
90.03 in causing it to fight for pleasure or profit, (including, but not
limited to being a spectator or vendor at an event where a 4-legged animal is
caused to fight for pleasure or profit) mutilation, beating, torturing,
tormenting, failing to provide adequate food, drink, space or health care, or
by any other means; or
      (2)   Subjects any animal in his or her custody to cruel neglect; or
      (3)   Kills any animal.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the killing of animals:
      (1)   Pursuant to a license to hunt, fish or trap;
      (2)   Incident to the processing as food or for other commercial
purposes;
      (3)   For humane purposes; and/or
      (4)   For any other purpose authorized by law.
(KRS 525.130) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals in the first degree, a class D felony, see KRS 525.125
§ 90.04 DYEING OR SELLING DYED CHICKS OR RABBITS.
   No person shall sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange, display or
possess living baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits which have been
dyed or colored; nor dye or color any baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or
rabbits; nor sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange or to give away baby
chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits, under 2 months of age in any
quantity less than 6, except that any rabbit weighing 3 pounds or more may be
sold at an age of 6 weeks.
(KRS 436.600) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 ABANDONING DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No owner of a domestic animal shall abandon the animal.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED AND SUFFERING ANIMAL.
   (A)   Any peace officer, animal control officer or any person authorized by
the Board of Agriculture may destroy or kill or cause to be destroyed or
killed, any animal found abandoned and suffering and not properly cared for, or
appearing to be injured, diseased or suffering past recovery for any useful
purpose.
   (B)   Before destroying the animal the officer shall obtain the judgment to
that effect of a veterinarian, or of two reputable citizens called by him or
her to view the animal in his or her presence, or shall obtain consent to the
destruction from the owner of the animal.
   (C)   (1)   Any animal placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian for
treatment, boarding, or other care, which shall be unclaimed by its owner or
his or her agent for a period of more than 10 days after written notice by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, is given the owner or
his or her agent at his or her last known address, shall be deemed to be
abandoned and may be turned over to the nearest humane society, dog pound or
animal shelter or disposed of as such custodian may deem proper.
      (2)   The giving of notice to the owner, or the agent of the owner of
such animal by the licensed veterinarian, as provided herein shall relieve the
licensed veterinarian and any custodian to whom the animal may be given of any
further liability for disposal.
(KRS 257.100)
DOGS
§ 90.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG. Any member of the canine family, 6 months of age or over, male or
female.
§ 90.16 RESERVED.
§ 90.17 RESERVED.
§ 90.18 RESERVED.
§ 90.19 NOISE DISTURBANCE.
   No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the city which, by frequent
and habitual barking, howling, or yelping, creates unreasonably loud and
disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the
peace, quiet and good order of one or more of the inhabitants of 2 or more
separate residences. Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain,
be lodged or fed within any dwelling, yard or enclosure which he or she
occupies or owns shall be considered as harboring the dog.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every police officer, peace officer or other authorized official shall have
the authority to apprehend any dog running at large in violation of this
chapter and any unlicensed dog in the city, and to impound the dog or have the
dog impounded in the appropriate place.
§ 90.21 RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOG.
   The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim the dog upon the payment of
all appropriate fees and after fulfilling any and all other requirements.
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already otherwise provided shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day
the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
90.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500,
imprisoned for not more than 12 months, or both for each offense.
(KRS 525.130)
   (C)   Any person who violates §
90.04 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $100,
nor more than $500.
(KRS 436.600)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations and Construction
   
91.01   Permit required for street work and connection
   
91.02   Standard for street work
   
91.03   Standard for connection
   
91.04   Penalties
Road and Bridge Projects
   
91.15   Public hearing required
   
91.16   Notice requirements; public may testify
   
91.17   Effect of testimony
   
91.18   Hearing to be held prior to construction
   
91.19   Separate hearing for each project not required
   
91.20   Exemptions from hearing requirement
Obstructions
   
91.30   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
91.31   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
91.32   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
91.33   Removal of ice and snow
Installation of Driveways and Culverts
   
91.45   Driveway requirements
   
91.46   Culvert requirements
   
91.47   Financial responsibility
   
91.48   Permit for encroachment
Lighting
   
91.60   Taking over private street lighting
 
   
91.99   Penalty
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 91.01 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR STREET WORK AND CONNECTION.
   (A)   No person shall, without first obtaining an encroachment permit from
the City of Pewee Valley as provided herein, shall:
      (1)   Except for the emergency repairs of a public utility, begin to
construct, reconstruct, repair, or alter, any sidewalk, curb, curb-cut,
driveway, or street, or cut, or excavate any street, for underground utility
lines of otherwise, on any of the public streets or right-of-way of the City of
Pewee Valley; or
      (2)   Make any new vehicular connection to any of the City of Pewee
Valley’s right-of-ways; or
      (3)   Excavate and install any new utility connection within any City of
Pewee Valley right-of-ways.
      (4)   A public utility which has conducted emergency excavations or cuts
must apply for an encroachment permit within 48 hours of the commencement of
said work.
   (B)   The city shall provide forms contains the information required for
application for an Encroachment permit and such other information deemed
necessary in the administration of this subchapter, providing, however, that a
utility company may devise its own form, if the form contains all of the
information called for in the city form. The application may be mailed or
delivered to the city, or sent my facsimile and shall contain at a minimum:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the entity for whose benefit
the work is proposed.
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the person who is doing the
actual work.
      (3)   Description of the proposed work, including construction detail,
location, and when the work will begin and projected to be completed.
(Ord. 2016-05, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 91.02 STANDARDS FOR STREET WORK.
   (A)   The work must be done according to the standards set out in this
subchapter and otherwise be in accordance with the quality of work required in
the area for public work of like character.
   (B)   The work must not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, the demand and necessity for parking space, and the means of egress to
and from the property affected and adjacent properties.
   (C)   The public health, welfare and safety of the public will not be
unreasonably impaired.
   (D)   Any and all installation and repairs of concrete and asphalt repair
and patching must be in accordance with the following specifications and the
Kentucky Department of Highways specifications:
      (1)   General: all materials and methods of construction shall conform to
Kentucky Transportation Cabinet, Department of Highways Specifications: Current
Edition with subsequent revisions.
      (2)   Concrete construction.
         (a)   Concrete shall be “ready mixed” conforming to ASTM
Specifications C-94. Air entraining admixture for concrete shall conform to
ASTM Specifications C-260-77. Reinforcing steel shall be deformed steel bars
conforming to ASTM Specification A615, Grade 60. Welded wire fabric shall
conform to ASTM Specification A185.
         (b)   Expansion Joint Filler shall be ½" remolded asphaltic
impregnated material conforming to ASTM D1751, latest revision, unless
otherwise noted on the plans.
         (c)   All concrete to be used in construction of headwalls, wingwalls,
culverts, catch basins or for any other structural purposes shown on the Plans
shall be Class “A”, 3,500 pounds per square inch and delivered only in
quantities for immediate use. Concrete which has set prior to placement shall
be discarded.
         (d)   Forms shall be constructed in accordance with ACI 347. Form ties
shall be removed to a point ½" inside the wall and the resulting holes filled
with a rich cement grout.
         (e)   Bending, placing, fastening and supporting of reinforcement
shall be in accordance with ACI (318-95).
         (f)   Mechanical, insertion type, internal vibrators shall be used to
compact the concrete.
         (g)   Concrete work shall be protected against frost and rapid drying
and kept moist at least three days after placing. Concrete may not be placed
when the temperature is below 35 degrees Fahrenheit, unless sufficient
framework and canvas or other housing is maintained at 50 degrees Fahrenheit by
the Contractor.
      (3)   Concrete curb.
         (a)   All curbs or curb and gutters are to be constructed of Class “A”
Concrete, 3500 pounds per square inch test, and are to be uniform in height,
width and alignment, true to grade and satisfactory in finish and appearance.
All materials and methods of construction, including curing, to be in
accordance with Section 506 of the Kentucky Department of Highways Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
         (b)   All concrete curbs shall have expansion joints constructed at
intervals of not less than 6 feet nor more than 30 feet, and ½" pre-molded
expansion joint material, cut to conform to the curb or to the curb and gutter
section, shall be used in each expansion joint.
         (c)   When curbs and gutters and/or island curbs are removed and
replaced the area behind curbs shall be tamped and brought up to grade. This
area shall be filled with suitable earthen materials, seeded and strawed, if
necessary. All disturbed areas shall be seeded and strawed. All curbs shall be
replaced in kind with the color of concrete that gives the appearance of being
as aged as the existing curb.
         (d)   Caution shall be exercised when removing a median curb so as not
to damage any sprinkler piping or watering heads. If any of the sprinkler
system is damaged it will be repaired by the Contractor at no additional cost.
      (4)   Dense graded aggregate base.
         (a)   The base shall be of the course or courses identified as
existing in the pavement section excavated and, as specified, dense graded
aggregate with water, placed and compacted according to § 303 of Kentucky
Transportation Department Specifications and conforming to line and grade.
         (b)   The aggregate shall be crushed limestone as required by §
805.04.03 of Kentucky Department of Transportation Specifications, graded so as
to produce a final mixture in place, meeting the following:
 
1 inch square sieve   100
3/4 inch square sieve 70-100
3/8 inch square sieve 50-80
No. 4 square sieve    35-65
No. 30 square sieve   10-40
No. 200 square sieve  2-10
 
         (c)   The water shall be from approved supply, added to the extent
that a thin slurry forms on top of the base when compacted. The compacted depth
of each layer shall be no less than four inches (4").
         (d)   All work done under this item shall conform to § 303 of the
Kentucky Department of Transportation Specifications.
      (5)   Backfilling trench. Trenches shall be backfilled in six-inch (6")
layers and each layer thoroughly tamped to pavement sub-grade for pipe laid
under the proposed paving. Pipe laid outside the limits of the paving or curb
and gutter shall be tamped in six-inch (6") layers to the top of the pipe where
no paving or entrance drives are encountered. Where entrance drives or cross
streets are encountered, tamping shall be as described in six-inch (6") layers
to the pavement sub-grade. Where tamping is only required to the top of the
pipe, the remainder of the ditch shall be backfilled with loose earth and earth
heaped above the top of the ground over the trench and allowed to settle until
towards completion of the project, after which excess earth shall be removed
from the top of the trench to the level of the ground and disposed of by the
contractor.
      (6)   Excavation and replacement of damaged pavement.
         (a)   Upon excavation of asphalt roadways for utility work, the
existing sub-grade and sub-base is to be thoroughly compacted by use of a
mechanical tamp and/or vibratory roller. When compaction is complete, repave
the areas using the Kentucky Department of Highways Specification Material;
asphaltic concrete base. After tack coat has been installed and allowed to
reach the tacky stage as provided above, a course or courses of the total
thickness to match the existing pavement section of Class I Type “A” Bituminous
Concrete or equivalent shall be constructed in accordance with all provisions
of the Kentucky Department of Transportation Specifications 402. This base
material shall be placed and thoroughly compacted in not more than four (4")
inch thick layers, to match the existing pavement section excavated and
matching the elevation of the existing pavement surface course. The finished
project shall be a neat and smooth riding surface.
         (b)   SS-lh tack coat shall be applied to asphalt binder at a rate of
0.10 gallons per square yard. Tack coat shall in all respects meet the Kentucky
Department of Transportation, Specifications 407.
         (c)   All joints shall be sealed with Crack Master Supreme #M105OL. No
drainage pockets or ruts will be permitted.
         (d)   When patching a specific pavement area (instead of providing a
full asphalt overlay), joints for the base asphalt, as well as the surface
course asphalt shall be sealed, with no pockets or ruts permitted as noted
above.
         (e)   Alternatively, for utility repairs, restoration can be performed
by installation of 6" to 8" Class “A” concrete cap over the utility trench in
place of the existing base material. The concrete cap shall be installed a
minimum of 12" beyond either side of the utility trench. The asphalt pavement
saw cut shall be a minimum of 12" either side of this concrete cap and shall be
installed with standard edge key. (Refer to typical utility trench restoration
detail attached.)
(Ord. 2016-05, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 91.03 STANDARDS FOR CONNECTION.
   (A)   The determination as to whether an Encroachment Permit for a new
vehicular connection to Pewee Valley City right of way, shall include, but is
not limited to, the following considerations:
      (1)   Whether the parcel(s) benefited by the connection has other,
reasonable vehicular access through another access point.
      (2)   Whether the applicant will be adversely affected by denial of the
encroachment permit.
      (3)   Whether city services and safety will be adversely affected by the
approval of the encroachment permit.
      (4)   The cost (if any) to the city in allowing the encroachment.
      (5)   Whether the applicant has fully studied (to the satisfaction of the
City Council) the traffic implication of the encroachment on the surrounding
city intersections and roadways, as part of its encroachment application and
the feasibility of any possible mitigation of such impact.
   (B)   The determination as to whether an encroachment permit for a new
utility connection through Pewee Valley right of way may be made, shall
include, but is not limited to, the following considerations:
      (1)   Whether the proposed utility being proposed in the right of way may
result in additional cost to Pewee Valley residents by virtue of future
connection requirements and fees to City of Pewee Valley residents, caused by
the utility facility being built.
      (2)   Whether the proposed utility is necessary to service Pewee Valley
residences, or instead benefits residents and businesses in communities other
than Pewee Valley.
      (3)   The cost (if any) to the city in allowing the encroachment,
including costs to its residents for connection fees.
      (4)   Whether the applicant has fully studied (to the satisfaction of the
City Council) the implications of the encroachment on the city right of way and
residents as part of its encroachment application and the feasibility of any
possible mitigation of such impact.
      (5)   Whether the applicant has fully studied (to the satisfaction of the
City Council) alternate routes to achieve the utility connection, which do not
impact the City of Pewee Valley right of way and the feasibility of any
possible mitigation of such impact.
   (C)   The city may waive any or all of such application and approval, for
minor and inconsequential connections.
(Ord. 2016-05, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 91.04 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person making any cut or improvement in the right of way as
described in this subchapter shall restore the surface of the area to Kentucky
Department of Highways specification (and this subchapter) and shall warrant
the pavement repairs against failure of all types for the duration of five
years.
   (B)   The city shall require any entity to post a performance bond prior to
initiating any work in the city, by cash or certified check, in the amount
sufficient to defray the cost of performing repair and restoration work, if the
applicant does not perform its restoration responsibilities. The cost shall be
estimated by the City Engineer. If the project anticipates the city accepting a
public roadway into its roadway system, the developer must post a bond in
sufficient amount for the city to complete the final coat of asphalt on the
public road and any other cost to bring the roadway up to an adequate standard
for acceptance into the public roadway system of the city.
   (C)   Upon the failure of any entity to properly repair and restore any cut,
excavation, or alternation, the city may authorize the repair or restoration of
the area in a proper manner and charge said cost to the entity who made the
repair, cut, excavation, or alternation (and/or the entity upon whose behalf
the work was done). In the event the city must make the repair or restoration,
the city shall have a lien against any property of said entities (if any) that
the work directly benefits, or on whose behalf it was undertaken. The lien
shall be recorded in the Clerk’s office and shall bear interest at twelve
percent (12%) per annum thereafter until paid.
   (D)   In addition to the remedies set out above, the city shall cite any
person, utility, company or entity for each violation and any person, utility,
company or entity violating this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall pay a fine of not more than $500. Each street,
sidewalk, right-of-way, easement, or drain which is cut, excavated, burrowed,
tunneled, bored, disturbed, damages or altered, shall be deemed a separate
offence. Further, if deemed necessary by the city to protect the public ways
and public utilities of the city, and entity repeatedly violating this
subchapter may be denied permission to make any future cuts or excavations.
   (E)   The city may deny an application for an encroachment permit. Said
denial shall be in writing and must specify the reasons for denial. Applicant
shall have a right to appeal the decision the City Council, which appeal must
be in writing and must be received within 30 days of the denial. Said appeal
will be docket for review and decision at the next regularly scheduled City
Council meeting, provided it is received at the City Office within seven days
prior to the meeting. If not so timely received, it shall be docketed for the
following regular meeting. Applicant will be allowed a reasonable time to
present any relevant evidence that supports applicant’s appeal. The decision of
the City Council on the appeal must be in writing, with findings supporting
said approval or denial.
(Ord. 2016-05, passed 12-5-2016; Am. Ord. 2, Series 2024, passed July 3, 2024)
Statutory reference:
   Sidewalks; construction along public roads; specifications, see KRS 178.290
   Sidewalks; ramps for wheelchairs, see KRS 66.660
ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS
§ 91.15 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   Before the city expends state derived tax revenues on a municipal highway,
road, street or bridge it shall provide an opportunity to the public to provide
input in a public meeting for which notice has been given under KRS 61.823(2)
to (4) with regard to the project and to priorities for use of tax moneys for
road and bridge purposes.
(KRS 174.100)
§ 91.16 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS; PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY.
   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state derived tax revenues
on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall include the topic as a specific
item on the public meeting agenda and shall allow any person to speak with
regard to any proposed project, any project which he or she feels should be
built or done which has not been proposed, priorities for completion of
projects, and any other matter related to road or bridge projects.
(KRS 174.100(1))
§ 91.17 EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.
   The city shall not be bound by the comments and input provided at the
meeting but shall give due consideration to them.
(KRS 174.100(2))
§ 91.18 HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project wherein
state derived tax revenues are involved until the meeting as provided herein
has been held.
(KRS 174.100(3))
§ 91.19 SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate meeting for
each project. A single meeting encompassing the entire road and bridge program,
provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified at the
meeting, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(KRS 174.100(4))
§ 91.20 EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency repair or
replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or man-caused disasters
nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.
(KRS 174.100(5))
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 91.30 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way, without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
way within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting
any fence or building to remain thereon.
   (B)   Each day that any fence or building is permitted to remain upon the
public way shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk.
   (B)   No owner, occupant or person having the care of any building or lot of
land, bordering on any street or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered
with barrels, boxes, cans, articles or substances of any kind, so as to
interfere with the free and unobstructed use thereof.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.33 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his or her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove
therefrom all snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather
conditions, a reasonable time which will ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after
the abatement of any storm during which the snow and ice may have accumulated.
Penalty, see §
91.99
INSTALLATION OF DRIVEWAYS AND CULVERTS
§ 91.45 DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any driveway with an elevation of 30 inches above the low point of the
ditch will require that a headwall be placed at both ends of the culvert. The
headwall shall be 6 inches, running parallel with the driveway. Headwalls shall
extend to the depth of 8 inches below the bottom of the culvert and shall be
poured with minimum strength concrete of 4000 psi grade. Headwalls should have
reinforcement wire or rebar installed according to Department of Transportation
trade practices. 4000 psi pre-cast headwalls, whether straight, cut and slope,
or fluted, are acceptable.
   (B)   The street shoulder and ditch may not be disturbed, except for the
proper installation of a driveway and/or culvert. Disturbances include, but are
not limited to grading, filling in of ditches and all forms of landscaping.
(Prior Code KOC, § 620.13, passed 7-2-2001; Prior Code KOC, § 620.14, passed 4-
7-2003; Am. Ord., passed 10-3-2005)
§ 91.46 CULVERT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The minimum culvert size for all city roads and roads within the city,
other than state maintained roads, shall be 15 inches inside diameter and shall
be a minimum length equal to the width of the driveway pavement plus 4 times
the depth of the drainage ditch as measured from the top of the driveway to the
invert of the ditch. State maintained roads shall meet the minimum requirements
of the State Highway departments for encroachment permits. All culverts shall
be reinforced concrete pipe, 14 gauge galvanized corrugated metal pipe with
asphalt or epoxy coating, or smooth bore N12- HDPE pipe or equivalent. The
pipes may be round, oval or arch pipes and must be installed to the
manufacturer’s specifications and meet the requirements for installation
determined by the Engineer for the city. No material other that those mentioned
shall be acceptable. The area below the pipe shall be compacted to 95% proctor
using mechanical methods. The culvert shall be bedded in #57 stone compacted to
95% proctor and completely supported by said stone for the entire length of the
pipe. There can be no greater than 1 inch deflection in the horizontal run of
the culvert pipe. Minimum cover for all culverts shall be sufficient to
withstand a H20 highway load per manufacturer’s specifications.
   (B)   There can be no greater than 1 inch deflection in the horizontal run
of the culvert. The culvert shall have a minimum coverage of 4 inches above and
surrounding it; consisting of 0-3/8 limestone, dense grade limestone, or 57
limestone and compacted to 85% to 90% consistency.
   (C)   All proposed entrances onto city roads shall be evaluated by the City
Engineer to determine if a culvert pipe is necessary. If a culvert pipe is
necessary, the owner shall have prepared an encroachment drawing, prepared and
signed by an engineer licensed to practice in the state of Kentucky. The plan
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and recommendation of
approval or denial by the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 620.13, passed 7-2-2001; Prior Code KOC, § 620.14, passed 4-
7-2003)
§ 91.47 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The financial responsibility for complying with the above
specifications and minimum requirements shall be borne by the property owner
constructing the culvert or driveway, including reasonable costs for
inspection.
   (B)   In the event a property owner has paid the city a culvert fee equal to
1% of the land cost and new building cost or $500, which ever is greater, the
city accepts financial responsibility for the existing culvert complying with
the above specifications.
(Prior Code KOC, § 620.13, passed 7-2-2001; Prior Code KOC, § 620.14, passed 4-
7-2003)
§ 91.48 PERMIT FOR ENCROACHMENT.
   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, build, establish
or install any culvert or driveway on any public street, whether or not
maintained by the city, without first having obtained a written permit to do so
from the City Council member in charge of roads. An application for such permit
shall be in writing and contain the name and address of the person making
application, the name and address of the contractor or person to construct the
culvert or driveway, the proposed location and dimensions of the culvert or
driveway and the name and address of the owner of the property.
(Prior Code KOC, § 620.13, passed 7-2-2001; Prior Code KOC, § 620.14, passed 4-
7-2003)
LIGHTING
§ 91.60 TAKING OVER PRIVATE STREET LIGHTING.
   New or existing private street lighting will be considered for inclusion
within the city’s regularly maintained street lighting program, where it is
intrinsic to public safety and uniformity, under the following conditions:
   (A)   The request be written and specific as to the exact location and type
fixtures to be accepted by the city;
   (B)   A majority of those living around the street lighting that is the
subject of the request consent in writing to the transfer; and also acknowledge
in writing the terms of that acceptance stated in this section;
   (C)   All fixtures accepted be standard LG&E fixtures and poles of the type
normally used by the city. If there is any different type of fixture or pole
that is part of a request, the city has the option of accepting it on the
condition that it be replaced with a standard fixture. The city has the option
of accepting an upgraded fixture only if the requestor agrees in writing that
for the useful life of the fixture and/or its attachment structure, the city’s
only contribution will be an amount equal to the city’s standard cost for
electricity (not maintenance) for that specific type of structure and fixture
(no upgrades) through Louisville Gas and Electric Company;
   (D)   The number of fixtures and locations accepted by the city shall be
limited to its purpose of providing for the public safety at intersections and
entrances; and standardizing the type and intensity of city street lighting;
and
   (E)   The fixtures meet all the standards set out in the city’s lighting
ordinance.
(Ord. 2007-3, passed4-2-2007)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
91.45 et seq. shall be corrected within 90 days of the violation, or a penalty
shall be levied. The penalty, which shall inure to the city, shall be a minimum
of $250, and up to $25 per day for continuing violations, but not to exceed the
cost incurred by the city to correct violations, in addition to all attorney
and legal fees incurred by the city to correct the violations.
(Prior Code KOC, § 620.13, passed 7-2-2001; Prior Code KOC, § 620.14, passed 4-
7-2003)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Property maintenance standards
   
92.02   Responsibility for property maintenance
   
92.03   Enforcement
   
92.04   Appeals
Cross-reference:
   Trees, see
Ch. 95
Statutory reference:
   Private nuisances, see KRS 411.500–411.570
§ 92.01 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any owner, or other person
in control of said property, or premises, (including a holder of a mortgage,
where the home encumbered by such mortgage is deemed by the city as vacant and
abandoned and the city has given said mortgage holder notice of the city’s
intent to so enforce this chapter, as said notice is set out in KRS 65.8840);
to keep or maintain property, premises, or rights-of-way adjacent to said
premises, in such a manner which causes, or tends to cause, substantial
diminution in value of other properties, or which renders such properties as
dangerous, or detrimental, or adverse to the health, or welfare, or offensive
to the senses of the residents of the City of Pewee Valley. This includes, but
is not limited to, the following conditions, which are hereby declared a
nuisance:
   (A)   Incomplete projects. Any renovation or construction to structures or
grounds must be completed through consistent, sustained effort and no such
building or grounds under construction or renovation may be allowed to be
uncompleted for an unreasonable length of time, given due consideration to the
type of project. A period of 120 days without consistent, sustained effort to
complete the project shall be an unreasonable length of time, without
sufficient, specific, written explanation for said delay.
   (B)   Any premises which detrimentally impacts the surrounding neighborhood
because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay or is unsafe for the purpose
for which it is being used or is not secured or is improperly secured.
   (C)   Permits and excessive growth of weeds, grass or other vegetation.
Unless otherwise stated, excessive shall be growth to a height of 12 inches or
more.
   (D)   Permits any structure/residence to become unfit and/or unsafe for
human habitation or occupancy, or to permit condition to exist in the structure
which is dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants or the
structure, the occupants of neighboring structures, or other residences of the
City. All residences within the City shall have a safe, permitted and operable
connection to water, electric/gas, and septic or sewer service. Residents who
are in the process of construction and are in compliance with section (A) are
exempt from this section during the construction.
   (E)   Permits, or causes, the interference of, filling, or obstruction of a
drainage ditch, devices or system as to inhibit, alter, or prevent proper
drainage patterns.
   (F)   Permits the unreasonable accumulation of ashes, leaves, wood, lumber,
limbs, twigs, storm debris and/or any residue from the burning of any
combustible material; which are not the process of legal and permitted disposal
or composing.
   (G)   Permits manure or compost piles or other material which is of such a
nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or
attract rodents, vermin or other disease carrying pests, animals or insects.
This section shall not apply to farming and nursery operations where the matter
is kept over 100 feet from the nearest property line.
   (H)   Permits any tree, stack, or other object standing in such a condition
that is likely to, if the condition is allowed to continue, endanger life, limb
or property, or cause hurt, damage or injury to persons or property by falling
thereof or of parts thereof.
   (I)   Permits the dropping, deposit, or acquiesce in the dropping,
depositing, scattering of waste material in any manner, in or on any public or
private property any material of any kind, not those activities normally
associated with yard maintenance, seasonable disposal activities, or composing.
   (J)   Allows unsanitary material on the premises. It shall be unlawful for
any person to keep, or permit another to keep upon any property deleterious or
septic material, or polluted water, unless such material is retained in
containers or vessels which deny access of humans, flies, inspects, rodents or
animal. This section shall not apply to overflowing septic tanks and lateral
lines as those items are subject to existing health department regulations or
to farming and nursery operations where the matter is keep over 100 feet from
the nearest property line.
   (K)   Permits any condition to exist that is injurious to the public health.
Such as but not limited to:
      (1)   Unlawful storage of explosives;
      (2)   Having an uncovered or insecurely covered cellar, well, pit or any
excavation or situated upon any premises in any open lot that any reasonable or
prudent man should realize should be injurious to human health;
      (3)   The failure to keep an animal’s pen, yard, lot or other enclosure
in a sanitary condition and free from preventable offensive odors, or failure
to keep an animal’s pen, fence or enclosure maintained so as to prevent such
animal from escaping the owner’s property;
      (4)   Permits the unlawful burning of any refuse, garbage, or waste or
material of any kind;
      (5)   Permits any partially dismantled, wrecks, junked, discarded or
otherwise non-operating motor vehicle to machine to remain on any property
longer than 15 days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to
any vehicle in an enclosed building, or so located upon the premises as to not
be readily visible from any public place or form any surrounding private
property. This section shall further not apply to a lawfully operated junk yard
in the business of sale of part in accordance and with the Zoning Ordinance of
Oldham County and with the approval of Planning and Zoning; and
      (6)   Permits a vehicle to be parked in any way which is a violation of
any Pewee Valley parking ordinance (as may be amended from time to time); and
any provision of the Oldham County Zoning Code (as may be amended from time to
time) or any Oldham County Ordinance (as may be amended from time to time).
   (L)   Permits any condition to exist that causes a building not to be in
reasonably good repair, such as, but not limited to:
      (1)   Every window; exterior door; basement; porch; roof; eaves;
foundation; exterior wall; exterior stairs; shall be reasonably watertight;
weathertight; bird, animal, and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair;
      (2)   All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall
be reasonably protected from the elements and decay by paint, which is not
lead-based paint, or by other protective covering or treatment; and
      (3)   All gutters, shutters, down spouts and any other parts of the
exterior of the home shall be maintained and be reasonably fit for their
intended purpose.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed - -2013)
§ 92.02 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any owner, or other person in control of said property, or premises,
(including a holder of a mortgage, where the home encumbered by such mortgage
is deemed by the city as vacant and abandoned and the city has given said
mortgage holder notice the city’s intent to so enforce this chapter, as said
notice is set out in KRS 65.8840); must keep or maintain property, premises, or
rights-of-way adjacent to said premises, in a manner consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter and the Code of the City of Pewee Valley, Oldham
County Ordinances, Oldham County Zoning and Subdivision regulations, Kentucky
Revised Statutes and the Kentucky Building Code.
   (B)   Enforcement of this subchapter may be accomplished by the person or
employee as may be designated by the City Council to enforce city ordinances in
any manner authorized by this subchapter or by any other law, including but not
limited to issuance of criminal citations, civil actions and abatement.
   (C)   Abatement of public nuisances:
      (1)   Non-exclusive authority to abate. The city may choose to abate any
public nuisance or violation of the City Code through any of the abatement
methods set forth in the City Code or in other local, state or federal law, and
nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting,
prejudicing, or adversely affecting the city’s ability to concurrently or
consecutively use any of those proceedings as the city may deem are applicable.
Proceeding under this section will not preclude from city from proceeding under
other sections of this subchapter. Whenever the person or employee as may be
designated by the City Council to enforce city ordinances determines that any
condition exists in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, he/she may
take enforcement action pursuant to this section.
      (2)   Right of entry. The person or employee as may be designated by the
City Council to enforce city ordinances may enter any property or premises at
all times to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this subchapter if he/she
has cause to believe a violation of provisions of this subchapter is occurring.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed - -2013)
§ 92.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced upon the filing of a petition to the
City of Pewee Valley Mayor by two City of Pewee Valley residents, alleging that
an owner, lessee, or occupant of any property is maintaining or keeping a
nuisance thereon, or maintain his or her premises in a manner causing
substantial diminution in the value of other property, or tends to renter such
properties as dangerous, or detrimental, or adverse to health and welfare, or
offensive to the senses of the residents of the City of Pewee Valley.
   (B)   Criminal or civil penalty. Pursuant to the city’s prosecutorial
discretion, the city may enforce violations of the provisions of this
subchapter as criminal, civil or abatement actions.
      (1)   Misdemeanor. Any person who is violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day, during which
any such offence is committed, continued or allowed shall be a separate
offense.
      (2)   Each and every offence under this subchapter is punishable by:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first offense;
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $500 for the second offence of the same or
similar provision within one year period; or
         (c)   A fine no less than $1,000 for each additional offence, after
the second, of the same or similar provision of this subchapter within a one
year period of the first offense.
   (C)   Enforcement procedures and notice.
      (1)   The city hereby establishes the standards and procedures for the
enforcement of this subchapter under KRS 65.8840 as follows:
         (a)   Whenever a violation of this chapter is discovered, the city,
person or employee as may be designated by the City Council to enforce city
ordinances, shall give at least five days written notice to any one or more or
all: the owner, operator, agent, occupant or person having control or
management of the property to remedy such violation. The City may, in its
discretion, may provide more time to remedy the violation. If the violation
concerns a home which has been deemed vacant and abandoned and notice is being
sent to the holder of a mortgage, any notice of violation sent to the mortgage
holder must also comply with the notice provisions set out in KRS 65.8840.
         (b)   The notice shall be served upon the responsible person as stated
above, by mail, or by personal service. If by mail, it shall be addressed to
the last known address of the owner of the said property, as it appears on the
current tax assessment roll. The failure of any or all of the addresses to
receive the notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. Further, the
posting of notice of a hearing or order pursuant to this subchapter shall be
conclusively deemed to be adequate notice to any and all occupants, users or
possessors of the property or its contents, and the failure of any such
occupant, user or possessor to see, read, understand or otherwise receive the
notice shall not invalidate any of the proceedings. Upon the failure to the
owner of the property to comply, the city is authorized to send employees or
persons hired by the city upon said property to remedy the situation. If the
violation concerns a home which has been deemed vacant and abandoned and notice
is being sent to the holder of a mortgage, any notice of violation sent to the
mortgage holder must also comply with the notice provisions set out in KRS
65.8840.
      (2)   The city shall have a lien against the property for the reasonable
value of labor and materials used in remedying the situation. The Affidavit of
the person or employee as may be designated by the City Council to enforce city
ordinances, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of the lien and
the regularity of the proceedings pursuant to this chapter and KRS 381.770, and
shall be recorded in the Office of the Oldham County Clerk. The lien shall be
notice to all personas from the time of its recording and shall bear interest
thereafter until paid at the rate of 1.5% per month, compounded monthly, and
may be enforced by judicial proceedings.
      (3)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in the previous sections of
this chapter or any other remedy authorized by law, the owner of a property
upon which a lien has been attached pursuant to this section shall be
personally liable for the amount of the lien, including all interest, civil
penalties, and other charges and the City may bring a civil action against the
owner and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recover of a debt
owed.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed - -2013)
§ 92.04 APPEALS.
   Any action taken by the person or employee as may be designated by the City
Council to enforce city ordinances may be appealed to the City Council by any
person cited hereunder. Such appeal must be in writing, stating with
specificity the grounds of the appeal and it must be filed with the City Clerk
within the same time allowed for abatement (without extension). The grounds for
the appeal shall be stated in such appeal in detail. Such appeal shall be heard
by the City Council within 60 days of it being filed with the City Clerk. While
such appeal is pending, the abatement notice shall be held in abeyance.
(Ord. 2013-2, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fire Prevention
   
93.01   Blasting permit
   
93.02   Storage of flammables and other matter
Open Burning
   
93.20   Definitions
   
93.21   Permissible open burning
   
93.22   Notice
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.01 BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the authorized city
official. The authorized city official, before granting such permit may require
the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other persons
against injury or damages which might result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.
   (A)   All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and stored in
a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.
   (B)   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior or any material of
a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for the hazardous materials.
   (C)   No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which impedes or
prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.
Penalty, see §
93.99
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NOTICE. Required contact with Pewee Valley Fire Chief, or designated
representative, of type of fire, location of fire, when fire is to be started
and estimated time of burning.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter in such a manner that the products
of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the outdoor
atmosphere without passing through a stack or chimney.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.7, passed 1-3-1994)
§ 93.21 PERMISSIBLE OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Any permissible open burning must be supervised while in progress.
Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the person setting the fire to prevent
unwanted spread of fire.
   (B)   Fires may be set for the following purposes, provided that such fires
do not violate any of the provisions of KRS Chapters 149, 150, 227 or any other
laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, and shall require no notice:
      (1)   Fires set by individual home owners for burning leaves during
daylight hours;
      (2)   Fires set for the cooking of food for human consumption on other
than commercial premises;
      (3)   Fires set for recreational or ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   Fires set for disposal of natural growth, for land clearing, trees
and limbs felled by storms;
      (5)   Fires set for the disposal of household rubbish, or garbage,
originating at a dwelling of 5 family units or less;
      (6)   Fires set for weed abatement disease and pest prevention;
      (7)   Small fires set by construction and other workers for comfort
heating purposes provided excessive smoke is not created; and
      (8)   Fires set by commercial concerns to dispose of on site commercial
rubbish where there are no extraneous materials, which produce dense smoke,
used to cause ignition or aid combustion, during daylight hours.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.7, passed 1-3-1994) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.22 NOTICE.
   Any other type of fire that one wishes to ignite shall require notice upon
the Pewee Valley Fire Chief, or designated representative, and the granting of
his or her permission for same. Fire Chief, or designated representative, will
grant permission if in his or her judgment there is no undue threat to life,
safety, health or property. Any denial of permission to burn shall be appealed
in writing to the Pewee Valley Town Council within, 30 days of denial with
notice given to the denying agent.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.7, passed 1-3-1994)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.
   (B)   If the owner, lessee, occupant of person having charge of any property
shall intentionally burn any material or property in violation of §§
93.20 et seq., then each of them, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less that $50, nor more than $500, for each offense on each day burning is
allowed and continued.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.7, passed 1-3-1994)
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
   
94.01   Throwing litter from vehicle
   
94.02   Tracking foreign matter on streets
   
94.03   Hauling loose material
   
94.04   Sweeping litter into gutters
   
94.05   Litter on private property
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.
   No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private
property.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.
   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit upon any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
   Every person hauling or causing to be hauled dirt, sand, gravel, cement,
fill dirt or loose material of any kind in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be hauled in vehicles
provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of
the contents from falling or being thrown, blown, or deposited upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place. Any materials which fall from, or which
are thrown, blown, or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place, shall be removed immediately by the person in
charge of the vehicle.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks or other
public places, or upon any private property.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city whether owned by that person or not.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
   
95.01   Protection of trees on public property
   
95.02   Maintaining trees
   
95.03   Protection of shade trees
§ 95.01 PROTECTION OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Street trees. Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes
and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either
side of all streets, avenues or on the rights-of-way or easements within the
city. Boundaries to property lines may be indicated on deeds or plats. Street
trees include any trees on city parks, traffic circles or traffic triangles
which where the traffic circles or traffic triangles are the property of the
city. Boundary disputes shall be submitted to the County Surveyor or the
planning and zoning maps will be used for resolution.
   (B)   Creation and Establishment of a Tree Board. There is hereby created
and established a Tree Board for the city, which shall consist of not more than
5, nor less than 3, citizens who are residents of the city, and who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
   (C)   Term of office. The initial 3 Board members will serve one year and
all future Board members will serve for 2 years. In the event that a vacancy
shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council for the unexpired
portion of the term. The Tree Board can organize committees and sub-committees
of non-Board members to implement the Board’s programs.
   (D)   Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
   (E)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and/or update annually, and administer the written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs along streets, and in other public areas. The plan will be
presented to the City Council when a plan is established or any changes are
made to the plan, and upon their acceptance and approval by the City Council,
shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city.
      (2)   The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of its work.
   (F)   Operation. The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulation. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction
of business. All members will be notified at least 24hours before a Tree Board
meeting is to occur.
   (G)   Street tree species to be planted. The Tree Board may formulate an
official street tree list of species and sub-species for Pewee Valley,
Kentucky. The list of allowable species shall be broken down into categories of
small, medium and large trees. No species other than those included in this
list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the city’s
Tree Board.
   (H)   Distance from curb and sidewalk. The distance trees and bushes may
shall be planted from curbs or curblines, any sidewalks and rights-of-way will
be in accordance with the 3 species size classes listed in division (G) above
and no trees may be planted close to any curb, medium trees, 3 feet, and large
trees, 4 feet.
   (I)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the right-of-way or
easement lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public
grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance
the symmetry and beauty of the public grounds. The Tree Board may remove or
cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof, in the city’s right-of-
way or other public property, which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of
street trees by a property owners adjacent to the public property, providing
that the selection and location of the trees is in accordance with divisions
(G) through (K) below.
   (J)   Tree topping. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any
person, firm, or entity to top any street tree, or other tree on public
property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than 3 inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as
to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under or around utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from
this section at the term nation determination of the Tree Board.
   (K)   Pruning, corner clearance. Every owner of any tree overhanging any
street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such
branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view
of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 8 to 12
feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. However, the Tree Board will
be contacted in order for the pruning plan to be reviewed before any pruning
action is taken. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees
or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the
public. The city shall have the right to require the property owner upon 10
days written notice to prune any tree or shrub on private property when the
tree or shrub interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or
sign or intersection. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense
within 10 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of
owners to comply with the provisions, the city shall have the authority to do
such trimming or pruning and charge the cost of trimming or pruning and removal
on the owner’s property tax bill.
   (L)   Dead or diseased tree removal on pate public property. After review by
the Tree Board, and upon the Board’s recommendation, the city shall have the
right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees within the city’s
right-of-way or easement when such trees constitute a hazard to life and
property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to
other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such
trees of such intended removal. Removal must comply with these provisions, the
city shall have the authority to place a notice.
   (M)   Removal of trees and branches that impede traffic. Trees and branches
which fall across public streets, sidewalks or foot paths that impede traffic
shall be cleared by the city from the public way at the city’s expense.
   (N)   Interference with Tree Board. It shall be unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or any of its agents or
servants while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching,
pruning, spraying or removing of any street tree as authorized in this section.
   (O)   Review by City Council. The City Council shall have the right to
review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree Board. Any person may appeal
from any ruling or order of the Tree Board to the Town Council who may hear the
matter and make the final decision, provided the approval appeal is filed, in
writing, within 5 days of the ruling or order appealed from.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.9, passed 3-6-1995) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 MAINTAINING TREES.
   (A)   All shade and ornamental trees on the streets, alleys, and public
places of the city shall be under the control of the City Council, and all
trees planted on the streets and public places of the city shall be so located
as to in no way interfere with the sidewalks, guttering, or drainage of the
streets.
   (B)   All trees in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city which
are so located as to in any way interfere with the use of the streets, alleys,
pavements or gutters or injure or interfere with the proper construction of the
streets, pavements or gutters or are an obstruction to the drainage are hereby
declared to be a nuisance and shall be removed by the owners of the property
fronting thereon, or as hereinafter set out.
   (C)   Whenever it shall become necessary for the proper use and construction
of any street, pavements, or drainage of the city, or to prevent injury to
same, that any of the trees mentioned in division (B) of this section be moved,
the City Council, City Clerk, or Mayor shall notify the owner of the property
fronting thereon in writing to remove the trees forthwith and if he fails to do
so for a period of 10 days after receiving the notice (or if he is a
nonresident, after a period of 30 days from the time a notice is placed in the
United States mail directed to his or her last known place of address), then
the City Council may cause the removal of the trees, and the cost of removal
shall be assessed against the owner and added to his or her tax bill.
   (D)   All shade or ornamental trees on the streets and public places of the
city shall be trimmed by the owner or occupant of the property fronting thereon
in a manner such as to keep them from hanging down and interfering with the
travel and proper use of the streets and sidewalks of the town.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Police Chief or his designee to
notify the City Council whenever any overhanging shade trees are interfering
with the travel or proper use of the streets or sidewalks of the city and the
City Council shall thereupon notify in writing the owner or occupant of the
property upon which the shade trees are standing, or the property adjacent to
and fronting the trees, to trim the trees in accordance with division (D) of
this section.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.6, passed 5-2-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 PROTECTION OF SHADE TREES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or entity to cut, bruise
or injure or cut down or cut off any branch, or in any way deface, injure or
destroy any shade tree or shrubbery that may be standing on any of the streets,
alleys, right of ways, or other public places of the city, without prior
written approval of a majority of the City Council; unless determined by a
majority of the City Council to be inappropriate, the person(s) removing the
tree and/or the property owner from whose property the tree is removed shall
immediately replace the removed tree with a tree of the same species as the
removed tree.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.30, passed 5-2-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of §
95.01 shall be, upon conviction or plea of guilt, deemed guilty of a violation
and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100, plus court costs.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.9, passed 3-6-1995)
   (B)   Any person who shall fail for a period of 10 days to trim his trees or
the trees fronting on his property as provided in §
95.02(D) after he has received notice so to do as provided in §
95.02(E) shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be proceeded
against by summary warrant and, if convicted, shall be fined not less than $10
and not exceeding $50 for each offense. Each day’s failure to trim the trees
after the expiration of 10 days from the receipt of notice, shall constitute a
separate offense. Owners and/or occupants of property within the city are
declared to be equally liable under the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1010.6, passed 5-2-1988)
   (C)   Any person, corporation, or entity violating the provisions of §
95.03 shall be, upon conviction or plea of guilt, deemed guilty of a violation
and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for each offense.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.30, passed 5-3-1988)
CHAPTER 96: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
96.01   Unlawful
   
96.02   Notification to remove
§ 96.01 UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to park, store, leave or permit the parking, standing,
storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind for
a period of time in excess of 72 hours, which vehicle is in a rusted, wrecked,
junked or partially dismantled or inoperative or abandoned condition, whether
attended to or not, upon any public or private property within the city, unless
the same is completely enclosed within a building or unless it is in
connections with a business enterprise properly operated in the appropriate
zone pursuant to the zoning laws of the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 540.3, passed 9-3-1968) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned vehicles on city streets, see KRS 189.751 through 189.753
   Liens on motor vehicles for storage or towing charges, see KRS 376.275
§ 96.02 NOTIFICATION TO REMOVE.
   In the event the owner, agent or occupant of the property on which any
parked, stored or abandoned vehicle is allowed to remain in excess of 72 hours
as referred to in §
96.01, after being notified to remove the same, does not take appropriate
action to remove or completely enclose the same within a building, then the
city may enter upon the premises and take whatever action is necessary to
remove the same from the premises, and the owner, agent or occupant thereof
shall be responsible and liable for the costs incurred by the city in removing
the vehicle.
(Prior Code KOC, § 540.3, passed 9-3-1968)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
      
112.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
113.   FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
      
114.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain trades, businesses or
professions
   
110.02   Application for license
   
110.03   Standards; issuance of license
   
110.04   Date and duration of license
   
110.05   License not transferable
   
110.06   License certificate to be displayed
   
110.07   Revocation or suspension
   
110.08   Appeal and review
   
110.09   Exemptions
   
110.10   Short-term rentals
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TRADES, BUSINESSES OR
PROFESSIONS.
   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses or professions for
which licenses are required by any provision of this code or any other
ordinance of the city without first applying for and obtaining a license from
the City Clerk or other duly authorized issuing authority.
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be made to the City Clerk in writing upon forms to be furnished
by him or her and shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and of each officer, partner or business
associate;
      (2)   His or her present occupation and place of business;
      (3)   His or her place of residence for 5 years next preceding the date
of application;
      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;
      (6)   A description of the merchandise to be sold, if for a vendor; and
      (7)   Such other information concerning the applicant and his or her
business as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the
license desired.
   (B)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in good
standing upon the original application, unless otherwise provided.
   (C)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall deposit
the fee required for the license requested.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful knowingly to make any false statement or
representation in the license application.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 STANDARDS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the application for a license, accompanied by the
proper fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required, the
City Clerk shall forthwith deposit the fee in the General Fund of the city and
issue to the applicant a proper license certificate signed by the City Clerk
and any other appropriate city official. If for any reason the license is not
issued, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (C)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done or possesses any of
the following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; or
      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character
§ 110.04 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein
specified and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31
of the year issued. However, at any time after December 14 licenses may be
issued for the ensuing calendar year. Unless otherwise specified the full
annual fee will be required of licensees irrespective of the date of issue of
the license.
   (B)   In no event shall a license be granted to any business or any person
for a longer time than 1 year.
§ 110.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business and unless otherwise provided no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted in
a prominent place upon the licensed premises, the license certificate. Other
licensees shall carry their license certificates at all times and whenever
requested by any officer or citizen, shall exhibit the license.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Any license may be revoked by the legislative body at any time for
conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the time of issuance,
would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any misrepresentation of a
material fact in the application discovered after issuance of the license; for
violation of any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance relating
to the operation of the business or enterprise for which the license has been
issued; or upon conviction of a licensee for any federal, state or municipal
law or ordinance involving moral turpitude.
   (B)   The revocation shall become effective upon notice served upon the
licensee or posted upon the premises affected.
   (C)   As a preliminary to revocation, the legislative body may issue an
order suspending the license, which shall become effective immediately upon
service of written notice to the licensee. This notice shall specify the reason
for suspension, and may provide conditions under which reinstatement of the
license may be obtained. Upon compliance with these conditions within the time
specified, the license may be restored.
§ 110.08 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   In case any applicant has been denied a license, or if his or her license
has been revoked or suspended, the applicant or licensee as the case may be,
shall within 3 business days have the right to appeal to the legislative body
from the denial, revocation or suspension. Notice of appeal shall be filed in
writing with the City Clerk who shall fix the time and place for a hearing
which shall be held not later than 1 week thereafter. The City Clerk shall
notify the Mayor and all members of the legislative body of the time and place
of the hearing not less than 24 hours in advance thereof. A majority of the
legislative body members shall constitute a quorum to hear the appeal. The
appellant may appear and be heard in person or by counsel. If, after hearing, a
majority of the members of the legislative body present at the meeting declare
in favor of the applicant, the license shall be issued or fully reinstated as
the case may be; otherwise the order appealed from shall become final.
§ 110.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business, occupation
or profession which is exempt from municipal licensing and/or license taxes
pursuant to state or federal law.
§ 110.10 SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the size of many homes and lots being used
for short-term rental in Pewee Valley creates an unwanted and inappropriate
opportunity for the short-term rentals to become large event spaces.
   (B)   The City Council hereby finds that the impact of traffic, noise and
transient persons from these potentially large events is inappropriate for the
city and cannot be mitigated.
   (C)   Therefore, no person, firm or corporation shall own or operate a
short-term rental on any premises (whether it is the personal residence of the
owner or not), within the city, unless the property is zoned C-2, C-3, or C-4,
which allows hotels and motels as a Permitted Use.
(Ord. 2020-5, passed 8-3-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-1, passed 2-1-2021) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.
   (B)   Any person who operates a short-term rental shall be issued a citation
by an enforcement officer designated by the city and ordered to cease
operations. Violation of §
110.10 (including advertising for short-term rental without a license) carries
a penalty of not less than $150 for first offense and $400 per day for each day
of violation thereafter. Each day of such violation(s) shall constitute a
separate offense.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city is authorized to pursue
remedial civil actions for violations of §
110.10 by civil complaint or petition for injunctive relief, declaration of
rights or other appropriate proceedings filed in the Oldham County, Kentucky
Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2020-5, passed 8-3-2020; Am. Ord. 2021-1, passed 2-1-2021)
CHAPTER 111: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Cannabis businesses prohibited
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The City Council accepts that the definitions within KRS 218B.010 are hereby
adopted as if set out herein and as relevant to this chapter.
(Ord. 4, Series 2024, passed September 4, 2024)
§ 111.02 CANNABIS BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   All cannabis businesses are hereby prohibited from operating within the city
limits.
(Ord. 4, Series 2024, passed September 4, 2024)
CHAPTER 112: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
112.01   Imposition of license fee
   
112.02   Amount of fee for companies issuing life insurance
   
112.03   Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
   
112.04   Due date; interest
   
112.05   Written breakdown of collections
§ 112.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits
of the city, on a calendar-year basis.
§ 112.02 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING LIFE INSURANCE.
   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues life
insurance policies on the lives of persons residing within the corporate limits
of the city shall be 10% of the first year’s premiums actually collected within
each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies.
(KRS 91A.080(2)) (Prior Code KOC, § 220.31, passed 11-4-2002) (Am. Ord. 2008-2,
passed 1-7-2008)
§ 112.03 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.
   The license fee imposed on each insurance company which issues any insurance
policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be 10% of the premiums
actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of
the policies on risks located within the corporate limits of the city on those
classes of business which the company is authorized to transact, less all
premiums returned to policyholders; however, any license fee or tax imposed
upon premium receipts shall not include premiums received for insuring
employers against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death
caused thereby, under the provision of the Worker’s Compensation Act and shall
not include premiums received on policies of group health insurance provided
for state employees under KRS 18A.225(2) and 18A.228, or premiums received by
any state employee benefit fund created pursuant to KRS Chapter 18A for the
purpose of providing health benefits to state employees. No license fee imposed
under this section shall apply to premiums received on health insurance
policies issued to individuals nor to policies issued through Kentucky Access
created in KRS 304.17B-005. No license fee imposed under this section shall
apply to premiums paid to insurers of municipal bonds, leases or other debt
instruments issued by or on behalf of any political subdivision of the state;
provided that this exemption shall not apply if the bonds, leases or other debt
instruments are issued for profit or on behalf of for-profit or private
organizations.
(KRS 91A.080(3), (10)) (Prior Code KOC, § 220.31, passed 11-4-2002) (Am. Ord.
2008-2, passed 1-7-2008)
§ 112.04 DUE DATE; INTEREST.
   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30 days
after the end of each calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid on or
before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate as defined in
KRS 131.010(6).
(KRS 91A.080(8), (9))
§ 112.05 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city a written breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine;
   (D)   Fire and allied perils;
   (E)   Health; and
   (F)   Life.
(KRS 91A.080(8))
CHAPTER 113: FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
Section
Cable Television
   
113.01   Scope and applicability
   
113.02   Filing and review of rates
   
113.03   Provision generally applicable to rate orders
   
113.04   Franchisee duties
   
113.05   Duties of Cable Rate Commission
   
113.06   Penalties and forfeitures
   
113.07   Proprietary information
   
113.08   Effective date
Utilities
   
113.20   Scope
   
113.21   Definitions
   
113.22   Franchisee’s rights and privileges
   
113.23   Plans and specifications; construction
   
113.24   Indemnification
   
113.25   Franchise period
   
113.26   Awarding franchise; notice and bids
   
113.27   Rates
Communications Services
   
113.40   Franchise fees
Cross-reference:
   Bank franchise and local deposit tax, see §
35.05
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 113.01 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter governs the regulation of rates for basic service and equipment
within the City of Pewee Valley, Kentucky (“City”) for any franchisee which has
been notified that (a) the city has been certified to regulate its basic
service and equipment rates; and (b) the city has adopted regulations governing
regulation of basic service and equipment rates. The provisions set forth below
are intended to be consistent with all Federal Communications Commission
(“FCC”) regulations governing the regulation of basic service rates and
equipment, and the city will regulate and interpret its rules so that they are
consistent with FCC regulations, as if those regulations were set forth in full
herein; the franchisee is prohibited from engaging in any activity it is
prohibited in engaging in under FCC rules, as if those rules were set forth in
full herein. For purposes of these provisions, the term “basic service” at
Title 47 C.F.R. § 76.901 and the term “equipment” refers to all equipment and
services subject to regulation under Title 47 C.F.R. § 76.923.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.02 FILING AND REVIEW OF RATES.
   (A)   Initial filings by franchisees.
      (1)   Filings; when made. A franchisee that is notified that its basic
service and equipment rates are subject to regulation must file a submission
(“the rate filing”) within 30 days of the notification (but no earlier than
November 15, 1993), justifying its then-existing basic service and equipment
rates. All rates, for all customer classifications must be justified. Once a
franchisee has been so notified by the city that its rates are subject to
regulation, it may not thereafter increase its rates for basic service or
equipment without the prior approval of the city. This requirement applies in
all cases, including with respect to increases in rates announced prior to the
date the operator was notified its rates were subject to regulation where the
increases were not implemented prior to the date of notice. A franchisee must
submit a rate filing to justify any increase in basic service or equipment
rates or any new basic service or equipment rate (collectively referred to
herein as rate increases). An “increase” occurs when there is an increase in
rates or decrease in program or customer services. Rate filings proposing and
supporting rate increases must be filed for review at least 30 days in advance
of the proposed effective date of the increase. This requirement does not alter
or eliminate any other notice requirement.
      (2)   Filings; where made. Every rate filing must be submitted to the
city’s Cable Rate Commission (“C.R.C.”). A rate filing shall be considered
filed for review on the date the required rate filing and all required copies
are received by the C.R.C. Four copies of each rate filing (including all
supporting materials) must be submitted. If the operator claims any part of the
filing is proprietary, it shall additionally file 8 copies which omit the
proprietary information.
      (3)   Filing; contents. Subject to any FCC regulations governing the
burden of proof, a rate filing submitted by a franchisee must show that the
rates the franchisee proposes to charge for basic service and equipment are
reasonable. Except as inconsistent with FCC rules:
         (a)   Every rate filing must clearly state in a covering letter
whether it justifies existing rates; or proposes an increase in rates. The
covering letter must also identify any rate that is derived in whole or in part
based upon cost of service and identify any pages of the rate filing that
contain information that the franchisee claims is proprietary. It must state
whether any part of the proposed increase is based on an inflation adjustment
or an alleged increase in external costs. The covering letter should also
contain a brief, narrative description of any proposed changes in rates or in
service.
         (b)   The pages of each rate filing must be numbered sequentially.
         (c)   The rate filing must contain all applicable FCC forms and these
forms must be correctly completed.
         (d)   If different rates are proposed for basic service for different
classes of customers, the filing must show that the classifications and the
differences in the rate charged are reasonable and consistent with federal law.
      (4)   Establishment of rate. If the franchisee seeks to support a rate
based upon a cost of service, the city will establish a rate that provides the
franchisee an opportunity to recover the reasonable costs associated with
providing basic cable service, including a reasonable profit. An expense or
investment is not presumed reasonable merely because the franchisee has
incurred or made it. A franchisee is not entitled to recover monopoly profits
in any form.
      (5)   Cost of service analysis. In addition to information the city
requires the franchisee to provide, and unless the city grants a waiver of this
provision, a franchisee who seeks to justify all or any part of its rates based
upon its cost of service must submit a complete cost of service analysis that
shows all expenses it incurs and all revenues derived from the system, directly
or indirectly by the franchisee or any person that constitutes a cable operator
of the system within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 522(5). The cost of service
must identify the accounting level (as that term is used in the FCC’s
regulations) at which each expense or revenue identified was aggregated and
show clearly how the expense or revenue was allocated. The franchisee may not
include costs at an accounting level unless it also includes all revenues from
that same level attributable to the system or to a group of systems, of which
the system serving the city is a part. The replacement cost of a comparable
system must be identified and supported. The franchisee must identify the name
and address of any entity with which it has a contract, other than a
programmer, which derives revenues from the system and must state whether and
how the revenues of that entity were included in the cost of service. In
addition, the cost of service shall clearly show the derivation of a proposed
charge per channel and the application of that charge to yield a basic service
rate. It must also show and support the derivation and allocation of any
amounts included in the derivation of the rate for:
         (a)   Operation and maintenance expenses;
         (b)   Administrative and general expenses;
         (c)   Programming expenses (identifying retransmission consent costs
and copyright fees separately);
         (d)   Costs for PEG access and any institutional network;
         (e)   Franchise fee expenses;
         (f)   Investment in the system and associated depreciation;
         (g)   Other expenses, including federal, state and local taxes,
itemized; and
         (h)   The proposed return on equity and actual interest expense paid
by the franchisee.
      (6)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchisee is not required to
submit the cost of service specified in division (A)(5) above for equipment
rates, and instead initially shall complete, submit and support the costs of
equipment using applicable FCC forms. Any cost of service submitted to justify
basic service rates must show that the cost of service does not include
equipment costs.
   (B)   Initial city review.
      (1)   After receiving a rate filing, the C.R.C. promptly shall publish a
notice that a filing has been received and that, except for those parts which
may be withheld as proprietary, it is available for public review. The notice
shall state that interested parties may comment on the filing, and shall
provide interested parties 7 days to submit written comments on the filing to
the C.R.C. The C.R.C. shall submit the comments received and its
recommendations for action to the City Council no later than 20 days after the
filing and shall make those recommendations available for public inspection.
The franchisee may submit a response to public comments or staff
recommendations, but must do so no later than 3 business days after the staff
recommendations are submitted to the City Council. The response shall be filed
with the C.R.C., and if submitted in a timely fashion, the C.R.C. shall forward
a copy to the City Council.
      (2)   Within 30 days of the date of the filing, the City Council shall
issue a written order, which may be in any lawful form, approving the proposed
rate in whole or in part; denying the proposed rate in whole or in part; or
tolling the proposed rate in whole or part. If the City Council tolls the rate
in whole or in part, its written order at a minimum shall explain that it
requires additional time to review the rate filing and state that the
franchisee may cure any deficiency in its filing by submitting a supplementary
filing as provided in division (C) below. With respect to existing rates,
tolling means the rates may remain in effect, subject to refund; with respect
to rate changes, tolling means the portion of the rate change that is tolled
may not go into effect.
   (C)   Supplementary filings.
      (1)   If a proposed rate is tolled in whole or in part, the franchisee
shall submit a supplementary filing 20 days from the effective date of the
tolling order, containing corrections, if any, to its filing (including any
required supplement to its cost of service filing) and any response to
information filed by interested parties or to the recommendations of the staff,
or any additional information necessary to support the proposed rate.
Supplementary filings must be filed in accordance with division (A)(2) above.
      (2)   A supplementary filing also must contain such information as the
city directs the franchisee to provide.
      (3)   In addition to information the city requires the franchisee to
provide, and unless the city grants a waiver of this provision, a franchisee
who claims that it is entitled to a rate in whole or in part based upon the
adjustments for inflation and external costs contemplated by Title 47 C.F.R. §
76.922(d)(2) and (3) must submit the following:
         (a)   A calculation showing how each part of the adjustment was
derived;
         (b)   A statement itemizing each external cost (as defined by FCC
regulations), the amount of that external cost for the 2 calendar years prior
to the date of the filing and the year-to-date in which the filing is made; and
the projected amount of the external cost for the remainder of the year in
which the filing is made and for the following calendar year; (The statement
must specifically show any increases in revenues from programming services.
“Revenues” include all revenues, in whatever form received.)
         (c)   If the increase is attributable to any increase in programming
service costs, the contract for each programming service whose cost has
increased; a sworn statement identifying each programming service whose costs
increased where the programmer is an affiliate of the franchisee (as defined by
FCC regulations); and, for any contract that has been in effect less than 12
months, the prior contract for the service;
         (d)   A sworn statement by the franchisee’s chief financial officer or
an independent, certified accountant stating that he or she has examined all
external costs (including all programming costs) and has offset against any
increase claimed, the amount of any decreases in external costs, and the amount
by which any increase in external costs was below the GNP-PI, as required by
Title 47 C.F.R. § 76.922, or any applicable, superceding regulation; affirming
that the franchisee has only sought to recover any external cost to the extent
that cost exceeded the GNP-PI; and affirming that the franchisee has not
attempted to recover any increase in the cost of programming purchased by an
affiliate except as provided in 47 C.F.R. § 76.922, or any applicable,
superceding regulation.
      (4)   Upon receiving the supplementary filing, the C.R.C. promptly shall
publish a notice that a filing has been received and that it is available for
public review (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary). The
notice shall state that interested parties may comment on the filing, and shall
provide interested parties 20 days to submit written comments on the filing to
the C.R.C. The C.R.C. shall submit the comments received and its
recommendations for action to the City Council no later than 30 days prior to
the date the City Council must act under division (C)(7) below.
      (5)   The recommendations shall be made available for public inspection.
The franchisee may submit a response to public comments or staff
recommendations, but must do so no later than 10 days after the staff
recommendations are submitted to the City Council. The response shall be filed
with the C.R.C., and if submitted in a timely fashion, the C.R.C. shall forward
a copy to the City Council.
      (6)   The City Council shall issue a written order, which may be in any
lawful form, approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the
proposed rate in whole or in part; or allowing the rate to go into effect in
whole or in part, subject to refund. If the City Council issues an order
allowing the rates to go into effect subject to refund, it shall also direct
the franchisee to maintain an accounting in accordance with Title 47 C.F.R. §
76.933.
      (7)   The order specified in division (C)(5) above shall be adopted
within 90 days after the tolling order for any rate the franchisee justifies
based on the FCC benchmark. The order shall be adopted within 150 days of the
tolling order for any rate the franchisee justified with a cost of service
showing.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.03 PROVISION GENERALLY APPLICABLE TO RATE ORDERS.
   (A)   Any rate order of the City Council shall be issued and effective upon
adoption. Each rate order shall be released to the public and the franchisee.
In any case where the City Council approves, denies or tolls a rate; orders
that a rate may go into effect subject to refund; or orders refunds or
establishes rates, a public notice shall be published stating that the order
has issued and is available for review. Any such order shall be in writing.
   (B)   The City Council may take any steps that it is not prohibited from
taking by federal law to protect the public interest as part of any rate order
or by any other means. By way of illustration and not limitation, it may
require refunds, set rates and impose forfeitures and penalties directly or
through its delegated representatives and enforce refund orders. Any order
prescribing a rate must explain why the franchisee’s proposed rate was
unreasonable and why the prescribed rate is reasonable. However, before
prescribing a rate or ordering a refund to subscribers, the City Council shall
ensure the franchisee has had notice and opportunity to comment on the proposed
rate or refunds. If the recommendations of the C.R.C. propose a refund or a
rate, then mailing a copy of the recommendation to the franchisee at the time
it is submitted to City Council shall be deemed to provide the franchisee this
notice and the franchisee must comment on the refund or rate in its response to
the recommendations.
   (C)   No order approving or setting a rate using the FCC benchmarks shall be
interpreted to establish the just and reasonable rate to subscribers. Every
such rate approved or established shall be subject to further reduction and
refund to the extent permitted under applicable laws and regulations, as the
same may be amended from time to time. By way of illustration and not
limitation, should the FCC reduce the benchmarks, the city shall have the right
to reduce a franchisee’s rates and to require the franchisee to refund any
amounts collected above the benchmark, except to the extent prohibited by
federal law.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.04 FRANCHISEE DUTIES.
   (A)   A franchisee must implement remedial requirements, including
prospective rate reductions and refunds, within 60 days of the date the City
Council issues an order mandating a remedy.
   (B)   Within 90 days of the date an order mandating a remedy is issued, a
franchisee must file a certification, signed by an authorized representative of
the cable company stating:
      (1)   Whether the franchisee has complied fully with all provisions of
the City Council’s order;
      (2)   Describing in detail the precise measures taken to implement the
City Council’s order; and
      (3)   Showing how refunds (including interest) were calculated and
distributed.
   (C)   It is each franchisees’ responsibility to keep books and records of
account so that it can refund any amounts owed to subscribers.
   (D)   It is each franchisees’ duty to submit as complete a filing as
possible, and knowingly withholding information or making a filing that is
incomplete under applicable law shall be treated as an evasion of this chapter.
   (E)   Information requests records of revenues or expenses that are
allocated to the franchisee’s system must respond to requests for information
from the city by deadlines established by the city. A franchisee is:
      (1)   A franchisee and any other entity that has responsible for ensuring
that such other entity responds to the city’s requests.
      (2)   Because federal law limits the time available for an initial
response to a filing by a franchisee, before the order contemplated by §
113.02(B) issues, the franchisee must be prepared to respond to requests for
information regarding its filing within 5 days of the date an information
request is mailed to it. The information may include the information the
franchisee would be required to provide as part of any supplementary filing.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.05 DUTIES OF CABLE RATE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The C.R.C. shall be responsible for administering the provisions
herein.
   (B)   Without limitation and by way of illustration:
      (1)   C.R.C. shall ensure notices are given to the public and each
franchisee as required herein and by FCC regulations.
      (2)   C.R.C. may submit requests for information to the franchisee and
establish deadlines for response to them, as provided in §
113.04.
      (3)   For good cause, the C.R.C. may waive any provision herein or extend
any deadline for filing or response except as to such matters that are
mandatory under FCC regulations.
      (4)   C.R.C. shall rule on any request for confidentiality.
      (5)   C.R.C. shall prepare the recommendations to the City Council
contemplated by §
113.02(B) and (C). If the C.R.C. recommends that any increase be denied in
whole or in part, it shall:
         (a)   Propose a rate and explain the basis for its recommendation (it
may propose that rates remain at existing levels); and
         (b)   Recommend whether and on what basis refunds should issue; and
         (c)   Notify the franchisee of its recommendation at the time it is
submitted to the Council.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.06 PENALTIES AND FORFEITURES.
   Except as prohibited by federal law, a franchisee shall remain subject to
penalties and forfeitures under the city’s Ord. 1982-1, which originally
granted the franchise, and its request for approval of a rate may be denied if
it:
   (A)   Knowingly submits false or fraudulent information to the city in
connection with any rate proceeding;
   (B)   Fails to comply with any lawful order or request of the city,
including, but not limited to a request for information or an order setting
rates; or
   (C)   Evades or attempts to evade federal or local rate regulation; provided
that, filing for approval of a rate that is later determined to be unreasonable
is not in and of itself an evasion of federal or local rate regulation.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.07 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   If these provisions, or any request for information requires the
production of proprietary information, the franchisee must produce the
information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is
submitted, a franchisee may request that specific, identified portions of its
response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The
request must state the reason why the information should be treated as
proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for
confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance
of the evidence shows that non-disclosure is consistent with the provisions of
the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. The city shall place in a
public file for inspection any decision that results in information being
withheld. If the franchisee requests confidentiality and the request is denied,
(1) where the franchisee is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the
proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned
to it; or (2) the franchisee may seek review within 5 working days of the
denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed
pending review.
   (B)   (1)   Any interested party may file a request in inspect material
withheld as proprietary with the C.R.C.
      (2)   The C.R.C. shall weigh the policy considerations favoring non-
disclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the
facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting
entity and the cable franchisee that submitted the information as to the
disposition of the request.
      (3)   It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or
the franchisee may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any
appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 113.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective upon its passage and publication as
required by law.
(Prior Code KOC, § 610.4, passed 11-1-1993)
UTILITIES
§ 113.20 SCOPE.
   There is hereby created a franchise for the erection of poles and for
stringing, laying and maintaining overhead and underground wires and cables for
the transmission, distribution and sale of electricity together with all
appurtenant facilities and equipment and for installing, laying and maintaining
gas pipes for the transmission, distribution and sale of gas together with all
equipment facilities and equipment in, along, under and across the public ways,
roads, streets, alleys and other public places in the city; and for
constructing the necessary conduits and manholes for the installation of the
wires, pipes and facilities and equipment, and for selling electricity and gas
by means of the facilities. The gas and electricity may be conveyed through the
city and to any other town or to any portion of the county or to any other
county.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975)
§ 113.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPANY. The person, firm or corporation which shall become the purchaser of
the franchise, or any successor or assignee of such person.
   STREETS.  The public ways, roads, streets, alleys, and other public places
of the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975)
§ 113.22 FRANCHISEE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
   The company acquiring this franchise shall have the right to erect, install
and maintain poles, cables and conduits in, along, under and across and over
the streets, and to install, string, lay and maintain wires thereon and
thereunder together with all related facilities and equipment; for the
transmission, distribution and sale of electric energy, and the company shall
also have the privilege of installing, laying and maintaining gas mains and
pipes, together with all related facilities and equipment in, along, under, and
across the streets, and to transmit and sell gas through the pipes. The company
shall also have the right to use the streets with its service and maintenance
vehicles and equipment in furtherance of this franchise.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975)
§ 113.23 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Before beginning the construction of any new line of pipes, poles or
conduits under this franchise, the company shall prepare a plat showing the
construction of the work to be done and a brief description showing the manner
in which it is to be done, which plan and specification shall be presented to
the City Council for approval. After the work is completed, the City Council
shall have the right to examine it, and in case it finds that the work has not
been done in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by it, the
company shall, at its own expense, make such changes as will cause the work to
conform to the plans and specifications approved by the Council.
   (B)   The work shall be done in a workmanlike manner, and so as not to
unnecessarily interfere with the public use of any streets. Wherever the
surface of any street is opened, it must be restored at the expense of the
company, within a reasonable time, to as good a condition as it was prior to
the opening thereof.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.24 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The company acquiring this franchise and its successors and assigns shall
indemnify the city for any and all damage that may legally arise from the
presence or operation of its pipes, wires or appliances or poles so constructed
or maintained on or along the streets, and defend all actions which may be
brought against the city by reason of or arising out of the construction or
operation of the gas and electric lines.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975)
§ 113.25 FRANCHISE PERIOD.
   The franchise hereby created shall continue for a period of 20 years from
and after the date the same shall become effective, but it is not exclusive,
and the city reserves the right to sell similar franchises to others.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975)
§ 113.26 AWARDING FRANCHISE; NOTICE AND BIDS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to advertise the sale of
the franchise as herein set out for a period of 10 days, by written or printed
notice posted in 3 of the most conspicuous places in the city, and advertise
the sale of the franchise once a week for 3 consecutive weeks in the county
newspaper, so that the final publication shall appear not later than 2 days
before the day on which the sale will occur and not sooner than some day during
the week preceding the week in which the sale shall take place.
      (2)   The notice and newspaper advertisement shall state when the Clerk
shall sell the franchise at public auction to the highest and best bidder,
giving the time and place of sale. In the advertisement and notice, the right
of the City Council to reject any and all bids shall be reserved. The newspaper
publication shall describe the franchise to be sold and any special provisions.
The Clerk shall sell the franchise in accordance with the notice and
advertisement.
      (3)   The City Council may accept that bid which, in its judgment, is the
highest and best. No bid shall be accepted of less than $50, which amount is
fixed as the upset price for the franchise. The bidder to whom the franchise or
privilege shall be awarded shall within 10 days after the acceptance of its bid
by the City Council pay the amount of the bid to the Treasurer of the city.
   (B)   In case the successful bidder for the franchise shall fail within 30
days after its bid shall have been accepted to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter, the Clerk shall again advertise the franchise for sale in the
manner in which the first sale was made, and shall again sell the franchise in
the manner and upon the same conditions and requirements as the original sale
of the franchise was made, except that no sale shall be made to the bidder who
had failed to perform the terms of the first sale.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975)
§ 113.27 RATES.
   The company agrees to charge such rates as may from time to time be fixed by
the Public Service Commission of Kentucky, or any successor regulatory body.
(Prior Code KOC, § 450.1, passed 5-5-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
§ 113.40 FRANCHISE FEES.
   The franchisee shall pay to the city as annual compensation for the use of
the rights-of-way a communications franchise fee equal to the following:
   (A)   $100 per antenna in the rights-of-way; plus
   (B)   (1)   For each single cable, wire, fiber, conduit or other linear
facility, or bundle of the same up to 2 inches in diameter placed above ground,
$1 per foot of rights-of-way on which it is placed or over which it is
suspended; plus
      (2)   For each bundle of cable, wire, fiber, conduit or other linear
facility greater than 2 inches in diameter placed above ground, $0.50 per foot
of rights-of-way on which it is placed or over which it is suspended; plus
      (3)   For each single cable, wire, fiber, conduit or other linear
facility, or aggregate of the same placed below ground contemporaneously, $0.50
per foot of rights-of-way used to accommodate the same.
(Ord. 2005-9, passed - -2005)
CHAPTER 114: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
114.01   Adoption of State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
   
114.02   Published notice of application
   
114.03   Delinquent taxes; license withheld
   
114.04   Forfeitures
   
114.05   Compliance with other ordinances and regulations
   
114.06   Conditions governing licenses
   
114.07   Issuance of license; receipt of fees
   
114.08   Revocation or suspension of license
   
114.09   Transfer of license or business
   
114.10   Spirits; hours of sale
   
114.11   Beer; hours of sale
   
114.12   Minors; prohibitions governing
   
114.13   Display of printed warning
   
114.14   Treating prohibited
   
114.15   Premises; approval of by Health Department and fire prevention
   
114.16   Books and records
   
114.17   Spirits outside locked department; discovery of
   
114.18   Operation without a license
   
114.19   Licensee to notify employee that sales of alcohol to minors
prohibited; acknowledgment
   
114.20   Licensee to notify employee that proof of age required
   
114.21   Failure to pay fines
   
114.22   Sunday sales
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 ADOPTION OF STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL LAW.
   The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Laws and Administrative
Regulations of the Commonwealth of Kentucky (KRS Chapters 241, 243, and 244),
and all amendments and supplements thereto, are adopted as far as applicable as
a portion of this chapter except as otherwise lawfully provided herein. The
City of Pewee Valley Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) Administrator shall
administer all Alcoholic Beverage Control Ordinances and regulations of the
city and all statutes of the Commonwealth of Kentucky relating thereto and the
regulations of the Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. The City of Pewee
Valley Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) Administrator shall have all the powers
and duties as set out in KRS Chapters 241, 243, and 244. Pursuant to KRS
244.160(2); the duties of the City of Pewee Valley Alcoholic Beverage Control
(ABC) Administrator are hereby combined with the duties of a sitting city
council member; which designated council member shall be appointed by the City
Mayor, with the concurrence of the City Council. In the alternative, the city
may appoint a dedicated Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) Administrator, who is
not one of the sitting council members.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.02 PUBLISHED NOTICE OF APPLICATION.
   The City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator shall not approve any application
for an original license to sell alcoholic beverages until the applicant has
caused to be published a concise advertisement in accordance with the
provisions of KRS 243.360.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.03 DELINQUENT TAXES; LICENSE WITHHELD.
   No license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is
delinquent in the payment of any taxes due to the City of Pewee Valley at the
time of issuing the license. Nor shall any license be granted to sell on any
premises or property, owned and occupied by the licensee, on which there are
any delinquent taxes or liens due to the City of Pewee Valley Government. Where
the property or premises on which a license to sell is sought, is rented or
occupied by the applicant for a license but is owned by another, no license
shall be granted if the taxes or liens of the City of Pewee Valley due on the
property or premises have not been paid. In such cases, the City of Pewee
Valley ABC Administrator may, in his or her discretion, issue a license to sell
after receiving from the City of Pewee Valley a written statement to the effect
that the applicant for the license and the owner of the property or premises on
which the license is sought have made arrangements with the City of Pewee
Valley, satisfactory to it, for taking care of the indebtedness represented by
the unpaid and delinquent taxes or liens referred to above.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 FORFEITURES.
   If any license issued under this chapter is revoked or cancelled for any
reason by the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator, the licensee shall
forfeit any and all claims, which the licensee might otherwise have had to any
portion of the license fee paid by the licensee on the issuing of the license.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.05 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS.
   No license shall be issued or renewed to any person for selling at retail or
wholesale any alcoholic beverages at any premises or location where such
business or associated activities are prohibited under, or are in violation or
conflict with any regulation, including but not limited to signs, fire
prevention and/or the zoning code and regulations of the City of Pewee Valley
and any ordinance supplementary or amendatory to it, and any license issued in
violation of this section shall be void. Any zoning restrictions that may apply
shall be noted on the license at the time of issuance.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.06 CONDITIONS GOVERNING LICENSES.
   All licenses granted under this chapter shall be granted subject to the
following conditions, and all other conditions of other ordinances and
regulations of the City of Pewee Valley applicable thereto and all rules and
regulations duly adopted by the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator.
   (A)   Each licensed premises shall at all times be conducted in an orderly
manner and no disorderly, riotous, or indecent conduct shall be allowed at any
time on any licensed premises and no nuisance suffered, permitted or maintained
thereon.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to sell, keep
or permit to be sold, or kept on the licensed premises any controlled
substances as defined in KRS Chapter 218A. In addition to other penalties set
out in this chapter for the violation of this section the City of Pewee Valley
ABC Administrator shall also have the authority to revoke the license issued to
the premises.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any employee of any
licensee, to permit or allow acts of prostitution, gambling or the possession
of any gambling device on the licensed premises.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or employee of any licensee, to
allow the premises to become overcrowded or violate any ordinance or regulation
of the Fire Prevention or Fire Marshall offices.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.07 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; RECEIPT OF FEES.
   All licenses granted under this chapter shall be approved and issued by the
City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator and shall be good for one year, through
the license expiration date of June 30th. All license fees from licenses issued
under this chapter shall be collected by the City of Pewee Valley ABC
Administrator. Fees for licenses approved for a portion of the license-year
shall be pro-rated.
Distiller’s license, per annum                                  $500.00
Rectifier’s license, per annum                                  $3,000.00
Wholesaler’s distilled spirit and wine license, per annum       $3,000.00
Quota retail package license, per annum                           $1,000.00
Quota retail drink license, per annum                             $1,000.00
Special temporary license, per event                              $166.66
Nonquota type 1 retail drink license                              $2,000.00
(includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum
Nonquota type 2 retail drink license                              $1,000.00
(includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum
Nonquota type 3 retail drink license                              $300.00
(includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum
Distilled spirits and wine special temporary auction license, per $200.00
event
Caterer’s license, per annum                                    $800.00
Bottling house or bottling house storage license, per annum       $1,000.00
Malt beverage licenses as follows:
   Brewer’s license, per annum                               $500.00
   Microbrewery license, per annum                             $500.00
   Malt beverage distributor’s license, per annum            $400.00
   Nonquota retail malt beverage package license, per annum    $200.00
   Nonquota type 4 retail malt beverage drink license, per annu$200.00
   Malt beverage brew-on-premises license, per annum           $100.00
Limited restaurant license                                        $1,200.00
(includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum
Limited golf course license                                       $1,200.00
(includes distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages), per annum
Special Sunday retail drink license (spirits, wine and malt
beverages), per annum                                             $250.00
 
 
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016; Am. Ord. 5, Series 2022, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 114.08 REVOCATION OF SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendment
thereof, by a duly authorized agent or employee of a licensee shall constitute
a violation by the licensee. Whenever any licensee shall violate any provision
of this chapter or any ordinance relating to the subject of alcoholic beverage
control or any of the rules or regulations of the City of Pewee Valley ABC
Administrator, or any of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Laws
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky, or any amendments or supplements thereto, or
any of the rules and regulations adopted by the Kentucky State Alcoholic
Beverage Control Board, or any acts of Congress, or rule or regulation of any
federal board, agency or commission relative to the regulation and taxation of
alcoholic beverages; proceedings for the revocation of the license shall be
instituted in the manner and under the procedure established by the Kentucky
State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
   (B)   For a violation of any section of this chapter or any amendment
thereof or of any rule or regulation of the City of Pewee Valley ABC
Administrator, or of any rule or regulation of the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board, or any acts of Congress or rule or regulation of any federal
board, agency or commission relative to the regulation and taxation of
alcoholic beverages, or on conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction for
any such violation, the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator is authorized
and empowered to order the revocation or suspension of any license issued under
this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.09 TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR BUSINESS.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned by the
holder, except as provided in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Laws of the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, KRS 243.630 and per approval of the City of Pewee
Valley ABC Administrator.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.10 SPIRITS; HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Retail package distilled spirits and wine. The lawful operating hours
for a licensee to sell, permit to be sold, or deliver distilled spirits or wine
are as follows: between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight on Monday through
Saturday.
   (B)   Retail drink distilled spirits and wine. The lawful operating hours
for a license to sell, serve, or permit the consumption of distilled spirits or
wine are as follows: between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight Monday through
Saturday.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.11 BEER; HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Retail malt beverage package. The lawful operating hours for a
licensee to sell, permit to be sold, or deliver malt beverages are as follows:
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight Monday through Saturday.
   (B)   Retail malt beverage drink. The lawful operating hours for a licensee
to sell, serve or permit the consumption of malt beverages are as follows:
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight Monday through Saturday.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.12 MINORS; PROHIBITIONS GOVERNING.
   The provisions of KRS Chapter 244 and KAR Chapter 804 involving prohibitions
governing minors shall apply to licensees and licensed premises within the
jurisdiction of the City of Pewee Valley.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.13 DISPLAY OF PRINTED WARNING.
   The provisions of KRS 244.083 requiring the display of printed warnings
shall apply to licensees and licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the
City of Pewee Valley.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.14 TREATING PROHIBITED.
   The provisions of KRS 244.050 prohibiting treating shall apply to licensees
and licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the City of Pewee Valley.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.15 PREMISES; APPROVAL OF BY HEALTH DEPARTMENT AND FIRE PREVENTION.
   Upon the initial application for an alcoholic beverage license, the City of
Pewee Valley ABC Administrator shall not grant the license under this chapter
to any applicant until the applicant and the applicant’s place of business have
been approved by the Board of Health and the Fire Prevention Bureau. Upon
renewal of an alcoholic beverage license, the requirement of approval by the
Board of Health and Fire Prevention Bureau before issuance will be waived if
the applicant’s business has been approved by the Board of Health and Fire
Prevention Bureau during the licensing period. Premises being licensed for the
retail sales of package distilled spirits and wine may be exempted from the
Board of Health approval unless otherwise required by the Board of Health.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.16 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The provisions of KRS 244.150 and 804 KAR 4:100 requiring the retention of
books and records shall apply to licensees and licensed premises within the
jurisdiction of the City of Pewee Valley.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.17 SPIRITS OUTSIDE LOCKED DEPARTMENT; DISCOVERY OF.
   The provisions of KRS Chapter 44 and KAR Chapter 7 pertaining to the
discovery of spirits outside a locked department shall apply to licensees and
licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the City of Pewee Valley.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.18 OPERATION WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   The provisions of KRS 243.020 pertaining to licensing shall apply to
licensees and licensed premises within the jurisdiction of the City of Pewee
Valley.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.19 LICENSEE TO NOTIFY EMPLOYEE THAT SALES OF ALCOHOL TO MINORS
PROHIBITED; ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   (A)   Every licensee selling alcoholic beverages by retail sales shall
notify each individual employed in retail sales that the sale of alcoholic
beverages to any person under the age of 21 years is prohibited.
   (B)   A notice to employees shall be provided before the employee commences
work as a retail sales clerk. The employee shall signify receipt of the notice
required by this section by signing a form that states as follows: I understand
that under the laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky it is illegal to sell
alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of 21 years.
   (C)   The licensee shall maintain the signed acknowledgment required in
subsection (B) in a place and manner so as to be easily accessible to any
Police Officer of the City of Pewee Valley or the City of Pewee Valley ABC
Administrator or his or her employees conducting an inspection of the retail
outlet for purposes of monitoring compliance in limiting the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages to persons under the age of 21 years.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.20 LICENSEE TO NOTIFY EMPLOYEE THAT PROOF OF AGE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every licensee selling alcoholic beverages by retail sales shall
notify each employee employed in retail sales that proof of age is required
from a prospective buyer if it is reasonable to believe that the prospective
buyer is under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   The following unaltered written instruments are the only acceptable
types of identification:
      (1)   An unexpired driver’s license issued by any state, provided such
license contains a picture of the person;
      (2)   An official identification card issued by any state, provided such
identification includes a picture of the person;
      (3)   A United States Armed Forces identification card, provided such
identification includes a picture of the person;
      (4)   An unexpired passport issued by a government and which contains a
picture of the person and date of birth.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.21 FAILURE TO PAY FINES.
   The failure of any person or entity to pay any fine imposed upon such person
or entity by the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator or hearing officer for
violations of this chapter within 30 days of its imposition shall be grounds
for the issuance of an order by the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator
revoking the eligibility for employment of that person by licensees, or
revoking the license issued by the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 114.22 SUNDAY SALES.
   The Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator shall issue a Special Sunday
Retail Drink License, which authorizes any person who already holds a drink
license, to sell for consumption on the premises, distilled spirits, wine and
malt beverages from the hours of 1:00 P.M. to 9:00 P.M. on Sunday. This Special
Sunday Retail Drink License is available to those who otherwise qualify for
such a license in accordance with the provisions of KRS Chapter 243, as
amended, on payment in advance of the fee of $250 per annum to the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Administrator.
(Ord. 5, Series 2022, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The penalties for violations of
Chapter 114 that pertain to alcoholic beverage laws that are set forth in KRS
Chapters 241 through 244 shall be the same as provided by such chapters.
   (B)   Any person under the age of 18 years who violates any provisions of
Chapter 114 shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure prescribed by
statute for minors charged with the commission of a public offense.
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $250 nor more than $1,000, imprisoned not more than 50 days, or
both.
   (D)   The fines imposed under subsections (A) through (C) shall be in
addition to and independent of any action which may be taken by the City of
Pewee Valley Alcoholic Beverage Administrator, in accordance with the
provisions of the State of Kentucky Alcoholic Beverage Control laws and
Administrative Rules and Regulations.
   (E)   In addition to any criminal penalties that may be prescribed, any
person or entity that violates the provisions of
Chapter 114 shall appear before the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator or
the City of Pewee Valley Alcoholic Beverage Control Board hearing officer for a
civil hearing, and is subject to a civil penalty of not less than $200 and not
more than $500 for each violation if convicted. This section shall not apply to
obligations imposed upon the City of Pewee Valley ABC Administrator or his or
her employees under those sections.
(Ord. 2016-1, passed 3-7-2016)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Weapons and firearms
   
130.02   Public gatherings
   
130.03   Throwing rocks
   
130.04   Shooting birds or squirrels
   
130.05   Posters
   
130.06   Disturbing lawful assemblies
   
130.07   Carrying concealed weapons
   
130.08   Camping on public property
§ 130.01 WEAPONS AND FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire off any gun, pistol, rifle or
other firearm (except in defense of his or her person or his or her property)
or explode any giant cracker or other detonating substance of a loud or
dangerous character or to explode any gunpowder or dynamite or kindred
explosives, within the city limits of Pewee Valley, except firing legal
fireworks on July 4 and New Year's Day. Any person, however, may secure the
consent of the City Council to use powder, dynamite or other explosive for
blasting purposes, where the use of same will not injure adjacent property or
endanger the public.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.33, passed 8-1-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Carrying concealed weapons, see §
130.07
§ 130.02 PUBLIC GATHERINGS.
   (A)   No one shall sponsor a public gathering within the city at which 100
persons or more are expected to gather without first applying to the City Clerk
for a permit.
   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk shall supply application forms for public
gathering permits.
      (2)   The application forms shall solicit the following information from
the applicant:
         (a)   Applicant's name and address;
         (b)   Location of public gathering; date of public gathering and hours
thereof;
         (c)   Expected number to attend public gathering;
         (d)   Provisions applicant has made for policing public gathering and
regulation of traffic flow;
         (e)   Whether person policing public gathering are professional police
officers or volunteers;
         (f)   Description of sanitary facilities available at public gathering
location; and/or
         (g)   Whether alcoholic beverages are to be served or permitted to be
consumed on the premises.
   (C)   Upon receipt of application for permit, containing the information
required in division (B) above, the City Clerk shall at the next regular
meeting of the City Council submit the application to the City Council or have
the application circulated among a majority of the City Council members.
   (D)   If in the opinion of the majority of the City Council the granting of
the permit applied for would in no way adversely affect the public health,
morals, safety or general welfare of the community, the City Clerk shall be
instructed to grant the public gathering permit.
   (E)   There shall be exempted from the provisions of this section regular
daily, weekly or monthly meetings, civic meetings or business meetings and
advanced scheduled plays.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.25, passed 8-3-1970; Prior Code KOC, § 1020.27, passed
1-3-1984; Prior Code KOC, § 1020.32, passed 5-2-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 THROWING ROCKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw stones, snowballs, rubber-balls
or other missiles upon the public streets, avenues or public places of the
town.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.31, passed 5-2-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 SHOOTING BIRDS OR SQUIRRELS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or otherwise kill squirrels or
song birds within the city limits, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fire a gun or pistol within the town limits, except on property owned or
occupied by such person.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.18, passed 9-15-1914) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 POSTERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to nail, post or attach to any
tree, fence or other support on public property within the limits of the city,
any advertising sign or device or any other unsightly or objectionable article
or material.
   (B)   Notices or announcements of local interest may be posted at places
permitted by the city officials.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.24, passed 9-15-1914) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   No person shall, within the limits of the city, wilfully interrupt or
disturb a congregation assembled for, or engaged in, the worship of God, or any
school while in session, or any assemblage engaged in any lawful purpose.
(Prior Code KOC, § 1020.7, passed 9-15-1914) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 130.07 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   The City Council does authorize all police officers employed by the city as
members of the Pewee Valley Police Department to carry concealed deadly weapons
on or about their person at all times within the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Prior Code KOC, § 320.2, passed 2-3-1975)
Cross-reference:
   Weapons and firearms, see §
130.01
§ 130.08 CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Defintions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ABANDONED PROPERTY. Property, including residential, commercial, and
industrial, that is not owned by or leased to the city and that has been vacant
for at least one year.
      CAMP or CAMPING. Use of property for temporary living accommodations
purposes by the occupation or habitation of an area through the use of a tent
or other similar temporary shelter, recreational vehicle, camper shell, car,
truck, SUV, or other vehicle.
      CAMPING PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment or supplies that are used by a person or
persons to facilitate camping including but not limited to, grills, outdoor
cookers, lanterns, sleeping bags, latrines, temporary shelters of whatever
kind, or other similar type equipment or supplies.
      CITY. The City of Pewee Valley, Kentucky.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property owned by, or leased to the city
including, but not limited to, green spaces, open spaces, rights-of-way, public
sidewalks, crosswalks, streets, curbs, public alleyways, public owned parks or
trails, public passageways, publicly owned commercial lots, publicly owned
residential lots, publicly owned vacant lots, and/or publicly owned cleared
lots.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A motor vehicle, trailer or hybrid trailer that is
equipped with amenities and features intended for the owner or others to use
for the purposes of leisure activities, camping and/or sleeping including, but
not limited to motor homes, travel trailers, camper vans, truck campers, pop-up
campers, teardrop trailers, fifth wheels, toy haulers or motor homes.
      VACANT PROPERTY. Property, including residential, commercial, and
industrial, that is not owned by or leased to the city and is unoccupied, or
empty for at least one year.
   (B)   Camping on public property prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or set out camping
paraphernalia on public property within the city limits for more than four
consecutive hours during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or set out camping
paraphernalia on public property within the city limits during the hours of 8:
00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
   (C)   Camping on abandoned property prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or set out camping
paraphernalia on abandoned property within the city limits for more than four
consecutive hours during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., without the
permission of the landowner.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or set out camping
paraphernalia on abandoned property within the city limits during the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., without the permission of the landowner.
   (D)   Camping on vacant property prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or set out camping
paraphernalia on vacant property within the city limits for more than four
consecutive hours during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., without the
permission of the landowner.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or set out camping
paraphernalia on vacant property within the city limits during the hours of 8:
00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., without the permission of the landowner.
   (E)   Enforcement and penalties. Any person violating this section shall be
guilty of criminal trespass in the third degree and subject to the sentences
and fines as set forth by state law.
(Ord. 6, Series 2023, passed 11-1-2023)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   ZONING
      
152.   SIGN REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Kentucky Building Code
   
150.001   Adoption of Kentucky Building Code and Standards of Safety;
enforcement agents
   
150.002   Application
   
150.003   Appeals
House Numbers and Address Signs
   
150.015   Display of house numbers
   
150.016   Removal prohibited
Construction; Height Restrictions
   
150.030   Application; notice
   
150.031   Permit application fee
   
150.032   Statement
   
150.033   Review of proposed plans
   
150.034   Illegal nonconforming use
Structures Unfit for Human Habitation
   
150.045   Structures unfit for human habitation
Repairing, Closing or Demolition of Structures
   
150.055   Definitions
   
150.056   Housing Commission created; powers
   
150.057   Commissioner
   
150.058   Petition; complaints
   
150.059   Determination
   
150.060   Compliance with order to repair
   
150.061   Conditions
   
150.062   Service of complaints or orders
   
150.063   Temporary injunctions
Outdoor Lighting
   
150.080   Definitions
   
150.081   Regulations
   
150.082   Control of glare; luminaire design factors
   
150.083   Control of lights shining on rights-of-way, public property
   
150.084   Effective date; grandfathering of nonconforming luminaires
   
150.085   Installation of public area and roadway lighting; new construction
   
150.086   Notification requirements
   
150.087   Violations; legal actions and penalties
   
150.088   Exceptions
   
150.089   Temporary lighting; advertisement
Water Quality Management
   
150.100   Title, purpose and general provisions
   
150.101   Definitions and acronyms
   
150.102   Program objectives and general approach
   
150.103   Authority and right of entry
   
150.104   Illicit discharge detection and elimination
   
150.105   Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) permit application process
   
150.106   Construction site runoff management
   
150.107   Post-construction water quality management
   
150.108   Water Quality Management Plan permit inspections
   
150.109   Qualified professional
   
150.110   Water Quality Management Plan permit termination
   
150.111   Mediation process for plan acceptance
   
150.112   Enforcement, penalties and appeals
Water Quality Drainage System
   
150.125   Intent and application; establishment of system
   
150.126   Purpose of system
   
150.127   Definitions
   
150.128   Authority over design, maintenance and inspection
   
150.129   Rules and regulations
   
150.130   Plan review
   
150.131   Funding
   
150.132   Capital improvements
   
150.133   Drainage response system
Building Regulations
   
150.134   Application of revenues
   
150.135   Delinquent accounts
   
150.136   No liability
   
150.137   Water quality management user fee policy
   
150.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Request for consolidation of contiguous parcel water quality fees
   
Appendix B: Request for consolidation of condominium water quality fees
   
Appendix C: Assumption of partial water quality bill agreement
Cross-reference:
   Sewers and drainage, see
Ch. 51
KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE
§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF KENTUCKY BUILDING CODE AND STANDARDS OF SAFETY;
ENFORCEMENT AGENTS.
   (A)   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Chapter 7, Title 815 of
the Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as
contained in Chapter 20, Title 815 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations;
the Kentucky Standards of Safety, as contained in Chapter 10, Title 815 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations, together with any amendments, are hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this code of ordinances. Copies
of the above codes and any amendments thereto shall be placed on file in the
office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection
during normal business hours.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall be designated as the local enforcement agent
for the Kentucky Building Code.
   (C)   The City Engineer and all other designated officers, agents, and
employees of the city are hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions
of the Standards of Safety.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.4, passed 10-5-1981) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.002 APPLICATION.
   The application of the state’s Building Code shall be extended to all
single-family dwellings in the city which are to be constructed or remodeled.
§ 150.003 APPEALS.
   Appeals from decisions made by the Building Inspector under this chapter may
be taken to the state’s Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction unless
and/or until a local board of housing appeals, as set forth in KRS Chapter
198B, is established to hear the appeals.
Statutory reference:
   Appeals procedure, see KRS 198B.070
HOUSE NUMBERS AND ADDRESS SIGNS
§ 150.015 DISPLAY OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   (A)   All property owners, or those leasing property, and residing or
occupying property within the corporate limits of the city shall display the
house number or numerical address assigned to that property in such a manner
that it can be properly identified from the street or roadway.
   (B)   This section shall take effect 30 days after its passage by the City
Council, approval by the Mayor and published as required by law.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.3, passed 9-4-1979) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.016 REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally remove the house numbers and/or
address signs from any real property within the city, without the express
consent of the property owner.
   (B)   Any such removal shall be considered theft by unlawful taking and
shall be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
(Prior Code KOC, § 120.36, passed 3-2-1998) Penalty, see §
150.999
CONSTRUCTION; HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
§ 150.030 APPLICATION; NOTICE.
   Before application is made for the construction of a building or other
structure more than 100 feet in height, notice shall be served to the Mayor or
City Clerk by the property owner and tenant/lessee and contracting company.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.5, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 150.031 PERMIT APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   (1)   This notice shall be accompanied by a permit application fee of
$500 and shall include a copy of the proposed plan of construction, including
site location, a narrative statement explaining the full details of the
proposed building or other structure and certifying that the proposed building
or structure will be constructed in compliance with all ordinances, statutes
and other regulatory guidelines or directives.
      (2)   A statement explaining whether contiguous residents and/or property
owners are in favor of or opposed to the proposed building or other structure.
   (B)   A contiguous property is one that is physically visible to the
proposed construction site or within range of sound or smell to be created by
the proposed building or other structure and/or the activity to be conducted at
the building or other structure when completed.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.5, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 150.032 STATEMENT.
   This statement concerning whether contiguous residents and/or property
owners are in favor of or opposed to the proposed building or other structure
shall include a statement of how many residents and/or property owners are in
favor or opposed and shall advise of the date of the meetings with the
residents and/or property owners, when such favor or opposition was obtained.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.5, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 150.033 REVIEW OF PROPOSED PLANS.
   (A)   Once notice has been properly served, the Town Council or a committee
designated by the Town Council to review proposed plans of construction, shall
review the proposed plan of construction and statement explaining whether
contiguous residents and/or property owners are in favor of or opposed to the
proposed building or other structure.
   (B)   The Town Council shall, either on its own recommendation or that of a
designated committee, issue a certificate, certifying that the form and
attachments have been properly filed a copy being provided to the applicant and
the Oldham County Planning and Zoning Commission shall or may request
additional information be provided prior to approval or issuance of such a
certificate.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.5, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 150.034 ILLEGAL NONCONFORMING USE.
   If construction of any building or other structure that is more than 100
feet in height is commenced or completed before the issuance of the required
certificate, that building or other structure shall be deemed an illegal
nonconforming use and shall be ordered by the Town Council to be torn down or
otherwise made conforming.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.5, passed 4-15-2002)
STRUCTURES UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
§ 150.045 STRUCTURES UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
   The City Council finds that there exists in Pewee Valley, Kentucky
structures which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering
such structures unsafe or insanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the
health, safety or morals or otherwise inimical to the. welfare of the residents
of the city.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.2, passed 2-1-1971)
REPAIRING, CLOSING OR DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES
§ 150.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOVERNING BODY. The general council, board of commissioners or other
legislative body, charged with governing a city, and the fiscal court of any
county.
   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations and corporations who have
interests of record in a structure and any who are in possession thereof.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. The officer or officers who are authorized by ordinances and
resolutions adopted hereunder to exercise the powers prescribed by such
ordinances and resolutions.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing commission or any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the city, county or state
relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities
concerning structures in the city.
   STRUCTURE. Any building, or part thereof, used or occupied, or intended for
use or occupancy, for human habitation or commercial or industrial purposes,
and includes any out-buildings and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.056 HOUSING COMMISSION CREATED; POWERS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Pewee Valley Housing Commission which
shall be administered by a public officer known as Commissioner of Pewee Valley
Housing Commission.
   (B)   The Pewee Valley Housing Commission shall have the additional power
and authority:
      (1)   To investigate the structural conditions in the city in order to
determine which structures therein are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use;
      (2)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination, but
the entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the
ordinances; and
      (5)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the
ordinance, to such officers and agents as he or she designates.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.057 COMMISSIONER.
   The Commissioner shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Pewee Valley
City Council and shall exercise the powers hereinafter prescribed and provided.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.058 PETITION; COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public
authority or by at least 5 residents of the city or county charging that any
structure is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, or whenever it
appears to the public officer (on his or her own motion) that any structure is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his
or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such structure
a complaint stating the charges in that respect.
   (B)   The complaint shall state:
      That a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his or her
designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than
30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in
interest may file an answer to the complaint and appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and
that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the public officer.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.059 DETERMINATION.
   If after the notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use,
he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of the
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order requiring the owner:
   (A)   To the intent and within the time specified in the order, to repair,
alter or improve the structure to render it fit for human habitation, occupancy
or use, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the structure if
the repair alteration or improvement of the structure can be made at a cost
that is not more than 50% of the value of the structure; or
   (B)   Within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish the
structure if the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be
made at a cost that is not more than 50% of the value of the structure.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.060 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER TO REPAIR.
   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the structure, the public
officer may cause the structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be
vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any structure so closed, a placard with the following words: “This
building is unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use; the use or occupation
of this building for human habitation, occupancy or use, is prohibited and
unlawful.”
   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
structure, the public officer may cause such structure to be removed or
demolished.
   (C)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition shall be a lien upon the real
property upon which cost was incurred. If the structure, is removed or
demolished by the public officer, he or she shall sell the materials of the
structure and shall credit the proceeds of the removal or demolition and any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the circuit court by the public
officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and
shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or decree of the court.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.061 CONDITIONS.
   The public officer may determine that a structure is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he or she finds that conditions exist in the
structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of
the occupants of the structure, the occupants of neighboring structures or
other residents of the city or county. The conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): Defects increasing the
hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation,
light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects;
uncleanliness. Additional standards to guide the public officer or his or her
agents, in determining the fitness of a structure for human habitation,
occupancy or use, may be provided by resolution of the Pewee Valley City
Council.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.062 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS OR ORDERS.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this
subchapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail,
but if the whereabouts of such person is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
the complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publication pursuant to
KRS Chapter 424.
   (B)   A copy of the complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on premises affected by the complaint or order, and shall be recorded in
the office of the County Clerk wherein the structure is located.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
§ 150.063 TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS.
   (A)   Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may,
within 30 days after the posting and service of the order, petition the circuit
court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the
provisions of the order, and the court may issue a temporary injunction
restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause.
   (B)   Hearings shall be had by the court on the petition within 20 days or
as soon thereafter as possible.
   (C)   In all such proceedings the findings of the public officer as to
facts, if supported by evidence, shall be conclusive.
   (D)   Costs shall be in the discretion of the court.
   (E)   The remedies herein provided shall be exclusive remedies and no person
affected by an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any
damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the public officer, or
because of non-compliance by such person with any order of the public officer.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.1, passed 2-1-1971)
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
§ 150.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECT LIGHT.  Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or
reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a luminaire.
   FIXTURE. The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps, and can include all or
some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a
lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror and/or a refractor or lens, and
shielding.
   FLOODLIGHT OR SPOTLIGHT. Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a
reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam
in a particular direction.
   FOOTCANDLE. A unit of illuminance. The amount of light falling on one square
foot from one candle one foot away.
   GLARE.  Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to
reduce a viewer’s ability to see and in extreme cases to cause momentary
blindness.
   HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE.  The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical
distance from the ground directly below the center line of the luminaire to the
lowest direct light-emitting part of the luminaire.
   INDIRECT LIGHT. Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of
other surfaces. Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual
light.
   LIGHT TRESPASS.  The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the
boundaries of the property on which it is located.
   LUMEN. A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot.
For the purposes of this subchapter the lumen output values shall be the
initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.
   LUMINAIRE.  This is a complete lighting system and includes a lamp or lamps
and a fixture.
   OUTDOOR LIGHTING.  The illumination of an outside area or object by any man-
made device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
   SHIELDING.  This is where direct light from a lamp is cut off or deflected
downward by the use of a hood or box or other means.
   TEMPORARY OUTDOOR LIGHTING. The specific illumination of an outside area or
object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means
for a period of less than seven days with at least 180 days passing before
being used again.
(Ord. 2005-8, passed 6-6-2005)
§ 150.081 REGULATIONS.
   All public and private outdoor lighting installed in the city shall be in
conformance with the requirements established by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.082 CONTROL OF GLARE; LUMINAIRE DESIGN FACTORS.
   (A)   Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1800
lumens and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at more than
900 lumens shall not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the
lowest direct light-emitting part of the luminaire, where shielding may be used
to bring such luminaire into conformance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1800
lumens and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total
of more than 900 lumens shall be mounted at a height equal to or less than the
value 3 + (D/3) where D is the distance in feet to the nearest property
boundary. The maximum height of the luminaire may not exceed 25 feet.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.083 CONTROL OF LIGHTS SHINING ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY, PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   No luminaire shall be placed within the front setback area, or for
corner lots, a side set back area, as defined by the applicable zoning
regulation, except for lights installed for the purpose of illuminating an
entrance to property, and, in which case, they shall individually and
collectively, not cast a light upon any portion of the surfaced area of a
public right-of-way, measured at a height of 4feet above the surface, of an
intensity greater than 4 footcandles.
   (B)   No luminaire, regardless of its size or type, shall be placed within
the rear or side set back areas of residential property except where such areas
are used for an entrance to the property and then such light(s) shall conform
to the standards set out in section one of this section.
   (C)   No luminaire, regardless of its size or type, shall be permitted which
is constructed or situated in such a manner that it casts a light beyond the
boundaries of the property upon which the light is maintained and which can be
measured at any point on the property of another at an intensity greater than 1
footcandle or at any point on a residential structure of another at an
intensity of greater than 1/10 of 1 footcandle.
   (D)   The city shall retain the right to place street lights within its
public rights-of-way where such lights are deemed necessary by the city or its
officials for the safety of motorists and pedestrians. Such lights shall not be
subject to the restrictions of this section.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.084 EFFECTIVE DATE AND GRANDFATHERING OF NONCONFORMING LUMINAIRES.
   (A)   This subchapter shall take effect immediately upon approval by City
Council and publication in a newspaper of general circulation, and shall
supersede and replace all previous ordinances pertaining to outdoor lighting.
   (B)   All luminaires in place prior to the date of this subchapter shall be
grandfathered. However, any luminaire that replaces a grandfathered luminaire,
or any grandfathered luminaire that is moved, must meet the standards of this
subchapter. Notwithstanding, all luminaires within the city limits shall be
brought into compliance within 10 years of enactment of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005)
§ 150.085 INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC AREA AND ROADWAY LIGHTING; NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Installation of any new public area and roadway lighting fixtures
other than for traffic control shall be specifically approved by the City
Council.
   (B)   Before any proposal for new multiple public roadway lighting
luminaires shall be approved, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to
describe the proposal and to provide an opportunity for public comment.
   (C)   If any subdivision, development or new construction within the city
proposes to have installed street or other common or public area outdoor
lighting, the lighting plans, description, and data shall be approved by the
city and the final plat shall contain a statement certifying that the
applicable provisions of the city will be adhered to.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.086 NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any building permit application within the city shall include a statement
asking whether the planned project will include any outdoor lighting.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.087 VIOLATIONS, LEGAL ACTIONS AND PENALTIES.
   If after receipt and investigation of a complaint, city officials find that
any provision of this subchapter is being violated, notice by hand delivery or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of such violation shall be given
to the owner and/or to the occupant of such premises, demanding that the
violation be abated within 30 days of the date of hand delivery or of the date
of mailing of the notice. If the violation is not abated within the 30-day
period, such continuing violation shall constitute a minor offense.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.088 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1800 lumens or
less and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at 900 lumens
or less may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting
height, except that if any spot or flood luminaire rated 900 lumens or less is
aimed, directed or focused so as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be
directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land or to create
glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the
luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to
eliminate such conditions.
   (B)   Luminaires used for public roadway illumination may be installed at a
maximum height of 25 feet and may be positioned at that height up to the edge
of any bordering property.
   (C)   All temporary emergency lighting needed by the Police, the Fire
Departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular luminaires,
shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   All hazard warning luminaires required by Federal regulatory agencies
are exempt from the requirements of this subchapter, except that all luminaires
used must be red and must be shown to be as close as possible to the federally
required minimum lumen output requirement for the specific task.
   (E)   Luminaires used primarily for sign illumination may be mounted at any
height to a maximum of 25 feet regardless of lumen rating.
   (F)   Where any provision of federal, state, or county or city statute,
ordinance, or regulation conflicts with any provision of this subchapter, the
most restrictive shall govern unless otherwise regulated by law.
   (G)   Spot lighting may be used to illuminate a building, sign or flag, or
flood lighting for temporary backyard, driveway or security purposes, provided
such lights do not cause glare perceptible from the street or light trespass
upon neighboring property greater than 1 footcandle.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
§ 150.089 TEMPORARY LIGHTING; ADVERTISING.
   (A)   Any temporary outdoor lighting that conforms to the requirements of
this subchapter shall be allowed. Nonconforming temporary outdoor lighting may
be permitted by the City Council after considering:
      (1)   The public and/or private benefits that will result from the
temporary lighting;
      (2)   Any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of
the temporary lighting; and
      (3)   The duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting.
   (B)   The applicant shall submit a detailed description of the proposed
temporary nonconforming lighting to the City Council, who shall consider the
request at a duly called meeting of the Council. Prior notice of the meeting of
the City Council shall be given to the applicant and the Pewee Valley Lighting
Committee. The City Council shall render its decision on the temporary lighting
request within two weeks of the date of the meeting. A failure by the City
Council to act on a request within the time allowed shall constitute a denial
of the request.
   (C)   Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertising sign shall
be mounted on the top of the sign structure and shall comply with shielding
requirements of §
150.082. Bottom-mounted outdoor advertising-sign lighting shall not be used.
Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent materials and
wholly illuminated from within which do not require shielding must be approved
by the City Council, where lamp wattage total shall be less than 41 watts. Dark
backgrounds with light lettering or symbols are preferred to minimize
detrimental effects. Laser or similar high intensity source lights, including
searchlights, is prohibited.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005) Penalty, see §
150.999 
WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
§ 150.100 TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This subchapter shall be known as the “Water Quality Management
Ordinance” for the City of Pewee Valley (“the city”), Kentucky, and may be so
cited.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide regulations and
measures that will address water quality in the city and to establish
procedures by which these requirements are to be administered and enforced.
   (C)   Jurisdiction.
      (1)   The laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky shall apply to this
subchapter.
      (2)   This subchapter shall govern all properties within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city.
      (3)   This subchapter is applicable to all new development and
redevelopment activities that result in any land-disturbing activities that
result in the disturbance of 20,000 square feet or more of land; except that
the provisions herein relating to post-construction shall only be triggered
when the disturbed area is grater than one acre. Although a permit is not
required for any land disturbance over 2,000 square feet but disturb less than
20,000 square feet, the landowner must nevertheless follow Best Management
Practices.
      (4)   Adherence to this subchapter in no way circumvents or eliminates
the requirements of the state or federal regulations. Permits may be required
by the Kentucky Division of Water and/or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of
this subchapter.
      (1)   Agricultural and silviculture (woodland production) operations
according to an Agricultural Water Quality Plan approved by the City
Conservation District or approved as required in the Kentucky Agricultural
Water Quality Plan developed in accordance with the Kentucky Agricultural Water
Quality Authority.
      (2)   Land reclamation projects regulated by the Kentucky State
Department for Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement.
      (3)   Additions or modifications to existing detached single-family
dwellings and redevelopment or renovation that does not disturb more than 2,000
square feet of land.
      (4)   Minor land disturbing activities that disturb 2,000 square feet or
less of land area, and not within 50 feet of a drainage way.
      (5)   Usual and customary site investigation and surveying activities,
such as soil testing, rock coring, test pits, boundary and topographical
surveying, monitoring wells and archaeological excavation, undertaken prior to
submittal of an application for preliminary subdivision or development
approval; provided any land disturbance is incidental to necessary equipment
access and performance of investigation and surveying activities.
      (6)   Following preliminary subdivision or development approval but prior
to site disturbance permit approval and issuance, clearing necessary to provide
access for survey work, rock soundings or other usual and customary site
investigations, provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Preliminary site investigations that have been planned to
minimize the amount of clearing required;
         (b)   Clearing shall follow proposed roadway centerlines and shall not
result in clear access way of more than 20 feet in width; and
         (c)   Cleared access ways beyond proposed roadways to assess
individual lots shall not exceed 12 feet in width and no trees eight inches or
greater in diameter measured at breast height (dbh) shall be removed without
prior approval by the city.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.101 DEFINITIONS AND ACRONYMS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge of spills and dumping or any disposal of
materials other than water into the system.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP’S). Those measures described in the latest
edition of the “National Menu of Best Management Practices, Post-Construction
Stormwater Management in New Development and Redevelopment”, http://
cfpub.epa.gov/KPDES/stormwater/menuofbmps/index. cfm, as published by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), “Kentucky Erosion
Prevention and Sediment Control Field Guide” as published by the Kentucky
Division of Water and “Best Management Practices for Construction Activities”
as published by the Kentucky Division of Conservation and Division of Water.
This shall also include related documents published and distributed by the
city.
   BUILDER. A person, partnership, contractor or corporation constructing one
or more buildings for occupancy or any other use.
   CERTIFICATION. A signed, written statement that specific constructions,
inspections or tests (when required) have been performed and that such comply
with the applicable requirements of this subchapter.
   CITY. A representative or designee of the city government to include persons
from the city representative’s office.
   CITY REPRESENTATIVE. The person or persons currently designated by the Mayor
to administer the Water Quality Program and any related permit activities.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C §§ 1251
et seq.).
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land disturbance activities subject to state KPDES
General Construction Permits or local permits. Such activities include, but are
not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
   CONSTRUCTION WEATHER DAYS. Days in which a needed activity could occur.
   CONTRACTOR. A person who contracts with the permittee, landowner, builder,
developer or another contractor to undertake any or all of the land-disturbing
activities covered by this subchapter.
   DETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to restrict the runoff of
water to a prescribed maximum rate and to detain for a specified period of time
the excess waters that accumulate upstream from the outlet structure.
   DEVELOPMENT. The planning or construction project involving substantial
property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the
site. The act of using land for building purposes.
   DIRECTLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DCIA). Surface area that drains/
discharges to an outfall without passing through a BMP.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The surface area from which water drains to a point of
consideration.
   ENGINEER. A person licensed as a Professional Engineer in the Commonwealth
of Kentucky in accordance with KRS Chapter 322.
   EROSION PREVENTION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (EPSC) MEASURE. The practice, or a
combination of practices, to prevent erosion and to abate the resulting off-
site sedimentation.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. Shall mean that:
      (1)   All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed;
      (2)   There are no areas of active erosion evident; and
      (3)   A uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the
cover for the area has been established or equivalent measures, i.e. mulches or
geotextile fabrics, have been employed.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any area inundated by a 100-year flood or as determined by the
FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) or an engineering study.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel that are required to carry and discharge the
peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream. The FLOODWAY is where
the water is likely to be fastest and not include the channel and the portion
of the adjacent floodplain.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) that is not composed entirely of water exempted by this subchapter or
managed pursuant to a Kentucky Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit
(other than the city’s KPDES stormwater permit) or otherwise defined by this
subchapter.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to KPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R., § 122.26(b)(14).
   KDOW. The Kentucky Division of Water.
   KENTUCKY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (KPDES) GENERAL PERMIT FOR
STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH SMALL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES (KYR10). A
permit issued by the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW) under designated
authority by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants in water discharges associated with
construction activity (also known as the “Construction General Permit” or
“KYR10").
   KENTUCKY POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (KPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW) under
designated authority by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA), whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general
area-wide basis.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. All clearing and grubbing, clear cutting,
construction, reconstruction, grading, modification, extension or expansion of
structures or parking areas, placement of fill and dumping that change the
natural cover or topography, thereby creating the potential for erosion and
contribution of sediment.
   LANDOWNER. A person holding legal title who directly or indirectly allows
the land-disturbing activity or who benefits from it.
   LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed as a Professional Land Surveyor in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky according to KRS Chapter 322.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains, that is
designed or used for collecting or conveying water, not privately owned, not a
combined sewer and not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   NOI. Notice of Intent.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
not composed entirely of water or otherwise allowed by this subchapter.
   NOT. Notice of Termination.
   OUTFALL. The point or location where water runoff discharges from a BMP,
conduit, stream or drain, storm sewer, channel or detention/retention facility.
   PERIMETER CONTROL PLAN (PCP). A component of the Water Quality Management
Plan that documents how sediment is controlled from leaving the project site.
   PERIMETER OUTFALL. The locations from which water flow(s) from the project
site/disturbed area.
   PERMITTEE. The person responsible for the land-disturbing activity; who must
have ownership interest in the property and is designated on an approved SWQMP
Permit.
   PERSON. Except to the extent exempted from this subchapter, any individual,
partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation,
trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility,
cooperative, city, town or other political subdivision of the state, any
interstate body or any other legal entity conducting land-disturbing activities
subject to this subchapter.
   POLLUTANT. Anything of a chemical component of nature which causes or
contributes to pollution.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical,
chemical or biological properties by the addition of a constituent.
   POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (P-WPPP). A component of
the Water Quality Management Plan that illustrates how the pollutants or
pollution will be prevented, treated and otherwise managed in the long-term,
beyond that of construction phases.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved.
   PROJECT SITE. The area of land disturbing activity.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is trained and experienced in
water treatment techniques and related fields as may be demonstrated by state
registration, professional certification, experience or completion of
coursework, as accepted according to this subchapter, that enable the
individual to make sound, professional judgments regarding water control or
treatment and monitoring pollutant rate, transport and drainage planning. The
city reserves the right to require an engineer’s review and certification for
plan modification, where appropriate.
   RETENTION BASIN. A drainage facility constructed to contain the runoff of
water to a prescribed maximum rate/volume to pass into the groundwater system
without discharging the retained volume to surface waters except through an
emergency bypass under conditions beyond the designed capacity.
   SITE. The entire area or project site of the land-disturbing activity as
proposed in the permit application.
   STOP WORK ORDER. An order by the city directing a permittee to suspend all
construction and/or operations except for work related to remediation of the
violation.
   STORM SEWER. Channel, ditch, catch basin, inlet pipe, culvert, conduit or
other conveyance used for the purposes of collecting and conveying water.
   WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (WPP). A component of the Water Quality
Management Plan that illustrates how the suspension of sediment and other
construction pollutants will be prevented.
   WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (WQMP).  Illustration and documentation of how
sediment and other pollutants are managed on the project site during and after
the construction phase. This is composed of three primary elements:
      (1)   The Perimeter Control Plan;
      (2)   The Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan; and
      (3)   The Post-Construction Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan.
   WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (WQMP) PERMIT. A legal document that allows
the permit holder to break ground or disturb soil on a site within the
provisions of a SWQMP.
   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches,
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of
surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a
part of the boundaries of the Commonwealth of Kentucky which are not entirely
confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.102 PROGRAM OBJECTIVES AND GENERAL APPROACH.
   (A)   Program objectives.
      (1)   Protection of the short-term and long-term public health, safety
and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by the following:
         (a)   Providing for regulation and management of the city’s water
system, including public and private facilities in the city’s service area;
         (b)   Protecting and preserving water quality and thereby fish and
wildlife habitat within the city and in downstream receiving waters; and
         (c)   Protecting those downstream and adjacent properties from water
quality impairment.
      (2)   Compliance with state and federal water regulations developed
pursuant to the Clean Water Act Amendments of 1987 and subsequent amendments.
This objective will be achieved by the following:
         (a)   Benefitting water quality to a level of “designated use” as
defined by the Clean Water Act §§ 305(b) and 303(d) and minimizing the impacts
from new development and/or areas of significant redevelopment;
         (b)   Managing the quality of water discharged to the MS4 by
controlling the contribution of pollutants associated with new development and
redevelopment;
         (c)   Prohibiting illicit discharges to water;
         (d)   Managing the discharge of spills and dumping or any disposal of
materials other than water into the system;
         (e)   Managing water pollution caused by the suspension and transport
of soils, sediment and other construction pollutants;
         (f)   Minimizing damage to public facilities and utilities;
         (g)   Managing the use of the public and private water/drainage system
that will not result in excessive maintenance costs;
         (h)   Encouraging the use of natural and aesthetically-pleasing
designs that maximize the preservation of natural areas;
         (i)   Guiding the construction of water management facilities by
developing comprehensive master plans that address water quantity, quality,
design, operation and maintenance;
         (j)   Encouraging the preservation of floodplains, floodways and open
spaces to protect and benefit the community’s quality of life and natural
resources; and
         (k)   Encourage the planning for and use of regional BMPs.
   (B)   General approach for development.
      (1)   To most effectively achieve the program objectives, the city
promotes an approach that encourages the consideration and use of:
         (a)   Regional BMPs;
         (b)   Low-impact development design principles;
         (c)   Waterway buffers;
         (d)   Low maintenance on-site BMPs; and
         (e)   A series of multiple BMP treatment systems.
      (2)   The city will encourage a primary preference for regional BMPs
through:
         (a)   Enabling and facilitating private partnerships where on-site
water quantity and/or quality requirements may be achieved or offset by
watershed based solutions;
         (b)   Enabling and supporting private to public partnerships, offsets
and regional BMP banking, and in-lieu fee funds; and
         (c)   In support of this approach, the city integrates into the
planning and construction plan review processes, when and where available, the
use of:
            1.   City Council adopted watershed studies;
            2.   City Council adopted master plans;
            3.   FEMA floodplain delineations; and
            4.   USEPA, KDOW 303(d) reports.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.103 AUTHORITY AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Upon written request to the person, the city shall have safe and easy access
to the areas to be inspected and/or monitored.
   (A)   The city shall have the right-of-entry on or upon the project site.
The city shall be provided access to all parts of the premises subject to this
subchapter for the purposes of inspection, monitoring, sampling and for the
performance of other duties necessary to determine compliance with this
subchapter.
   (B)   Where a project site has security measures in place which require
proper identification and clearance of individuals before entry into its
premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification and written
request, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.
   (C)   The city shall have the right to set up on a project site such devices
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the water operations or
discharges.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
areas to be inspected and/or monitored that can reasonably be moved shall be
removed promptly by the person at the written or verbal request of the city.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the person.
   (E)   The city or its designated representative may inspect the facilities
of any user in order to ensure compliance with this subchapter. Such
inspections shall be made with the consent of the owner, manager or signatory
official. If such consent is refused, denied or not promptly addressed, the
city may seek issuance of a search warrant.
   (F)   The city has the right to determine and impose inspection schedules
necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   An initial inspection prior to Water Management Plan approval;
      (2)   An inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage
structures;
      (3)   Erosion control inspections as necessary to determine effective
control of sediment prior to discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system;
      (4)   A finish or closeout inspection when all work, including
installation of storm management facilities, has been completed; and
      (5)   An inspection to determine the effectiveness or operational
viability of a permanent or long-term water quality management practice(s).
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.104 ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION.
   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(KPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Program, illicit discharges
to the MS4 are defined as illegal. Except as hereinafter provided, all non-
water discharges into the MS4 are prohibited and declared to be unlawful.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open channel or
any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or
unpolluted water, which is approved by the city based on exemptions listed in
division (B) below, to the water quality system.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge waters from residential
construction activities that are not complying with the Standard of Practice
for Residential Construction Water Quality Management as approved and
advertised by the city.
      (4)   In addition to illicit discharges, the discharge of spills and the
dumping and/or disposal of materials other than stormwater, including, but not
limited to, unpermitted (KPDES) industrial and commercial wastes, commercial
car wash wastes, sanitary sewage, garbage, yard waste, trash, petroleum
products, including used motor vehicle fluids, as well as leaf litter, grass
clippings and animal wastes into the MS4, whether directly or indirectly, are
prohibited, unless authorized under a KPDES Permit.
   (B)   Allowable discharges.
      (1)   Unless the city has identified a discharge as an unacceptable
source of pollutants to the “Waters of the Commonwealth of Kentucky”, the
following non-stormwater discharges into the MS4 are lawful:
         (a)   Discharges from emergency fire fighting activities;
         (b)   Diverted stream flows;
         (c)   Rising ground waters;
         (d)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate storm sewer
systems (as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20);
         (e)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
         (f)   Discharges from potable water sources as required for system
maintenance;
         (g)   Drinking water line flushing;
         (h)   Air conditioning condensate;
         (i)   Uncontaminated landscape irrigation;
         (j)   Uncontaminated irrigation water;
         (k)   Lawn watering;
         (l)   Uncontaminated springs;
         (m)   Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
         (n)   Uncontaminated water from footing drains and pumps;
         (o)   Individual residential car washing;
         (p)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (q)   Swimming pool discharges de-chlorinated through city accepted
BMPs;
         (r)   Controlled flushing stormwater conveyances (contained and
treated by appropriate BMPs);
         (s)   Discharges within the constraints of a Kentucky Pollutant
Discharges Elimination System (KPDES) Permit from the Kentucky Division of
Water (KDOW); and
         (t)   Discharges approved at the discretion of the city
representative.
   (C)   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   In the event of any discharge of a hazardous substance in amounts
that could cause a threat to public drinking supplies, a spill having a
significant adverse impact as defined by the USEPA and Kentucky State Law, or
any other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or the
environment, as may be asserted by the city, the owner or operator of the
facility shall give notice to the city and the KDOW as soon as practicable, but
in no event later than four hours after discovery of the accidental discharge
or the discharger becomes aware of the circumstances.
      (2)   If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed, the
owner or operator should call 911 immediately to report the discharge. A
written report must be provided to the city within five days of the time the
discharger becomes aware of the circumstances, unless this requirement is
waived by the city for good cause shown as determined by the city or its
designee on a case-by-case basis, containing the following information:
         (a)   A description of the discharge including volumes and
concentrations;
         (b)   The exact dates and times of discharge; and
         (c)   Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
discharge.
      (3)   The discharger shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any
adverse impact to the MS4 or the waters of state, including accelerated or
additional monitoring necessary to determine the nature and impact of the
discharge. It shall not be a defense, for the discharger in an enforcement
action, to claim that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the
business or activity of the facility in order to maintain water quality and
minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.105 WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN (WQMP) PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The landowner shall obtain from the city a WQMP Permit prior to the
initiation of any land-disturbing activities that result in the disturbance of
20,000 square feet or more of land. Although a permit is not required for any
land disturbance over 2,000 square feet but disturb less than 20,000 square
feet, the landowner must nevertheless follow Best Management Practices.
   (B)   This Water Quality Management Plan Permit (SWQMP) alone does not
authorize or grant permission to begin development or redevelopment on subject
property. It does not supersede other permits required by the city, state and
federal governments.
   (C)   Project site owners, as applicable in division (A) above, shall submit
an application for a SWQMP on forms provided by the city.
   (D)   Applications must include a Notice of Intent (NOI), Perimeter Control
Plan (PCP), Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan (WPPP), Post-Construction
Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) and any other necessary
information or documentation requested by the city. The NOI requirements are
included in division (F) below.
   (E)   The PCP and SWPPP are components of the SWQMP. While both plans may be
approved simultaneously, the provisions of a PCP shall be implemented,
inspected and accepted by the city prior to implementing the SWPPP and P-SWPPP
and before other construction proceeds.
   (F)   The landowner must notify the city and the Kentucky Division of Water
(KDOW) within the minimum time frame specified in the KPDES General Permit for
Water Discharges Associated with Small Construction Activities (KYR10) prior to
the commencement of construction activities through the submittal of an updated
NOI.
      (1)   Submittal for a WQMP Permit application shall include an NOI
letter, when required by 401 KAR 5:055 and 401 KAR 5:060, with proof of
publication of a Public Notice, Construction Plans, a Perimeter Control Plan, a
Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan, Post-Construction Water Quality
Pollution Prevention Plan and any other necessary information or documentation
requested by the city.
      (2)   The NOI letter, proof of publication of public notice and
construction plans for the SWQMP Permit shall be submitted to the city.
   (G)   Upon completion of construction activities, stabilization of the
project site and removal of all temporary erosion protection and sediment
control measures, the applicant shall submit a NOT to the city and the Kentucky
Division of Water (KDOW). The city, or its designated representative, shall
inspect the project site to verify that the requirements of the NOT have been
met.
   (H)   The city reserves the right to require a checklist of necessary items
to be completed and included with the SWQMP Permit application submittal. Upon
submittal, the SWQMP application shall be rejected in its entirety should any
item on the checklist be incomplete.
   (I)   The city reserves the right to collect fees associated with SWQMP
Permit application, plan review and inspections from the applicant.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.106 CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Perimeter control plan. The permittee shall secure the perimeter prior
to any land disturbance to decrease off-site sedimentation once construction
begins.
      (1)   Control plan objectives.
         (a)   Focus on downstream points and outfall areas and does not
necessitate protection of the entire site boundary;
         (b)   Protect adjacent properties by the use of vegetated strips along
lower perimeters, sediment barriers, filters, diversion berms, sediment basins
or other means acceptable to the city;
         (c)   Protect all points of discharge from outlets such as pipes,
drains, culverts, conduits and channels;
         (d)   Minimize erosion and control sedimentation; and
         (e)   Reduce the velocity of flows from the project site.
      (2)   Control plan requirements.
         (a)   The permittee shall utilize sediment control measures that
consider the type of flow, site terrain, soil type and other relevant factors.
         (b)   Buffer strips may only be utilized for sheet flow.
         (c)   Supplemental control measures shall be utilized when a single
control device or measure proves ineffective.
         (d)   Location and description of construction entrances and exits
that comply, or exceed, with BMP minimum standards.
         (e)   Minimum requirements of the KPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges Associated with Small Construction Activities (KYR10).
   (B)   Perimeter and outfall inspections.
      (1)   The perimeter and outfall protection inspection must be performed
prior to the permittee’s breaking ground or disturbing soil with exception for
installation of sediment control practices at the hydrologic perimeter and
outfall(s) of a construction site. The inspection shall include participation
by the city, the permittee and the permittee’s contractor.
      (2)   The perimeter and outfall protection inspection may only be
performed after the review and acceptance by the city of a Perimeter Control
Plan.
      (3)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish perimeter sediment
control devices, shall not begin until perimeter and outfall sediment control
devices have been installed and have been stabilized. Activities necessary to
establish the perimeter controls are exempt from initial inspection.
      (4)   The city shall inspect the proposed construction site within seven
normal business days after the submittal of the plan and installation of the
perimeter protection devices.
         (a)   The Inspector shall, in writing, either approve the portion of
work completed or notify the permittee where the work fails to comply with the
approved Perimeter Protection Plan.
         (b)   Failure by the city to perform the inspection within seven
normal business days will allow the permittee to begin land-disturbing
activities, but may be subject to subsequent inspections by the city and
revisions in the Perimeter Protection Plan.
         (c)   Inspection of perimeter and outfall protection measures shall
consist of a written checklist for each type of protective measure to ensure
that it was installed according to the approved plan and site-specific
conditions.
         (d)   Measures shown on the plan may be modified at the time of
inspection pursuant to agreement between the city and the permittee’s engineer
or qualified professional.
   (C)   Other inspections. The city may inspect a permitted construction site
in order to determine compliance with this subchapter. The city may determine
and establish inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter within access provided in divison (D) below.
   (D)   Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) Permit (“Water Quality Permit”).
      (1)   By accepting the permit, the permittee automatically acknowledges
and accepts that the city has the right to perform inspections of the project
site.
      (2)   The permittee shall complete a permit application that includes a
Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan (WPPP), Perimeter Control Plan (PCP)
and Post-Construction Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan (P-WPPP) to be
completed, sealed and signed by a licensed professional engineer and land
surveyor as appropriate and submitted to the city representative.
      (3)   The plan shall include and/or address the following elements:
         (a)   Area vicinity map showing current zoning, adjoining property
owners and street lines within 100 feet of the project boundaries all drawn at
a scale not greater than one inch = 2,000 feet;
         (b)   North arrow and its basis;
         (c)   Legend explaining symbols and abbreviations used on the plan;
         (d)   “Do Not Disturb Limits” for construction activity indicated by a
heavy dashed line and labeled as such;
         (e)   Boundary of site defined by bearings and distances and indicated
by a heavy solid line;
         (f)   Drawing(s) at a scale not greater than one inch = 100 feet. In
the case of an unusually large development, a scale of one inch = 200 feet may
be acceptable;
         (g)   Acreage of the total site and acreage of the project site (if
different);
         (h)   Directly Connected Impervious Area (DCIA);
         (i)   Impervious areas as measured in square feet;
         (j)   Benchmark location(s), description(s) and elevation(s) at sea
level;
         (k)   Basis of elevation datum;
         (l)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer,
permittee and project engineer;
         (m)   Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals;
         (n)   Mapping accuracy shall conform to National Standards of Mapping;
         (o)   Location of sinkholes, streams, steep slopes, known springs and
watercourses;
         (p)   Location of any existing buildings or structures;
         (q)   Location of any pertinent utilities, sanitary sewers, water and
stormwater facilities on the property or within 50 feet of the site;
         (r)   Elevations, dimensions, locations and the extent of all planned
grading indicated with proposed contours;
         (s)   A grading plan for borrow pits, quarries and material-processing
facilities based on the findings of soil site investigations;
         (t)   Design details of temporary and permanent structural controls;
         (u)   Approximate location of the 100-year floodplain or a statement
by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor that the site is not
located in an area subject to flooding. The basis for this determination shall
be shown;
         (v)   A detailed quantity estimate for water quality management
controls and measures;
         (w)   Identification of perimeter controls at outfalls and areas where
construction site drainage leaves the property boundary or disturbed area(s);
         (x)   Arrows indicating drainage flow patterns;
         (y)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and construction
details of all temporary and permanent water quality measures;
         (z)   Temporary stabilization plans and sequence of implementation;
         (aa)   Permanent stabilization plans and sequence of implementation;
         (bb)   Anticipated construction sequence describing the relationship
between implementation of water quality measures and stages of construction
activities;
         (cc)   Anticipated inspection and maintenance requirements for
permanent and temporary measures. This shall include the expected frequency of
routine inspections and maintenance activities such as removal of sediment and
waste concrete; and
         (dd)   Management practices or other controls to address the
following:
            1.   Waste concrete management;
            2.   Material delivery, handling and storage;
            3.   Sanitary/septic waste management;
            4.   Solid waste/trash and debris management;
            5.   Vehicle and equipment cleaning, fueling and maintenance;
            6.   Sensitive and vegetated area preservation;
            7.   Pit and channel de-watering operations;
            8.   Contaminated soil management as defined and approved by the
Kentucky Divisions of Water and Waste Management;
            9.   Hazardous materials and waste management as defined and
approved by the Kentucky Divisions of Water and Waste Management;
            10.   Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizer use; and
            11.   Long-term water quality treatment.
      (4)   Plan revisions. The permittee shall notify the city in writing of
any substantial field changes made to the approved Water Quality Management
Plan. Changes made to the plan must be approved by the city representative,
prior to implementation.
      (5)   Plan review and permit issuance. The city shall review the SWPPP
within a reasonable time frame, typically 30 calendar days, from date of
submission and issue or deny the requested permit. Failure to do so will allow
the person to proceed with land-disturbing activities in accordance with BMPs
and the submitted SWPPP. However, the city still reserves the right to review
and require changes it determines appropriate.
      (6)   Requirements for individual lots.
         (a)   A separate water quality permit is not required for individual
lots disturbing less than 20,000 square feet or more of land. For any land
disturbance over 2,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet, the
landowner must nevertheless follow Best Management Practices.
         (b)   All water quality management measures necessary to comply with
this subchapter must be implemented in accordance with the permitted plan for
the larger project and adhere to the general standard or those of a common area
plan.
         (c)   The individual permittee is responsible for the installation and
maintenance of all erosion prevention and sediment control measures until the
site is stabilized.
         (d)   The permittee, whether owning the property or acting as the
representative of the property owner, shall submit to the city the following
information for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit:
            1.   Dimensions, elevations, drainage patterns and swales, and
location of existing buildings and natural features that are pertinent to this
subchapter;
            2.   Proposed drainage patterns;
            3.   Location of the construction access to the site;
            4.   Location of perimeter erosion and sediment control measures
prior to land disturbance; and
            5.   The total square footage amount of disturbed area required by
the project.
         (e)   Temporary erosion prevention and sediment control measures may
be removed for completion of the finish grade. Permanent stabilization to
include either sod or mulched-seeding as appropriate for seasonal conditions
shall be completed within 14 days prior to removal of temporary erosion
prevention and sediment control measures.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.107 POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Water quality management.
      (1)   This section concerning post-construction water quality management
is only applicable when the disturbed area is over one acre.
       (2)   If there is land disturbance over one acre, the permittee shall
complete a permit application that includes a Post-Construction Water Quality
Pollution Prevention Plan (P-SWPPP) to be completed, sealed and signed by a
licensed professional engineer and/or land surveyor as appropriate and
submitted to the city representative.
   (B)   Post-Construction Water Quality Pollution Prevention Plan. A SWQMP
Permit requires a review and submittal of a Post-Construction Water Quality
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The Post-Construction SWPPP shall include
the following information:
      (1)   A description of the proposed land use including amount of
impervious area, directly connected impervious area and nature of the
development;
      (2)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and construction
details of all post-construction water quality Best Management Practices
(BMPs), as defined in the city guidance documents;
      (3)   A sequence describing when each post-construction water quality BMP
will be installed;
      (4)   A Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement containing
maintenance guidelines for all post-construction water quality measures to
facilitate their proper long-term function. This Agreement shall be made
available to future parties, including property owners, who will assume
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the post-construction water
quality measures;
      (5)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for buffers:
         (a)   The waterway buffer will be used to define areas where land
disturbance activities shall be permitted, but construction of any building or
structure shall not be permitted.
         (b)   A waterway buffer shall be applied to all waterways serving more
than 25 acres of tributary area or presented on a United States Geological
Survey map as a blue line stream.
         (c)   The waterway buffer shall be defined as the greater of:
            1.   Area contained within a boundary established by the floodplain
boundary as defined by FEMA or city master planning: or
            2.   Where a floodplain is not defined or calculated, the buffer
will be 25-feet on each side from the top of waterway bank as defined by
geomorphic shape (not by the current water surface elevation).
         (e)   The waterway buffer and floodplain may be used for application
of water quality devices. This may only be permitted if erosion prevention and
sediment control, water quality and cut-fill policies are adequately addressed
as determined by the city according to the provisions of this subchapter.
         (f)   Exemptions are granted so long as erosion prevention and
sediment control, water quality and cut-fill policies are adequately addressed.
Exemptions shall be granted for:
            (a)   Roads and utilities crossing waterways;
            (b)   Pedestrian trails and walkways proximate to waterways; and
            (c)   Other exemptions may be made at the discretion of the city
representative.
      (6)   A licensed professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Kentucky
shall stamp all construction plans and long-term maintenance documentation.
This shall include all proposed improvements or modifications to existing or
new water quality infrastructure and other related improvements or
modifications; and
      (7)   The city may require the posting of a maintenance bond to secure
the structural integrity of the facilities as well as the functioning of the
facilities in accordance with the approved Post-Construction SWPPP for a term
of 24 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. An irrevocable letter
of credit can be used as the financial assurance in lieu of a maintenance bond
although the contribution shall be equivalent to the amount that would be
estimated for the maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall be calculated as
20% of the estimated construction cost and may be reduced to 10% after 12
months if there are no concerns by the city representative.
   (C)   BMP design requirements and criteria.
      (1)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance
documents to serve as design and implementation standards. Other guidance
documents distributed by the city should be reviewed and considered when
preparing the Post-Construction SWPPP. These documents may be applied as
standards by which designs are to be prepared and controls implemented.
      (2)   The city shall have authority to implement this subchapter by
appropriate regulations, guidance or other related materials. In this regard,
technical, administrative or procedural matters may be modified as needed to
meet the objectives defined herein, so long as such modifications as to
technical, administrative or procedural matters are not contrary or beyond the
intent of the objectives defined above.
         (a)   Regulations, guidance or other related materials that may be
given authority by this subchapter may include, but are not limited to: Best
Management Practice (BMP) manuals, design regulations and requirements,
submittal checklists, review checklists, inspection checklists, certifications,
water quality management manuals and operation and maintenance manuals;
         (b)   Materials may include information deemed appropriate by the city
including guidance and specifications for the preparation of grading plans,
selecting environmentally sound practices for managing water quality, minimum
specifications and requirements, more complete definitions and performance
standards;
         (c)   The above referenced documents may restrict or prevent the use
of specific products, techniques or management practices (that are to be
accepted by the public or are deemed to have a negative impact on public
infrastructure or the MS4) that have been identified as unacceptable for
performance, maintenance or other technically based reasons; and
         (d)   Documents referenced above may be updated periodically to
reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be made available to
the public. However, the failure to update the manual shall not relieve any
applicant from the obligation to comply with this subchapter, and shall not
prevent the city from imposing the most current and effective practices.
      (3)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for water quality BMPs
functioning independently or in combination. Acceptable water quality BMPs
shall be defined by policy and guidance documents as approved by the Water
Quality Board.
      (4)   The P-SWPPP shall include provisions for water quality BMPs that
are designed to achieve the following design/performance objectives:
         (a)   Reduce total suspended solids (TSS) from the first flush as
defined by land use characteristics and contributing area; or, capture and
treatment of at least one-half inch precipitation applied over the contributing
area;
         (b)   Reduce or buffer increases in water runoff temperature caused by
contact with impervious surfaces;
         (c)   Reduce or buffer increases in water runoff volume and flow rate
caused by increases in directly connected impervious area and overall
impervious area; and
         (d)   Water detention/retention facilities shall be designed to
address the rate at which flow is released over the entire runoff discharge
period and the volume of discharge over the critical design-storm period if
defined by city water quality master plans. The outlet structure shall be
designed as a v-notch weir or other multiple stage configurations capable of
controlling the discharge rates for the first flush, two-, ten- and 25-year
design-storm events. The outlet structure shall be designed to safely bypass
the 100-year storm event.
      (5)   Soil bio-engineering, “green” and other “soft” slope and stream
bank stabilization methods shall receive preference over rip rap, concrete and
other hard armoring techniques.
      (6)   Retention supportive data must be submitted to justify the type of
facility selected. If the facility is designed to retain (volume control) all
or a significant portion of runoff (as opposed to temporarily detain), then
appropriate soils analyses findings shall be submitted to the city. This
submission shall also discuss the impacts the facility will have on local karst
topography as found through a geotechnical investigation of the site. The
facility may be designed to infiltrate runoff to groundwater rather than
transmit it downstream under conditions up to a ten-year storm event. It must
be able to bypass all other storms including 100-year event with a discharge
rate equivalent to or less than pre-development conditions without negatively
impacting the 100-year floodplain above or below the site. If data indicates
that the facility cannot retain a significant portion of the runoff (95%), then
the facility must be designed to detain runoff.
      (7)   If available, each P-SWPPP shall be evaluated for consistency with
the Water Quality Master Plan or watershed study for the major watershed or
watersheds within which the project site is located. The individual project
evaluation will determine if water quantity and quality management practices
can adequately serve the property and limit impacts to downstream public and
private properties. The presence of a regional facility(s) will be considered
in determining the extent to which water quantity and/or quality controls will
be necessary.
      (8)   The city reserves the right to require superseding or additional
treatment criteria or objectives for specific pollutant(s) as necessary to meet
overall water quality management program objectives or directives under a
watershed improvement or Total Maximum Daily Load (TDML) program as
administered by the USEPA or Commonwealth of Kentucky.
      (9)   On-site BMP Coordination with regional BMPs.
         (a)   All properties are expected to implement on-site water quality
control measures, but the extent of application may be reduced given the
availability, proximity and nature of regional water quality BMPs.
         (b)   The extent and type of on-site water quality management
practices implemented shall be proportionate to the land use, and proximity to
regional water quality management practices.
   (D)   BMP ownership and easements.
      (1)   Any water management facility or BMP which services individual
property owners shall be privately owned. General routine maintenance
(controlling vegetative growth and removing debris) shall be provided by the
owner(s). The owner shall maintain a perpetual, non-exclusive easement that
allows for access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The
city has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
      (2)   Any water quality management facility or BMP which services an
individual residential subdivision in which the facility or BMP is within
designated open areas or serves as an amenity with an established homeowners
association shall be privately owned and maintained consistent with provisions
of this subchapter. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement
which allows access for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The
city has the right, but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
      (3)   Any water quality management facility or BMP which services
commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained.
The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows access
for inspection and emergency maintenance by the city. The city has the right,
but not the duty, to enter premises for emergency repairs.
      (4)   All regional water quality management control facilities proposed
by the owners, if approved and accepted by the city for dedication as a public
regional facility, shall be publicly owned and/or maintained. All other water
quality management control facilities and BMPs shall be privately owned and/or
maintained unless accepted for maintenance by the city.
      (5)   The city may require dedication of privately owned water quality
facilities, which discharge to the city water quality system. This shall be at
the approval of the City Council.
   (E)   Regional facilities management.
      (1)   The objective of a regional water quality management facility, pond
or other device, is to address the water quality management concerns in a given
watershed with greater economy and efficiency than possible through individual
facilities. The intended result is fewer water quality management facilities to
maintain in the affected watershed while sustaining efficiency.
      (2)   The city encourages regional water quantity and/or quality
management practices, serving 25 to 250 acres of tributary area, which may be
consistently and efficiently managed and maintained. These types of practices
will be encouraged in order to replace or reduce the implementation of on-site
water quantity and/or quality management practices, as determined to be
appropriate by the city.
      (3)   Where a regional water quality management facility has been
established by one or more local governments, or by an authority operating on
behalf of one or more local governments, a development or property may
participate in the program in lieu of runoff control required by this
subchapter. This may be permitted provided that:
         (a)   Runoff from the development drains to an approved existing or
proposed public regional water quality management facility that will be
operational within one year;
         (b)   Participation in the form of contribution of funds, contribution
of land, contribution of quality management facility construction work or a
combination of these, the total value of which shall be in accordance with a
fee schedule adopted by the city;
         (c)   The city finds that the water quality management plans are in
compliance with all other applicable requirements and ordinances; and
         (d)   Each fiscal or in-kind contribution from a development owner
participating in a regional water quality management facility shall be used for
acquisition, design, construction or maintenance of one or more such facilities
in the same watershed in which the development is located.
      (4)   Detention facilities may, and are encouraged, to be designed to
serve multiple purposes. For example, runoff may be detained under wet-weather
conditions, but also serve as common or recreational areas during dry-weather
conditions. Where multi-purpose facilities are provided, or where flat grades
or poorly draining soils are encountered, provisions for adequate low-flow
water quality management system may be required. Where the retention/detention
facility is planned to be used as a lake, pond or water quality management
practice with a permanent pool, water budget calculations shall be performed
and submitted to demonstrate that an adequate permanent pool depth is expected
during dry summer months.
   (F)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements.
      (1)   Long-term operation and maintenance agreements. Long-Term Operation
and Maintenance Agreements shall include a maintenance plan for all water
quality BMPs in new development or redevelopment that require more than general
maintenance (e.g. periodic mowing).
         (a)   The plan will be developed to ensure that the water quality BMP
(s) is (are) kept functional. The maintenance agreement will specify minimum
operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to be performed by the
property owner.
         (b)   The plan shall address schedules for inspections and techniques
for operation and maintenance including vegetation clearing or mowing and
removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and other forms of
pollution.
         (c)   The agreement shall be noted on the final plat with the
appropriate notation on the particular lot(s).
         (d)   The agreement shall be included with property ownership title
documents and shall be binding on the owner, its administrators, executors,
assigns, heirs and any other successors in interest.
         (e)   The format for the Long-Term Operational and Maintenance
Agreement shall be provided through example by the city, or through guidance
documents.
         (f)   Care must be taken to ensure that any required facilities do not
become nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should
be designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance expectations must
be clearly stated in the Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
         (g)   When a water quality BMP serves more than one parcel, a home or
property owners’ association or binding contract for the purpose of operation
and maintenance is required. The owners’ association shall be responsible for
operation and maintenance as directed by this subchapter.
      (2)   Single entity ownership. Where the permanent water quality runoff
control facilities are designed to manage runoff from property in a single
entity ownership, the maintenance responsibility for the water quality control
facilities shall be with the single entity owner.
         (a)   A SINGLE ENTITY shall be defined as an association, public or
private corporation, partnership firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity
allowed to own real estate exclusive of an individual lot owner.
         (b)   The stated responsibilities of the entity shall be documented in
the Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement. Terms including owning,
operating and maintaining the facilities shall be submitted with plans in
application for a SWQMP Permit for an adequacy determination. Approval of a
SWQMP shall be conditioned upon the approval of these terms. These terms shall
be in writing, shall be in recordable form and shall, in addition to any other
terms deemed necessary by the city, contain a provision permitting inspection
at any reasonable time by the city of all facilities deemed critical in the
public welfare.
         (c)   Upon approval of the water quality BMPs by the city, the
facility owner(s) shall demonstrate the ability to guarantee and apply the
financial resources necessary for long-term maintenance requirements. The
funding mechanism shall be in a form approved by the city. The city will only
approve funding mechanism(s) for long-term maintenance responsibilities that
can be demonstrated to be permanent or transferable to another entity with
equivalent longevity.
         (d)   In the event that proposed funding is through an owners’
association, then it must be demonstrated that the association may not dissolve
unless long-term operation and maintenance activities are accepted by another
entity with equivalent longevity and adequate funding. Furthermore, the owners’
association’s responsibility must be stated in the association’s declaration,
covenants or by-laws, as appropriate.
         (e)   Unless made specifically clear in the preliminary stages of the
site design and construction plan review procedure, it will be assumed that all
water detention, retention, treatment or storage facilities and/or devices
shall be owned, operated and maintained by a single entity as defined above.
      (3)   City ownership. Where the city has accepted an offer of dedication
of the permanent water quality BMPs, the city shall be responsible for
operation and maintenance.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.108 WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Permittee performed inspections.
      (1)   Self-inspections. Permittee performed inspections (self-
inspections) shall be performed by a qualified professional.
      (2)   Inspection standards. The city shall develop standards and a
checklist to be used by the permittee for the inspections.
      (3)   Documentation to be kept on-site. Documentation of owner-performed
inspections and inspection findings shall be kept on-site, if appropriate
facilities are available.
      (4)   Availability of documentation. Documentation of owner-performed
inspections and inspection findings shall be made available within two business
days for construction and seven days for post-construction of a request by the
city or designated representative. Failure to timely submit documentation, as
requested, will be assumed to indicate that inspections were not performed and
may result in corresponding enforcement procedures.
      (5)   Construction inspections. Maintenance inspections shall be
performed at control measures in accordance with the KPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges Associated with Small Construction Activities (KYR10),
which requires self inspections at least every seven regular calendar days or
at least once every 14 calendar days, and within 24 hours after any storm event
of one-half inch or greater. The permittee shall begin repair actions within
seven calendar days after deficiencies or failures have been identified.
      (6)   Post-construction inspections. Inspection and maintenance shall be
performed at water quality BMPs on at least an annual basis and as otherwise
determined in the Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
   (B)   Oversight inspections.
      (1)   The city, or the city’s designated representative, has the
authority to periodically inspect the water quality BMPs. The city may make
inspections of the site at its discretion and shall either approve the
condition of the BMP or shall notify the permittee wherein the condition fails
to comply with the approved SWQMP.
      (2)   The city or its designated representative’s inspections and
findings will be presented and reviewed with the permittee at the time of
inspection (as available to site personnel), and be available in the city
public records within seven normal business days.
      (3)   The city shall identify, in writing, any measures with deficiencies
or that are not in compliance with the objectives of this subchapter and the
SWQMP Permit.
      (4)   The city is authorized to negotiate with the permittee to develop
and implement an action plan that exceeds the SWQMP Permit provisions, but is
necessary to prevent water pollution from leaving the site.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.109 QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL.
   A qualified professional is required to perform construction and post-
construction inspections and to direct and/or supervise maintenance activities
to ensure that the SWQMP Permit and Long-Term Operation and Maintenance
Agreement provisions are being implemented properly and maintain written
records of the inspections.
   (A)   Effect. This section shall be effective and enforced on May 4, 2009.
   (B)   Registration. Qualified professionals performing inspections or
overseeing maintenance activities under this subchapter must be registered by
the city prior to execution of those actions. All applicants must file an
application with the city.
   (C)   Construction qualified professional prerequisites.
      (1)   Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and experience in the
following areas:
         (a)   Construction practices;
         (b)   Operational standards;
         (c)   Cause and failure indicators; and
         (d)   Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct failures.
      (2)   Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the following will be
considered for registration:
         (a)   Similar qualification or certification of any other similar
program in the Commonwealth of Kentucky or in the United States so long as that
program required a test and the applicant passed the test; and
         (b)   Qualification or certification program as designated in the
KPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Small
Construction Activities (KYR10).
      (3)   Documentation demonstrating the above will be required by the city
before registration will be granted.
   (D)   Post-construction qualified professional prerequisites.
      (1)   Applicants must demonstrate knowledge and experience in the
following areas:
         (a)   Water quality treatment practices;
         (b)   Operational standards;
         (c)   Cause and failure indicators; and
         (d)   Maintenance measures used to prevent and correct failures.
      (2)   Applicants who can demonstrate one or more of the following will be
considered for registration:
         (a)   Professional engineer license in good standing in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in water quality
treatment BMPs;
         (b)   Professional land surveyor license in good standing in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in water quality
treatment BMPs;
         (c)   Landscape architect license in good standing in the Commonwealth
of Kentucky with demonstrated experience in water quality treatment BMPs;
         (d)   Professional in water quality certification in good standing;
and
         (e)   Similar qualification or certification of any other similar
program in the Commonwealth of Kentucky or in the United States so long as that
program required a test and the applicant passed the test.
   (E)   The city may report to the appropriate licensing, certification or
qualification authority for activities not consistent with the policies and
procedures identified in this subchapter. This may include reporting activities
that include, but are not limited to, the submittal of false or misleading
information or for repeated incompetence or negligent actions by the
registrant.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.110 WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN PERMIT TERMINATION.
   (A)   The permittee shall submit a completed Notice of Termination (NOT) the
city and the Kentucky Division of Water (KDOW) per the KPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges Associated with Small Construction Activities (KYR10).
   (B)   Written acceptance of site conditions shall be made by the city based
upon an inspection.
   (C)   The city shall consider whether conditions are sufficient, appropriate
and consistent with the SWQMP.
   (D)   A permit shall be considered open and active until the city accepts
the site conditions, a Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement has been
accepted and after the following as-built requirements have been completed:
      (1)   Temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been removed;
      (2)   The remaining, undeveloped acreage that was subject to the permit
does not exceed five acres;
      (3)   The designed public utilities are installed and have been inspected
by the appropriate agencies;
      (4)   The road(s) have been constructed and the binder course of pavement
has been placed in accordance with the standards in the subdivision
regulations;
      (5)   The remaining undeveloped acreage that was subject to the permit
does not pose a significant threat to the integrity of the infrastructure,
adjacent properties or water quality;
      (6)   Permanent water quality BMPs and other measures have been
implemented and are operational at the designed levels;
      (7)   Pipes, channels, catch basins, water quality treatment devices and
other drainage features are clear of sediment, obstructions and debris, and are
operating as designed and appropriate for final site conditions;
      (8)   Disturbed slopes are stabilized;
      (9)   Detention and retention basins are stabilized at designed volumes
and conditions; and
      (10)   The city shall have 21 normal business days to perform an
inspection and respond to the request. If the city does not respond within the
21 normal business days, then the request shall be granted automatic approval.
   (E)   As-built requirements.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, recording of the
final plat or final release of bond, the as-built condition (including: invert
elevations, size shape and location) of critical water quality management
features must be identified, approved and provided in a electronic form to the
city representative.
      (2)   The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and topographic
information of all detention, retention and water quality practices shall be
certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, licensed
in the Commonwealth of Kentucky. This information shall be provided to the
city, in the form of an as-built drawing or other electronic form accepted by
the city. The as-built certification shall indicate if final conditions are
consistent with, or exceed, the SWQMP provisions.
      (3)   If it is determined that information provided in the as-built
drawing, certification, inspection or survey of the site does not meet or
exceed the SWQMP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold
Certification of Occupancy or final bond release. Furthermore, other
enforcement mechanisms may be applied to the permittee or persons making
certifying statements.
      (4)   The requirements of this section do not apply for individual
residential lot development.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.111 MEDIATION PROCESS FOR PLAN ACCEPTANCE.
   Plan acceptance:
   (A)   In such cases when the city representative and the owner’s engineer
are not able to reach an agreement on construction plans to meet the
requirements of this subchapter, then the owner’s engineer may request binding
arbitration:
      (1)   Upon request for mediation, the city representative and the owner’s
engineer shall discuss and attempt to agree on selection of a third party
licensed professional engineer in the technical area of concern that will be
used to mediate the points of difference; and
      (2)   If the city representative and the owner’s engineer are unable to
agree upon a mediator and/or to resolve the differences in mediation, either
party may then seek a legal remedy;
   (B)   The time and related expenses of the mediating engineer shall be borne
by the owner’s engineer;
   (C)   The mediating engineer shall document and transmit his or her opinions
and/or discussion results to both the city representative and the owner’s
engineer upon completion of the mediation process regardless of outcome; and
   (D)   Pending resolution, the disputed enforcement action shall remain in
effect.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 150.112 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Responsibility. It will be the responsibility of the permittee to
ensure compliance with this subchapter and implementation of the SWQMP Permit
and Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Agreement. However, all responsible
persons, regardless of ownership, must comply with the requirements of this
subchapter and may be held accountable to the enforcement provisions herein.
   (B)   Disconnection of illicit discharges. The person responsible for any
connection in violation of §
150.104, with regard to illicit discharges, shall immediately cause the illegal
connection to be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the appropriate
sanitary sewer system upon approval by the operating body of the sanitary sewer
system and the Kentucky Division of Water.
   (C)   Liability of expenses incurred. Any person responsible for illicit
discharges or noncompliance with BMPs at industrial and/or construction sites,
and who fails to correct any prohibited condition or discontinue any prohibited
activity at the order of the city, shall be liable to the city for expenses
incurred in abating pollution. This may include expenses incurred in testing,
measuring, sampling, collecting, removing, treating and disposing of the
polluting materials and preventing further noncompliance and/or illicit
discharges.
   (D)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The city shall institute appropriate actions or proceedings by law
or equity for the enforcement of this subchapter within the areas of
jurisdiction previously described. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions
and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is
considered a separate offense; and nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation, including application for injunctive relief.
      (2)   Any of the enforcement remedies and penalties provided in this
subchapter are available to be applied independently or in a sequence deemed
necessary, shall be available to the city in response to violations of this
subchapter. If the person, property or facility has or is required to have a
stormwater discharge permit from the KDOW, the city may alert the appropriate
state authorities of the violation.
      (3)   Notice of Deficiency (NOD):
         (a)   In instances when the city, based on observations or
investigations, has reasonable cause to believe that a deficiency of this
subchapter has occurred, the city is authorized to notify the permittee, in
writing, of the following items:
            1.   Date and location of site observation(s) or investigation(s);
            2.   An itemized list of any deficiencies or failures;
            3.   A deadline in which the deficiencies are to be eliminated; and
            4.   The written Notice of Deficiency shall be hand-delivered and/
or sent by certified mail to the permittee.
         (b)   It will be the responsibility of the permittee to determine what
corrective actions are needed. If the deadline for eliminating the deficiency
is not met, it is the responsibility of the permittee to document that the
deadline has not been met and request an extension to be evaluated by the city
on a case-by-case basis.
      (4)   Permit denial. At the discretion of the city representative or
designated agent, it may withhold or delay any permit application, inspection
requests, appeals or other plan approvals from person(s) that have unresolved
enforcement matters.
      (5)   Notice of Violation (NOV). Whenever the city or its designated
representative finds that any person owning or occupying a premises has
violated or is violating this subchapter or order issued hereunder, the
enforcement official may serve, by personal service, or by registered or
certified mail, upon the person a written NOV. Within 30 days of the receipt of
this notice, or shorter period as may be prescribed in the NOV, an explanation
of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, which shall include specific required actions, must be submitted to
the city or its designated representative. Submission of this plan shall in no
way relieve liabilities for violations occurring before or after receipt of the
NOV.
      (6)   Stop work order.
         (a)   In the event compliance cannot be achieved within the terms of a
Notice of Deficiency, Notice of Violation, Permit Suspension or Permit
Revocation, the city may proceed with a stop work order. In the event the city
representative perceives that there is an immediate adverse impact or blatant
disregard for the requirements, it may issue a stop work order without first
administering a Notice of Deficiency, Notice of Violation, Permit Suspension or
Permit Revocation.
         (b)   No construction activities, other than those required to address
deficiencies/violations, are allowed on a project site when a stop work order
has been issued.
         (c)   The written stop work order shall be sent by certified mail to
the permittee.
         (d)   The written stop work order shall specify deficiencies and
violations that must be corrected prior to a city inspection for consideration
of removing the stop work order.
         (e)   The permittee shall notify the city in writing of the
anticipated date for completion of the corrective action(s) and provide at
least two normal business days notice for the city to perform a compliance
inspection.
         (f)   When a stop work order is removed, the city shall provide
written notice to the permittee.
      (7)   Permit suspension or revocation.
         (a)   In the event compliance cannot be achieved within the terms of a
Notice of Deficiency and/or Notice of Violation, the city may proceed with
permit suspension or revocation.
         (b)   Land-disturbing activities are not allowed on a project site
when a permit has been suspended or revoked other than those required to
address deficiencies/violations.
         (c)   The written permit suspension or revocation shall be hand-
delivered and/or sent by certified mail to the permittee.
         (d)   A permit suspension requires that the permittee submit a revised
portion of SWQMP as indicated by the city for review and acceptance by the city
of the specific issue of contention. When a permit suspension is removed, the
city shall provide written notice to the permittee.
         (e)   When a permit is revoked, the permittee must reapply for a
permit through the process of requesting a new permit.
         (f)   A permit revocation requires that the permittee resubmit a SWQMP
for a full review and acceptance by the city representative.
      (8)   Compliance order. If a person violates the provisions of this
subchapter, the city, or its designated representative, may give notice to the
owner or to any person in responsible charge of the subject property ordering
that unlawful conditions existing thereupon be abated within a schedule defined
from the date of such notice.
         (a)   The enforcement official shall have the authority to establish
elements of a compliance SWQMP and require the owner to implement such a plan
as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this subchapter. The
enforcement official may establish the requirements of BMPs.
         (b)   The notice and order may be given, provided that if in the
opinion of the city or its designated representative, the unlawful condition is
such that it is of imminent danger or peril to the public, then the city or its
designated representative shall, with or without notice, proceed to abate the
same, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the property. The city, as
described further in this section, may recover the cost of such actions from
the property owner.
      (9)   Fines. A person that has been found to have been in violation of
any provision of this subchapter, may be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed
the amount presented in this section.
         (a)   The penalty shall increase by 25% of the previous penalty amount
for every subsequent, but separate offense made by the same person. The penalty
shall be in addition to other enforcement actions of this section.
         (b)   The penalty may be assessed for each day, beyond schedules
applied in compliance orders or other schedules issued to the property owner or
other person responsible, for unauthorized activity defined in this section.
         (c)   In determining the amount of the penalty, a penalty schedule may
be developed by the city representative with confirmation by resolution of the
City Council that shall consider the following:
            1.   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to
the public health or to the public or private property resulting from the
violation;
            2.   The duration and gravity of the violation;
            3.   The effect on ground or surface water quality;
            4.   The cost of rectifying the damage;
            5.   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
            6.   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;
            7.   The cumulative effect of other enforcement actions applied for
the same offense;
            8.   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to
comply with the Water Quality Management Program; and
            9.   The costs of enforcement to the city.
         (d)   The maximum fines will be determined by the type of offense.
This indicates the maximum that may be imposed for a first offense and does not
reflect the increases described above for repeat offenses.
            1.   Development without or inconsistent with permit - up to
$7,500. To engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling or other
activity of any nature in any way without all required permits inconsistent
with any approved plan, permit, certificate or other form of authorization
granted for such activity.
            2.   Violation by act or omission - up to $5,000. To violate, by
act or omission, any term, variance, modification, condition or qualification
placed by the city or its designated representative upon any required permit,
certificate or other form of authorization of the use, development or other
activity upon land or improvements thereon.
            3.   Illicit discharge - up to $5,000. Any person who is found to
have improperly disposed of any substance defined as an illicit discharge, not
an allowable discharge or causes the city to be in noncompliance with any
applicable environmental permit.
            4.   Household products - up to $500. Any person who is found to
have improperly disposed of any substance not included in §
150.104(B) that was purchased over-the-counter for household use, in quantities
considered normal for household purposes, which upon discharge to the MS4 or
drainage network would have an adverse impact on water quality or cause the
city to be in noncompliance with any applicable environmental permit.
         (e)   In the event there are penalties assessed by the state against
the city caused by a person, the person shall be assessed the equivalent amount
of civil penalty. This shall include, but is not limited to, penalties for
improper disposal or illegal dumping, or illicit connection into the MS4.
      (10)   Administrative fee. Any person who undertakes any development
activity requiring a Water Quality Management Plan hereunder without first
submitting the plan for review and approval shall pay to the city, in addition
to any permit or inspection fee, an administrative fee which reflects the
actual cost of the corrective action.
      (11)   Order to clean and abate/restore. Any violator may be required to
clean and/or restore land to its condition prior to the violation.
      (12)   Cost recovery. If corrective action is not taken in the time
specified, the city may take the corrective action. The cost of the corrective
action abatement and/or restoration shall be borne by the property owner. If
the invoice is not paid within 90 calendar days, the enforcement official shall
have the authority to place a lien upon and against the property.
Alternatively, if the invoice is not satisfied within 90 calendar days, the
enforcement official is authorized to take all legal measures available to
enforce the lien as a judgment, including, without limitation, enforcing the
lien in an action brought for a money judgment, by delivery to the assessor or
a special assessment against the property.
      (13)   Injunctions and/or proceedings at law or in equity.
         (a)   Any violation of this subchapter or of any condition, order,
requirement or remedy adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected,
abated, mandated or enjoined by other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state
law.
         (b)   The city shall pursue, through a court of component
jurisdiction, any penalties that are not paid in full.
      (14)   Fee or utility credit revocation or adjustment. This enforcement
tool is intended to be available or used if there are, at any time, provisions
for a property water quality utility user fee funding mechanism managed by the
city. This enforcement tool permits that credits (reductions), adjustments
(increases) or other measures to modify fees or utility charges may be revoked
or added, in full or in part, if any provisions of this subchapter are
violated. The city representative will develop and periodically revise an
adjustment/credit schedule for adoption by resolution of the City Council.
      (15)   Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this
subchapter, any violation of this subchapter may be enforced by civil action
brought by the city’s attorney. Monies recovered under this section shall be
paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with implementing
or enforcing the provisions of this subchapter and the water quality program.
In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the
following remedies:
         (a)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
         (b)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation,
inspection or monitoring survey which lead to the establishment of the
violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action
under this section;
         (c)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the
adverse effects resulting from the violation; and
         (d)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality,
wildlife, fish and aquatic life.
      (16)   Emergency orders and abatements. The enforcement official may
order the abatement of any discharge from any source to the water quality
conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the
discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition that presents an imminent
danger to the public health, safety or welfare of the environment or a
violation of a KPDES Permit. In emergency situations where the property owner
or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that
service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an
immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare of the environment or
a violation of a KPDES Permit, the city may perform or cause to be performed
such work as shall be necessary to abate the threat or danger. The costs of any
such abatement shall be borne by the owner and shall be collectable in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (17)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter is a threat
to public health, safety, welfare and environment and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided
by state and local law.
      (18)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this subchapter are
not exclusive of any remedies available under any applicable federal, state or
local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies.
   (E)   Appeals.
      (1)   In order to have an appeal considered, the applicant shall submit a
written request within 15 calendar days of the decision made by the city
representative to the city.
      (2)   A hearing date shall be set within 30 calendar days from receipt of
the appeal.
      (3)   A written, final decision shall be rendered no more than five
business days after the hearing in writing.
   (F)   Notice. Notice shall be delivered to the last known address of the
property owner on record at the Property Valuation Administrator’s Office.
Notice shall be deemed served by certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. 2009-1, passed 5-4-2009)
WATER QUALITY DRAINAGE SYSTEM
§ 150.125 INTENT AND APPLICATION; ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM.
   Pursuant to its authority under the provisions of KRS 82.082 and 91A.510,
the city does hereby establish a Water Quality Drainage System to be acquired,
constructed, improved, operated, maintained and funded as hereinafter set out.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.126 PURPOSE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   The purposes of the establishment of the system are to provide for
possession, control and use of all storm and surface water drainage facilities
in the city, to be responsible for maintenance of all storm water facilities,
improve, manage, operate and repair storm water facilities, provide for
effective management and financing of the system within the city, provide
methods for mitigating the damaging effects of uncontrolled and unplanned storm
water runoff, improve the public health, safety and welfare by providing for
the safe and efficient capture and conveyance of storm water runoff and the
correction of storm water problems, authorize the establishment and
implementation of a master plan(s) for storm drainage including design,
coordination, construction, management, operation, maintenance, inspection and
enforcement, establish a reasonable water quality service charge based on each
property’s contribution of storm water runoff to the system and to encourage
and facilitate urban water resources management techniques including detention
of storm water runoff, minimization of the need to construct storm sewers and
the enhancement of the environment.
   (B)   In order to accomplish such purposes, a water quality service charge
shall be made on all real property within the city. The primary consideration
in setting the service charge shall be each property’s contribution to runoff.
   (C)   The water quality service charge shall be fair and reasonable and bear
a substantial relationship to the costs connected with the system. Rate studies
shall be conducted periodically.
   (D)   Service charges for residential properties of two or fewer dwelling
units shall reflect the relatively uniform effect that residential development
has on runoff. Large residential lots, parcels or tracts generally have a lower
overall intensity of development than small residential lots because a lesser
percentage of larger lots, parcels or tracts are covered with hard surfaced
area. The effect of large residential properties on runoff is lowered by less
imperviousness.
   (E)   Multi-family residential properties and land uses other than
residential shall pay according to the amount of runoff as computed by
multiplying the number of ERU’s times a charge per ERU.
   (F)   An appeal and service charge adjustment process shall be created to
review water quality service charges when unusual circumstances exist which
alter runoff characteristics or when either service or benefit varies from
normal conditions or when computation of ERU is disputed.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.127 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AVERAGE RESIDENTIAL IMPERVIOUS AREA. The average square footage of
impervious area on one- and two-family residential properties in the city as
determined by sampling the one- and two-family residential properties.
   CITY. The City of Pewee Valley, Kentucky.
   DEVELOPED. The condition of real property altered from its natural state by
the addition to or construction on the property of impervious ground cover or
other man-made physical improvements such that the hydrology of the property or
a portion thereof is affected.
   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity that
excavates, builds or otherwise improves a specific parcel or tract of land.
   DRAINAGE SERVICE CHARGE. The fee levied upon all developed real property
within the boundaries of the city.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). The billing unit used in the formula for
generating charges for properties. The ERU for all one- and two-family
residential properties shall be one. The ERU for each Class B property is
calculated by dividing the impervious area of a property by the average
residential impervious area, and rounding to two decimal points.
   EXISTING. Present or in effect as of the time of the adoption of this
subchapter.
   FACILITIES. Various flood control, drainage works and storm water systems
that include, but are not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, energy
dissipation structures, channels, outlets, retention basins, detention basins,
other structural components, ditches, floodwalls, basins, pipes, walls,
channels, creeks, ponds, drainage easements, drainage right-of-way, drainage
dedications and other interests in property used, dedicated, controlled,
possessed, maintained or leased by the city, for drainage purposes, together
with all appurtenances which connect or assist in drainage of water or flood
control.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Those hard surface areas either which prevent or retard
the entry of water into the soil in the manner that the water entered the soil
under natural conditions pre-existent to development, or which cause water to
run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than
that present under natural conditions pre-existent to development, including,
without limitation, the surfaces as roof tops, asphalt or convert paving,
driveways and parking lots, walkways, patio areas, storage areas or other
surfaces which similarly affect the natural infiltration or runoff patterns
existing prior to development.
   PREMISES. A lot or parcel, and the building and other improvements situated
thereon.
   STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm waters, surface
runoff and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial waste
other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM, STORM WATER and SURFACE WATER. They are used as interchangeable
terms.
   STORM WATER SYSTEMS and STORM WATER DRAINAGE. All man-made facilities,
structures and natural water courses used for collecting and conducting storm
water to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet
including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: inlets, conduits,
appurtenant features, canals, creeks, channels, catch basins, ditches, streams,
gullies, flumes, culverts, siphons, retention or detention basins, dams,
floodwalls, levies and pumping stations.
   SYSTEM. The water quality drainage system created herein, which consists of
the entire system of flood protection and storm water drainage and surface
water runoff facilities owned or leased by the city or over which the city has
right of use for the movement and control of storm drainage and surface water
runoff, including both naturally occurring and man-made facilities.
   UNDEVELOPED. That condition of real property unaltered by the construction
or addition to the property by man of impervious ground cover or physical man-
made improvements of any kind which change the hydrology of the property from
its natural state.
   WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT USER FEE POLICY. A written policy adopted by
municipal order, as set out herein, that direct out the day-to-day operational
detail required to carry out the intent of this subchapter, including the
setting of fees.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.128 AUTHORITY OVER DESIGN, MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   The city shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection,
construction and use of all storm sewers, storm drains and storm water
facilities in the city and shall have exclusive jurisdiction for the design and
construction of public storm water facilities in the city and shall inspect,
operate and maintain the facilities.
   (B)   The city shall have exclusive jurisdiction for the inspection,
maintenance, repair, removal, construction and operation of drainage facilities
on all city streets, boulevards, alleys, viaducts, sidewalks, curbs, street
crossing, grade separation and other public ways and easements, and all drains,
ditches, culverts, canals, streams, levees, tunnels and appurtenances thereof.
   (C)   The city shall implement and execute this subchapter by and through
its Mayor-Council form of government under KRS 83A.130, with the Council
approving this subchapter as well as the Water Quality Management User Fee
Policy; then the Mayor executing the ordinance and policy.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.129 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In order to accomplish the purpose of this subchapter, and to protect
the system, to secure the best results from the construction, operation and
maintenance thereof, and to prevent damage and misuse of any of the drainage
facilities, improvements or properties within the city, the city shall prepare
necessary and reasonable rules and regulations (hereinafter referred to as the
Water Quality Management User Fee Policy) which may include, but not be limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Prescribe the manner in which storm sewers, ditches, channels and
other storm water facilities are to be designed, installed and adjusted, used,
altered or otherwise changed;
      (2)   Prescribe inspection and other fees permitted by this subchapter;
      (3)   Prescribe the manner in which the facilities are operated;
      (4)   Facilitate the enforcement of this subchapter;
      (5)   Prescribe the collection procedures and timing of service charge
bills;
      (6)   Protect the drainage facilities, improvements and properties
controlled by the city and to prescribe the manner of their use by any public
or private person, firm or corporation; and
      (7)   Protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   The Mayor shall submit the Water Quality Management User Fee Policy
(and any changes, additions or amendments thereto) to the City Commission for
approval, via a municipal order. The initial Water Quality Management User Fee
Policy of the city is dated June 1, 2009; and was passed via municipal order on
the same date.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.130 PLAN REVIEW.
   The city shall be responsible for all storm and surface water drainage plan
reviews for all development in the city. Any person or organization removing,
constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, relocating or demolishing a storm
sewer, natural watercourse or other drainage facility, must first file an
application and obtain a permit from the city.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.131 FUNDING.
   Funding for the system and other water quality activities connected
therewith shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Funds appropriated by the city;
   (B)   Storm drainage service charge;
   (C)   Permit and inspection fees;
   (D)   Direct charges. This charge will be collected from owner and
developers for the cost of designing and constructing storm water facilities
and administrative costs and related expenses where the city designs and
constructs or contracts for the construction of the facilities; and
   (E)   Other income obtained from federal, state, local and private grants or
revolving funds.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.132 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   The city will implement a capital improvements program. The city shall
submit the capital improvement program which lists the capital improvements to
the city for approval. Upon approval of the capital improvements program, the
city shall have authority to proceed with, awarding of contracts, acquisition
of property and construction of the projects and no other approval will be
required.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.133 DRAINAGE RESPONSE SYSTEM.
   The city will operate and maintain a complaint response system in order to
assure effective and timely response to all surface and storm water drainage
complaints and shall regularly and timely issue report to the city as to the
number and type of drainage complaints received and to the response made to the
complaints.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.134 APPLICATION OF REVENUES.
   All monies collected through service charges and other fees authorized
herein, shall be deposited in a special revenue account and shall be separately
identified and accounted for in the city’s financial records. Collection and
disbursement of such monies shall be administered according to generally
accepted principles of governmental accounting. All such money shall be used
for costs and expenses, including administrative costs and salaries, related to
the water quality drainage system established by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.135 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   When any service charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days for monthly
billings and 45 days for quarterly billings after the same becomes due and
payable, the property, the tenant and the owner thereof, shall be deemed
delinquent until the time as all rates, fees and charges are fully paid; and
the city may terminate public sewer, water and drainage service to that
property and pursue its legal remedies against the tenant or owner to obtain
payment.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.136 NO LIABILITY.
   Floods and storm water runoff may occasionally occur which exceeds the
capacity of the system. This subchapter does not imply nor create a duty on the
city to insure that property subject to fees and charges established herein
will always be free from flooding or flood damage, or that stormwater systems
capable of handling all storm events can be cost effectively constructed,
operated or maintained. Nor shall this subchapter create a liability on the
part of, or cause of action against, the city or any of its elected officials,
officers or employees for any flood damage or any damage that may result from
storms or runoff thereof.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.137 WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT USER FEE POLICY.
   (A)   Acronyms list.
BMP   Best Management Practice
COS   Cost of Service
ERU   Equivalent Residential Unit
GIS   Geographic Information System
KDOW  Kentucky Division of Water
LOS   Level of Service
MS4   Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW  Public Owned Treatment Works
PVA   Property Valuation Administration
PY    Permit Year
SFR   Single-Family Residential
sMS4  Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
 
   (B)   Demonstration of need for user fee.
      (1)   There is a growing nationwide concern regarding preservation of
waters of the United States, the related management of stormwater and the
associated cost of doing so. These concerns have prompted many communities to
seek dedicated funding mechanisms for the high cost of improving storm drainage
systems, managing flooding issues and controlling stormwater pollution. By
recognizing that storm drainage systems are infrastructure that requires
ongoing management, a water quality utility can provide a source of funding for
that purpose.
      (2)   Currently, the city is responding to public concerns and regulatory
demands to address an increasing level of water quality management needs.
      (3)   Public concerns and regulatory demands for increased water quality
management services can be separated into two major categories: stormwater
quantity (flooding and property protection) and stormwater quality (health and
pollution management). The city is implementing activities to comply with the
unfunded federal/state mandated National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer (MS4) Phase II “Stormwater Quality”
Permit Program. This program, which started November 4, 2003, includes
activities that the city must perform over a five-year permit term. It is
expected that the permit will be indefinitely renewed and modified in five-year
periods, and the increased cost to be borne by the city for this new long-term
program is a primary driver in developing new revenue.
      (4)   As these issues continue to intensify, there is an increased need
to generate revenue to support the identified (and yet to be identified)
unresolved water quantity and quality problems. The program mission statement
shall be as follows: The city will implement a cost-effective water quality
management program to address citizen expectations and regulatory demands for
drainage system maintenance and flood control, to benefit the quality of local
water resources, and to comply with environmental regulations.
   (C)   State enabling authority. Pursuant to state law, the city will
establish a Water Quality Drainage System Ordinance that will include user fees
for stormwater management activities.
   (D)   Organization structure. Through its Mayor-Council form of government,
the city will support and administer a water quality management utility. The
following entities will be responsible for the associated activities.
      (1)   City.
         (a)   Review of proposed construction plans and zoning changes that
impact stormwater quality, including construction site pollution and post-
construction/long-term water quality management;
         (b)   Oversight of inspection of private construction referred in
division (D)(1)(a) above;
         (c)   Development of plans for capital improvement projects needed to
meet the LOS;
         (d)   Oversight of inspection, as deemed necessary, of private post-
construction/long-term water quality management;
         (e)   Performance of construction inspections as required by the MS4
program including KDOW mandated monthly inspection report summaries;
         (f)   Development and maintenance of a water quality infrastructure
inventory in a digital format to include size, condition, construction
materials and other related data;
         (g)   Coordination with the Oldham County PVA for the tracking of new
properties;
         (h)   Update impervious areas as necessary;
         (i)   Collection of plan review and inspection fees;
         (j)   Assistance and coordination to maintain the drainage and flood
control system on a level that can be achieved with typical street maintenance
equipment; and
         (k)   Coordination and/or implementation of KPDES and MS4 program
including:
            1.   Assessment of effectiveness of the program activities;
            2.   Coordination of community complaints related to stormwater
drainage quantity or quality;
            3.   Development of related reporting documents including annual
compliance demonstration;
            4.   Ongoing development and implementation of a public awareness
and involvement program;
            5.   Ongoing development and implementation of an illicit discharge
detection and elimination program;
            6.   Compilation and quality assurance of the monthly report to
KDOW for construction inspection;
            7.   Compilation and quality assurance of municipal operations
related to stormwater quality management at publicly operated facilities;
            8.   Coordination with other entities that may be involved with
permit implementation;
            9.   Development and administration of grants the city applies for
related to stormwater quality; and
            10.   Coordination of inspection of commercial properties for the
maintenance of the water quality treatment systems and tracking of impervious
area changes for the billing system.
      (2)   Highway Department.
         (a)   The KYTC is a co-permittee;
         (b)   Maintenance of the drainage and flood control system on a level
that can be achieved with accessible equipment and man-power;
         (c)   Street sweeping, catch basin cleaning, ditch and drainage
channel clearing, culvert and cross-drain repair and the like necessary to
maintain the MS4 to meet the expectations and KDOW water quality requirements;
         (d)   Quantification and documentation the amount of debris and
materials collected from street sweeping, catch basin cleaning, ditch and
drainage channel clearing and the like; and
         (e)   Management and coordination of capital improvement projects
under the guidance of the city.
      (3)   Oldham County PVA.
         (a)   Coordinate the tracking of new properties, as needed to account
for new impervious area and related billing system issues, with the city; and
         (b)   Coordinate with the necessary entities to maintain data
associated with stormwater user fee billing including hard copy, database and
GIS data.
   (E)   Level and cost of service. The city’s overall goal is to implement a
user fee that is fair, equitable and legally defensible. A principal aspect of
achieving this goal is to ensure that the revenues generated are less than or
equal to the cost of service required to implement the selected and/or desired
level of service. In essence, the city can collect up to, but no more than, the
amount needed to perform the activities associated with stormwater quantity and
water quality management. The city understands that for the water quality
management utility user fee to be successful in the long-term, efforts must be
made to clearly and frequently communicate the level of service. This is
necessary from initial user fee development, through long-term implementation,
to ensure public, elected official and town staff expectations are balanced and
consistent.
      (1)   The water quality management user fee will provide fiscal support
(in part or in total) to:
         (a)   KPDES MS4 ‘Phase II’ Permit. The activities as presented in the
Stormwater Quality Management Plan (SWQMP) Stormwater Permit. This includes
programmatic activities, education, outreach, illicit discharge identification
and elimination, construction site management, post-construction management,
municipal good housekeeping and other related activities.
         (b)   System and facilities maintenance. The repair and replacement,
rehabilitation and otherwise general response maintenance of the stormwater
conveyance and/or treatment systems within the public right-of-way.
         (c)   Capital Improvement Projects (CIP). The construction of
facilities, conveyance or treatment systems within a public right-of-way or
easement.
         (d)   Revitalization. The preventative maintenance activities
associated with drainage infrastructure improvements needed to achieve a
desired average life cycle.
         (e)   Elected official, stakeholder and general public education. The
activities needed to communicate progress and key issues to manage/maintain
service expectations and make certain that demands for service do not exceed
the available resources.
         (f)   Billing system administration and expenses. The costs incurred
by the administration, production and mailing of the bill/invoice for water
quality management fees.
      (2)   It is anticipated that the user fee will not provide fiscal support
to:
         (a)   Work in easements unless it is the judgment of the city that the
improvement will directly benefit or protect the system in the adjacent public
right-of-way;
         (b)   Stormwater system improvements outside of the public right-of-
way unless it is the judgment of the city that the improvement will directly
benefit or protect the system in the adjacent public right-of-way;
         (c)   Mowing or other maintenance activities of systems not within a
public right-of-way; and
         (d)   Mowing or other maintenance activities of public drainage beyond
that of a frequency and extent proportionately given to similar portions of the
city’s system.
      (3)   The revenue generated by stormwater management user fees can only
be used to support stormwater management activities. The General Fund may be
used to augment water quality management user fee revenue, but the water
quality management user fee shall not be used to augment the city’s General
Fund, nor any other activities that are unrelated to water quality management.
   (F)   Utility user fee; rate.
      (1)   Initial rate. An impervious area based user fee rate of $3 per
equivalent residential unit (ERU) per month will become effective July 1, 2009.
This rate is estimated to generate revenue that is not greater than the LOS/COS
defined in division (E) above.
      (2)   Increases in rate. The city recognizes that the user fee rate may,
in time, need to be raised to account for a number of factors including:
         (a)   Increases in services for gradually building a new program/
service;
         (b)   Increases in costs due to inflation;
         (c)   Increases in costs due to inflation effects on labor, equipment
and supplies;
         (d)   Expanded service area;
         (e)   Increases in citizens’ expectations for services;
         (f)   Expanded services mandated by state and/or federal regulations;
and
         (g)   At the discretion of the city, the user fee rate may be
increased to provide funding for issues presented above. The increase may only
be submitted for City Council approval provided that it can be demonstrated
that the new revenue to be generated is not more than the services provided.
      (3)   Fund balance and debt.
         (a)   The revenue generated by the user fee is to be managed in a way
to minimize reliance on debt products such as bonds and loans. The revenue is
to be kept on-hand until it grows to sufficient levels to support program
services. This will necessitate that some fiscal years will have more revenue
than expenditures to account for anticipated liabilities/expenses that are
beyond the fiscal year. However, the revenue reserves will be managed as not to
accumulate monies for expenses/liabilities that are more than 15 years away.
The revenue from this program will be managed with a net positive or null
balance unless the negative balance is offset by debt products or subsidies
from the General Fund made at the discretion of the city.
         (b)   Infrequent large/expensive projects benefitting many property
owners supported by debt products may be utilized with the city’s discretion.
The goal is to keep debt service payments to a small percentage and sustainable
of the total revenue collected annually.
   (G)   Utility user fee billing mechanism.
      (1)   The city will coordinate administration of the stormwater utility
user fee billing. Water quality management user fees will be paid first as the
last service/enterprise fund in the case of partial payments by the user. This
provides that in the event that a partial or no payment is made by the user
then the city has the authority to apply enforcement measures already
prescribed by higher listed services.
      (2)   Data used to support the billing system will be maintained by the
city in coordination with outside contractors.
   (H)   Utility user fee rate structure.
      (1)   Eligible properties.
         (a)   All properties that are expected to participate in other
existing utilities (drinking water and wastewater) are expected to participate
to an equitable level in the water quality management utility user fee. This
includes:
            1.   Privately owned property (including residential, commercial
and industrial);
            2.   Local state and federal governmental facilities;
            3.   Institutional properties (including not for profit entities
such as churches, schools and the like); and
            4.   Publicly owned properties (except for roadways as noted in
division (H)(10) below).
         (b)   Vacant properties that are provided exemption under other
statutes/regulations/ordinances shall not be applied for an exemption of water
quality user fees. As every property owner impacts water quality in some
manner, there are no total exemptions for the user fee. However, public
roadways and rights-of-way are not classified as eligible user fee properties
as described in division (H)(8) below.
      (2)   Rate structure approach.
         (a)   The city is utilizing an impervious area rate structure to serve
as the basis for the user fee. The intent is to mimic the equitability found in
other utilities. For example, the fee for drinking water is calculated by
estimating the cost of treating and conveying the amount of drinking water
measured by a meter. Nationally, the most accepted equivalent measure for
stormwater runoff is estimation and calculation of impervious area, which
correlates to the relative stormwater impact from the property. It is not
intended to measure the specific amount of stormwater runoff that drains off of
a piece of property, but, it provides a quantifiable measure to compare the
wide variety of property types and sizes. In essence, properties with more
impervious area (resulting in more stormwater runoff than other properties)
will pay a higher user fee. While all properties pay at the same rate, their
user fee varies depending on how many “impervious area units” (explained in
more detail in division (H)(3) below) the property has.
         (b)   In example, a residential property will have one impervious area
unit and will pay a flat rate (times one). In contrast, a commercial property
with a large parking lot and building totaling five times more impervious area
(thus having five impervious area units) will pay five times that of the
residential property.
         (c)   An Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) is a calculation/average
from a statistical sampling of all single-family residence (SFR) properties.
The impervious area (rooftops, driveways and the like) is measured for each of
the sample properties using digital orthogonally rectified aerial photography.
ERU’s have been calculated throughout the country, ranging from 1,500 to 4,000
square feet, with many ERU calculations at or around 2,500 square feet. The
city has decided to adopt an ERU based on a statistical sampling of residential
properties in the city of 6,700 square feet, consistent with similar area
utilities.
         (d)   The ERU may be changed at any time the City Council suspects
that new development trends have substantively altered the average or the user
fee rate structure is to be altered in such a way to necessitate change. Any
change in ERU will be based on impervious area calculations of a new
statistical sampling of residential properties in the city, or on a national
average ERU.
      (3)   Property classification.
         (a)   Each residential property shall be assumed to have a single
impervious area unit. That unit shall be referred to as the ERU (as defined in
division (H)(2) above) and shall include land use codes indicated as
residential in the table below. Vacant properties, as indicated in the table
below, shall not be assessed. All other eligible properties that are indicated
as non-residential properties in the table below will be individually assessed
a billing unit based on a measured estimate of impervious area.
Property Classification by Land Use
Property Class Code Property Class Billing Type Billing Rate (ERUs)
Property Classification by Land Use
Property Class Code Property Class             Billing Type Billing Rate (ERUs)
1XX                 Agriculture                N            Calculated
2XX                 Mineral                    N            Calculated
3XX                 Industrial                 N            Calculated
4XX                 Commercial                 N            Calculated
50X                 Residential Vacant         V            Normally Not Billed
51X                 Residential - One-Family   R            One
52X                 Residential - Two-Family   R            One
53X                 Residential - Three-Family N            Calculated
54X                 Residential -Mobile/       R            One
                    Manufactured Home
55X                 Residential - Condominium  N            Calculated
56X                 Residential - Townhouse    N            Calculated
59X                 Residential - Other        N            Calculated
6XX                 Exempt                     N            Calculated
8XX                 Utility                    N            Calculated
N = Non-resident; R = Resident; W = Non-Residential Vacant; V = Residential
Vacant
 
         (b)   The impervious area calculation shall include area estimates
for:
            1.   Rooftops of houses and permanent or semi-permanent buildings;
            2.   Asphalt, concrete and stone;
            3.   Sidewalks and paths;
            4.   Driveways;
            5.   Parking lots;
            6.   Recreational areas such as tennis courts, basketball courts
and the like;
            7.   Motor homes and trailers;
            8.   Permanent and/or semi-permanent covers such as greenhouses;
and
            9.   Areas that appear to have been compacted or modified to
prevent infiltration to the level of the surrounding area as determined by the
city.
         (c)   The impervious area units for non-residential/SFR properties
will not be assessed by an average as explained for residential properties
above. The impervious area and billing units for non-SFR properties will be
individually calculated using digital orthogonally rectified aerial
photography. The ERU will be applied as a factor to the individually calculated
impervious areas of non-SFR properties to determine the user fee. The
individually calculated factor will indicate the number of times more
impervious area that a non-SFR property has. This will be used to calculate the
corresponding fee.
         (d)   For example, if a non-SFR property (corner drug store) has an
impervious area that is four times larger than the ERU/average SFR, then it
will pay a user fee that is four times higher than the residential properties.
The number of ERUs for a non-SFR property will be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
         (e)   In the case of institutional or local, state or federal
government properties that are used for residential purposes, the property will
be billed as residential (one ERU) if the property otherwise meets the criteria
for an SFR (i.e., up to two-family dwellings). Otherwise, the property will be
billed as non-SFR and will be individually assessed based on ERU.
         (f)   The city will determine the impervious area for existing
developments as of January 1, 2009. The city is responsible for determining the
impervious area of new development. After this point; the impervious area will
be determined by as-built plans that have been submitted and approved by the
Planning Commission.
      (4)   Off-site owner properties. For parcels that are utilized as rental
or lease tenant property, the billing will be sent to the property owner’s
address rather than the property address, as provided/determined/maintained by
the county PVA office. However, the city has the discretion, but not the
requirement, as determined appropriate by the county PVA, to send the bill to
the property address for residential property.
      (5)   Property transfers. In the event that a property title is
transferred during the course of a billing year, the buyer and seller will each
pay a prorated stormwater fee based on the recorded date of transfer.
      (6)   Contiguous parcels. Through the long-term history of development
and redevelopment in the city, multiple contiguous parcels have been
consolidated through use, but not through county PVA and other land management
policies. Stormwater user fee charges for multiple parcels may be consolidated
into a single stormwater user fee account provided that the following criteria
are met:
         (a)   The parcels are contiguous - as verified by the city;
         (b)   The parcels have the same specific land use;
         (c)   The parcels have the same owner who is also the user fee charge
recipient; and
         (d)   The owner has completed the certification form in Appendix A.
      (7)   Multiple user/tenant properties. Non-SFR properties that are
utilized by two or more companies, persons or other entities shall be billed to
a single property owner/designated operator regardless of how many sub-parcels
or other utility segregating mechanisms such as water meters it contains. A
single property that has multiple tenants or other segregations may not be
given multiple bills unless the property has been subdivided and each parcel
has a separate owner(s).
      (8)   Condominium properties.
         (a)   Single-level residential condominium properties shall be billed
as non-SFR. However, if requested in writing using the form in Appendix B, the
city may at its discretion apply all charges to a single common property
manager/owner. Multi-level residential condominium properties shall be billed
as non-SFR.
         (b)   Common areas including, but not limited to, pools, outbuildings,
recreation courts and other related impervious area will be charged to the
condominium association operating the properties. If such an association does
not exist, then the individual properties will be evenly assessed the
additional impervious area.
      (9)   Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks will be categorized as non-SFR
properties and billing sent to the property owner. The billing units/ERUs will
be calculated based on the currently available digital orthogonally rectified
aerial photography. If in the city’s opinion, the property has expanded or is
being utilized to a significantly higher level as to require a reassessment,
then the ERUs to be assigned to the property may be estimated by using one of
the following techniques:
         (a)   Field survey;
         (b)   Use of updated digital orthogonally rectified aerial
photography; and
         (c)   Use of the “old” digital orthogonally rectified aerial
photography supplemented by a hand count of occupied trailer lots and the size
of the type of trailer units as estimates from the “old” digital orthogonally
rectified aerial photography.
      (10)   Public roadways and rights-of-way. Public roadways and rights-of-
way collect and convey a significant portion of stormwater runoff, as well as
provide a substantive element of the conveyance system. In this capacity and as
commonly assumed in other water quality management user fees across the
country, these areas will not be assessed a stormwater user fee.
      (11)   Private roadways and rights-of-way. Private roadways and rights-
of-way are a substantive element of the conveyance system. In this capacity and
as commonly assumed in other water quality management user fees across the
country, these areas will not be assessed a water quality user fee.
      (12)   Assumption of partial stormwater bills. On certain parcels of
property, impervious areas were built on the parcel for the exclusive use of
another entity. Examples are pump stations, transmission towers, electrical
substations that may be built on utility easements and private roads that cross
property lines. The entity who built the structure may accept responsibility
for the part of the water quality bill that applies to the structure. An
agreement must be made whereby the entity who built the structure/road agrees
to pay the water quality bill for the impervious area even though it is on the
parcel owner’s property using the form found in Appendix C.
      (13)   Vacant properties. For stormwater, a VACANT PROPERTY is defined as
a property without impervious area. A vacant property will normally not get a
water quality bill. The exception to this case is when contiguous parcels
(division (H)(6) above) include both residential and residential vacant
parcels. In this case the water quality bill may be sent to either the
residential or residential vacant parcel but not to both.
      (14)   Agricultural properties. For this document, AGRICULTURAL
PROPERTIES will be defined as a property that classified as agricultural by the
county PVA. Agricultural properties will be assessed in the same manner as non-
SFR properties.
      (15)   Properties under construction. The water quality fee for
properties under construction will be billed to the owner of record as of
January 1 of the billing year. The builder or developer is responsible for
stormwater charges until such time as the property is sold or transferred, at
which point the buyer and seller will be responsible for prorated charges based
on the date of transfer.
      (16)   Annexation. In the event that a property is annexed into an
incorporated portion of the city during the billing year, the property will be
charged a prorated stormwater fee for the year based on the date of annexation.
      (17)   Initial billing errors. During the water quality billing system
development process, errors will be made and not discovered until after billing
begins. Depending on the type of error that was made, adjustments will need to
be made to a customer’s water quality bill. In the case of a billing error, the
property owner shall have the option to pay the current bill and to have the
corrected water quality charges and any adjustment appear on the next water
quality bill. The threshold for retroactive billing adjustments is six months.
      (18)   Appeals and accountability process.
         (a)   Any non-SFR property may appeal the number of billing units/ERUs
assessed. Any expense necessary for development of data or other materials
shall be borne by the appealing entity/property owner and not borne by the
city. The appeal will be accepted and evaluated by the city. The appeal must
contain the impervious square footage as estimated by one of the following
ways:
            1.   Field survey utilizing total station or GPS data certified by
a land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Kentucky;
            2.   Other survey using digital orthogonally rectified aerial
photography utilized by a land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of
Kentucky; and
            3.   As-built plans certified by a land surveyor licensed in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky to be representatively accurate of all “new”
construction and a whole and accurate representation of all “previously
constructed” impervious area on the property.
         (b)   Construction design plans are not acceptable for this
estimation.
         (c)   In the event that the appeal is accepted by the city as
demonstrating a more accurate estimate, albeit of greater or lesser impervious
area, then it will be applied to future billing. If a credit to the property
owner is due, credit will be applied for the difference in the user fee for the
lesser of:
            1.   One-hundred eighty days;
            2.   One billing cycle; and
            3.   The date of property ownership transfer.
         (d)   In the event that the appeal is denied by the city to be a less
accurate estimate, then the property owner has the option to take the matter
before the city for final acceptance or denial. The property owner and the land
surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Kentucky who certified the
calculations shall appear before the city to argue for final appeal. The
decision of the city will be final and not to be reconsidered until a time the
property owner can submit other suitable data.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in §
150.001 shall be subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   Violators of the state’s Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $100, imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense.
(KRS 318.990)
      (2)   Violators of the state’s Standards of Safety shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense.
      (3)   Violators of the state’s Building Code or the Uniform State
Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$10, nor more than $1,000, for each offense.
(KRS 198B.990(1))
Statutory Reference:
   Violations of State Building or Residential Code; penalty, see KRS 227.990
(1)
   (B)   Any person not complying with §
150.015 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $50 for each
offense. Each day which the house number or numerical address is not displayed
as herein required shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code KOC, § 950.3, passed 9-4-1979)
   (C)   If any person shall remove house numbers and/or address signs in
violation of §
150.016, he or she, upon conviction therefor, for each offense, may be fined
$100 or both and/or sentenced to up to 72 hours in jail, or both.
(Prior Code KOC, § 120.36, passed 3-2-1998)
   (D) A violation of §§
150.080 through
150.089 shall be punishable by a fine of $100, plus court costs, and each day
of violation after the expiration of the 30-day period provided in §
150.087 may constitute a separate offense for the purpose of calculating the
penalty.
(Ord. 2005-6, passed 4-4-2005)
   (E)   Any failure of refusal to comply with the provisions of §§
150.125 through
150.137 is hereby designated a violation. Each day that a violation of §§
150.125 through
150.137 continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any person,
firm or corporation who violates the terms of §§
150.125 through
150.137 shall be fined an amount not to exceed $250 for each offense.
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
APPENDIX A: REQUEST FOR CONSOLIDATION OF CONTIGUOUS PARCEL WATER QUALITY FEES
I,                                                                     hereby
certify and attest that I own the contiguous properties at
                                                     , located in the city,
also indicated with the following parcel identification numbers. Consolidate
these parcel identification numbers to the master parcel identification number
and account billed to the address below.
                                                                 Master Parcel
No.                                     
                                                                 Billing
Address:                                        
                                                                                                                                
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  
                                                   
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                     
As such I acknowledge and accept that I will be charged and will pay in a
timely manner all water quality user fees applied under the interim and regular
fee schedules according to City Code. I certify and attest
that this information is true and correct under penalty of applicable state and
local laws. I request that these water quality accounts be consolidated for the
purposes of water quality user fee billing.
Certifier and Applicant                              City Engineer (Witness)
Printed Name:                                                       Printed
Name:                              
Signature:
                                                            Signature:
                                   
Date:                                                                    Date:
                                          
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
APPENDIX B: REQUEST FOR CONSOLIDATION OF CONDOMINIUM WATER QUALITY FEES
I,                                                                    hereby
certify and attest that I represent the condominium properties at
                                                     , located in the city,
also indicated with the following parcel identification numbers. Consolidate
these parcel identification numbers to the master parcel identification number
and account billed to the address below.
                                                                 Master Parcel
No.                                     
                                                                 Billing
Address:                                        
                                                                                                                                
                                                  
                                                  
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                     
                                                      
As such I acknowledge and accept that I will be charged and will pay in a
timely manner all water quality user fees applied under the interim and regular
fee schedules according to City Code. I certify and attest
that this information is true and correct under penalty of applicable state and
local laws. I request that these water quality accounts be consolidated for the
purposes of water quality user fee billing.
Certifier and Applicant                              City Engineer (Witness)
Printed Name:                                                       Printed
Name:                              
Signature:
                                                            Signature:
                                   
Date:                                                                    Date:
                                          
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
APPENDIX C: ASSUMPTION OF PARTIAL WATER QUALITY BILL AGREEMENT
I,
                                                                                                    
own the following property:
Master Parcel No.
                                                                                                                     
Billing Address:
                                                                                                                        
Hereinafter referred to as the OWNER.
And I,
                                                                                               
own the following property:
Master Parcel No.
                                                                                                                     
Billing Address:
                                                                                                                        
Hereinafter referred to as the ASSIGNEE.
By virtue of this Agreement, the assignee agrees to pay for
                                                           
equivalent residential units (ERUs) of impervious area from the owner’s parcel
being described as to dimensions in Attachment “A”. The Attachment shall be
considered the legally controlling description of this agreement. This
impervious area ERU will be deducted from the owner’s property and added to the
assignee’s property impervious area measurement. Should the assignee fail to
make the payment then the responsibility will revert back to the owner. This
agreement may be terminated by either party by giving written notice to the
other party with thirty 30 days notice. The adjustment in water quality service
fees will not be reflected until the billing year following the year the
agreement is agreed to or terminated.
Owner                                        Assignee
Printed Name:                                                       Printed
Name:                                    
Signature:
                                                            Signature:
                                         
Date:                                                                    Date:
                                                 
(Ord. 2009-2, passed 6-1-2009)
CHAPTER 151: ZONING
Section
Regulations Adopted
   
151.01   Regulations adopted by reference
Amendments to Adopted Regulations
   
151.10   Design guidelines for the Scenic Corridor
Overlay Districts Establishment; Administration
   
151.20   Purpose
   
151.21   Definitions
   
151.22   Establishment of Overlay Commission
   
151.23   Powers and duties of the Commission
   
151.24   Application process and enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Additional amendments and other zoning-related legislation, see
TSO I
   Establishment of specific overlay districts, see
TSO I
REGULATIONS ADOPTED
§ 151.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city adopts in its entirety, as if set forth in full herein, the Oldham
County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as recorded in the Oldham County Clerk’s
office.
(Ord. 2007-1, passed 4-2-2007)
AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED REGULATIONS
§ 151.10 DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR THE SCENIC CORRIDOR.
   The following design guidelines shall be added to the Oldham County
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, Section 350-200; as applicable to the Scenic
Corridor described therein as KY 146 and KY 22, within the city limits.
   (A)   Applicability. The following design guidelines shall apply to all
property adjacent to KY 146 and KY 22, which lies within 150 feet from either
side of the centerline of each roadway, within the city.
   (B)   Architecture guidelines.
      (1)   Respect and enhance the existing mix of historic design styles and
encourage both restoration and adaptive re-use to maintain the character of the
Pewee Valley Area;
      (2)   Consider the incorporation of elements of nearby historic buildings
in new construction, if appropriate;
      (3)   Large featureless buildings should be discouraged;
      (4)   Promote careful building materials selection that complement and
enhance the rural character of the Pewee Valley Area;
      (5)   Building color scheme of balanced, complementary colors should be
emphasized where appropriate;
      (6)   New residential developments are encouraged to have buildings
facing the street;
      (7)   Emphasize fences to be compatible with the Pewee Valley rural
character such as “diamond” style fencing along the scenic corridors;
      (8)   Use native stone and brick walls and columns rather than
manufactured stone walls and columns for signature entrances and walls;
      (9)   Use weathering steel guardrails with wooden posts as the design
standard where guardrails are required or replaced in the Pewee Valley Area;
      (10)   Low-profile signature entrances along the scenic corridors should
complement the rural character of the corridor; lighting should be directed
toward the sign;
      (11)   For new developments, consider the use of incentives, to include
density bonuses, to provide landscape buffers and/or screening exceeding
existing county requirements, along scenic corridors;
      (12)   Parking lots should be screened by a landscape buffer or other
natural features from view along the scenic corridors;
      (13)   All new buildings should have pre-dominant facades facing the
corridor;
      (14)   Provide a sense of enclosure along the building front to form
street walls where appropriate through design elements including, but not
limited to, street trees, site features such as lampposts and benches. Parking
areas should be located in the rear;
      (15)   Buildings and sites should be designed to emphasize pedestrian
scale architecture and landscaping, while avoiding large expanses of paved
areas, large featureless buildings and monotonous or franchise-style
architecture;
      (16)   Circulation systems should be designed to efficiently facilitate
traffic flow yet discourage speeds and volumes that impede pedestrian activity
and safety such as a grid pattern with short block lengths;
      (17)   Common or shared access points are encouraged. To the maximum
extent feasible, common or shared delivery and service access should be
provided between adjacent parcels or buildings and to the rear of buildings.
Future access easements may be required;
      (18)   A coordinated pedestrian system should be provided throughout the
Mix-Use Village Centers, including connections between uses on the site and
between the site and adjacent properties and rights-of-way;
      (19)   Continuous sidewalks or other pedestrian facilities should be
provided between the primary entrances to buildings, all parking areas that
serve the buildings, pedestrian facilities on adjacent properties that extend
to the boundaries shared with the development, any public sidewalks along
perimeter streets or other community amenities or gathering spaces;
      (20)   Adequate parking should be provided, but excessive parking is
discouraged;
      (21)   The visual impact of parking should be minimized through the use
of interior landscaped islands and through dividing parking spaces into
groupings. The edge of parking lots should be screened through landscaping or
other methods, such as decorative fences;
      (22)   The design of streets, pedestrian ways, landscaping, lighting,
signage, lighting and street furniture should be coordinated and integrated
throughout the site;
      (23)   Vehicular streets and driveways should be designed to be
compatible with pedestrian ways to encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment.
The width of streets should be sensitive to pedestrian scale and building
height;
      (24)   Service areas and mechanical equipment should be screened from
public view;
      (25)   Buildings should be designed to respect and enhance the existing
mix of historic design styles;
      (26)   All sides of a building open to view by the public should display
a similar level of architecture quality and should be subdivided and
proportioned using features such as arcades, awnings, entrances, windows or
other such features;
      (27)   Building facades should have highly visible customer-service
entrances that feature arcades, arches, canopies, display window, distinctive
roof forms, landscaped features or overhangs. Primary entrances should face
streets on which they are located;
      (28)   Buildings should have well-defined rooflines with attention to
architectural detail;
      (29)   Building materials that complement and enhance the rural character
of Pewee Valley should be promoted. For the Pewee Valley Area, exterior
building materials should consist primarily of wood, brick and stone and should
incorporate design features of traditional village character such as paned
windows;
      (30)   Building height should reflect small village scale; and
      (31)   All lighting must conform to the city lighting ordinance (as may
be amended from time to time).
   (C)   Sign guidelines.
      (1)   Design unique Pewee Valley signs that identify the entries to Pewee
Valley.
      (2)   Design signs to identify the stream or creek and its watershed at
every bridge within the Pewee Valley Area.
      (3)   All signage should be integrated with building facade or supporting
structures.
      (4)   Signs attached to buildings are encouraged rather than free-
standing signs.
      (5)   Monument signs are preferred over post-mounted signs to avoid a
temporary and fragile appearance.
      (6)   Landscaping should be planted around the base of free-standing
signs.
      (7)   For multi-tenant buildings, all signage on the facade should be
consistent in color, size and elevation.
      (8)   Back lighting only. No electronic reader signs.
      (9)   All signage must conform to the Pewee Valley sign ordinance (as may
be amended from time to time).
   (D)   Landscaping guidelines.
      (1)   Perimeter landscaping that incorporate buffer-like improvements,
such as berms and dense plantings are encouraged.
      (2)   Parking lots that contain sufficient landscaping to visually soften
views of buildings and parked automobiles are encouraged.
      (3)   Open-space areas that incorporate dense or mature vegetation are
encouraged.
      (4)   Preserve existing trees and under story rather than new plantings
and mounding as the preferred means of buffering.
      (5)   Encourage the planting of three new trees at three inches in
caliper for each existing tree at eight inches in caliper which is removed
within the landscape buffer area.
      (6)   Plant random clusters of trees and other planting materials.
      (7)   Generally avoid a manicured or controlled appearance. Limit formal
landscaping to small/tight areas.
      (8)   Incorporate ground cover and/or bushes into landscaping.
      (9)   Emphasize naturalized berms (with plantings throughout the entire
contour of the berm).
      (10)   Provide a complementary mix of deciduous and evergreen material,
clustering varieties of species and sizes (canopies interspersed with under
stories, bushes and ground cover) and emphasize hardy native species.
      (11)   Where additional screening is desired or required to buffer
different land uses or to protect the scenic nature of an area, a predominance
of evergreens may be required.
   (E)   Environmental guidelines.
      (1)   Encourage use of green-space and limit impervious surface through
innovative materials such as pervious asphalt and concrete and other “green”
type of parking lot materials.
      (2)   Promote water quality through innovative use of “green” technology,
such as diverting rainwater through rain gardens (where possible), filtering
drainage through plant material prior to entering the drainage systems.
      (3)   Where practical, use of innovative design for drainage retention
through the use of “bio-swale” and “bio-retention basins” rather than
traditional drainage structures.
      (4)   Evaluating the effectiveness (in terms of water quality) of any
septic systems in place on the site and where applicable, upgrading those
systems to better protect water quality.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 4-6-2009)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS ESTABLISHMENT; ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.20 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Preservation. The city has well-established residential and business
districts, and these areas show the unique and significant development of the
city. It is the finding of the City Council that the distinctive and
significant character of these areas can only be maintained by protecting and
enhancing their architectural and cultural heritage by creating overlay
district regulations for design standards and development within those areas so
designated.
   (B)   Goals. The purpose of this chapter is to affect the goals as set forth
in the above declarations of public policy and specifically, but not
exclusively to:
      (1)   Accomplish the preservation, protection, and appropriate design
within the overlay districts having a special character or architectural or
cultural interest and value to this city;
      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values in such districts and the
whole city;
      (3)   Foster civic pride in the value of notable accomplishments of the
past;
      (4)   Strengthen the economy of the city;
      (5)   Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to residents, tourists
and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to business; and
      (6)   Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, and interest
of the city.
(Ord. 7, Series 2022, passed 11-2-2022)
§ 151.21 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Any construction, replacement or change to the exterior of a
building or structure which requires a building permit, demolition permit, or
development plan approval.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The permit, issued by the Overlay District
Commission, which gives its approval for work to be done in the overlay
district.
   COMMISSION. The Pewee Valley Overlay District Commission.
   DEMOLITION. Any act that destroys in whole or part a landmark or a building
or structure in a historic district or on a landmark site.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. Any work, the purpose of which is to
correct deterioration or to prevent deterioration of a designated overlay
district property. The work shall restore the property to its appearance prior
to deterioration or shall result in the protection of its appearance. The work
shall involve the use of the same, or equivalent, building materials or as
close as possible to the original.
   PROPERTY. All structures including fences and buildings.
(Ord. 7, Series 2022, passed 11-2-2022)
§ 151.22 ESTABLISHMENT OF OVERLAY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established the City of Pewee Valley
Overlay District Commission (hereinafter “Commission”). The Commission shall
consist of five members. Three members shall be Council members who are
currently serving on the City Council. Two members shall be residents of the
city who have demonstrated interest in the unique and significant development
of the city. The Mayor of the city shall nominate for the approval of the City
Council all the members of the Pewee Valley Overlay District Commission.
Whenever possible, the Pewee Valley Overlay District Commission should include
members with training or experience in a preservation-related profession:
architecture, history, archeology, architectural history, planning or related
fields. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but they
will be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (B)   Terms of office. The terms of office of the members shall be two
years. Each member shall serve until the appointment and qualification of his
or her successor. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled within 60 days.
When a vacancy occurs during a term of office, it shall be filled within 60
days, and the person selected shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of
the term.
   (C)   Officers. The Commission shall elect members to serve as Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and Secretary. The Chairperson shall preside at the meetings
of the Commission and shall be spokesperson for the Commission. In his or her
absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall perform these duties. The Secretary shall
prepare minutes of the Commission’s meetings which shall be available for
public inspection.
   (D)   Conflict of interest. No member of the Commission shall vote on any
matter that may affect the property, income, or business of that member and
every member shall be subject to the city ethics ordinance, including submittal
of a financial disclosure statement.
   (E)   Meetings. The Commission shall adopt and make public rules for the
transaction of its business and shall hold public meetings as needed. All
meetings shall require a quorum of three members, the Chairperson reserving the
right to vote. All meetings shall have a previously available agenda and shall
comply with the State Open Meetings Statute, KRS 61.805.
(Ord. 7, Series 2022, passed 11-2-2022)
§ 151.23 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   Specific powers. The Commission shall take necessary and appropriate action
to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. These actions may include the
following:
   (A)   Establishing overlay districts. No overlay district may be established
within the city unless the following conditions have been met:
      (1)   The establishment of any overlay district shall begin with the
Commission’s recommendation and finding of fact to the City Council.
      (2)   The recommendation of the Commission shall include a listing of all
the individual parcels in the area to be included in the area proposed, a
recommendation of the design guidelines and regulations to be imposed upon the
area to be protected and findings detailing the reasons why the Commission
believes a certain area should be protected, based upon the following criteria:
         (a)   The value of the site as a reminder of the cultural or
archeological heritage of the location as a site of significant local, state,
or national event, or identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the city;
         (b)   The quality of the site’s architecture and architectural style
is valuable for the study of a period, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
         (c)   The character of the site is an established and geographically
definable neighborhood, united by culture, continuity of sites, architectural
style or physical plan and development; and
         (d)   The desire of the city to the extent possible, preserve the
extensive green space and tree canopy that has characterized the development of
the city area and has contributed to the city’s designation as a Tree City USA
for many years.
      (3)   The City Council shall act upon the recommendation of the
Commission by either accepting the recommendation, denying the recommendation,
or accepting the recommendation with modifications. Such action shall be
memorialized in an ordinance which meets the requirements of KRS 82.650 to
82.670. Prior to the second reading of said ordinance, the city will hold the
public hearing required by KRS 82.650 to 82.670 and shall send a copy of the
draft ordinance to the Oldham County Planning Commission.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the required public hearing the city shall
determine whether to impose the overlay district by deciding whether to approve
the final ordinance.
      (5)   The Commission shall notify each owner in an overlay district of
the designation and shall arrange that the designation of a property as part of
an overlay district be filed by the Oldham County Clerk in the land records by
owner’s name and tax district lot and block number. The Commission shall also
give notice of the designation to the Oldham County Planning Commission.
   (B)   Administering overlay districts. The Pewee Valley Overlay District
Commission is hereby delegated the authority and responsibility for the
administration of any designated overlay district, in accordance with KRS
82.650 to 82.670 and the following:
      (1)   A certificate of appropriateness from the Commission shall be
required before a person may undertake the following actions affecting the
exterior of any property located within a designated overlay district:
         (a)   Construction requiring a building permit;
         (b)   Demolition requiring a demolition permit;
         (c)   Relocation or moving a structure; and
         (d)   Any project requiring a development plan approval, conditional
use permit or site disturbance permit.
      (2)   Any determination of a certificate of appropriateness shall be in
writing and shall be based upon the design guidelines and regulations that were
adopted by the city when the overlay district was established by ordinance. The
Commission shall prepare and keep on file, available for public inspection, a
written annual report of its activities, cases, decisions, qualifications of
members and other work.
      (3)   Overlay district regulations shall not conflict with the zoning
regulations for the city and shall not permit uses prohibited by the underlying
zoning regulations, nor prohibit uses allowed by the underlying zoning
regulations. Overlay district regulations shall supplement the underlying
zoning regulations by establishing additional design standards, guidelines, and
criteria for development with the overlay district to reserve, conserve, or
protect the historical, cultural, architectural, aesthetic, or other
distinctive characteristics of the overlay district.
      (4)   Ordinary repairs and maintenance may be undertaken without a
certificate of appropriateness; provided, the work does not require building
permit, demolition permit, moving a structure, or any project requiring a
development plan approval, conditional use permit or site disturbance permit.
      (5)   When an applicant wishes to demolish a building or structure in an
overlay district, the Commission shall negotiate with the applicant to see if
an alternative to demolition can be found. The Commission may ask interested
individuals and organizations for assistance in seeking an alternative to
demolition and in obtaining estimates on rehabilitation costs for the
threatened building. The Commission may decide that a building or structure may
be demolished if it does not contribute to the district or is too badly damaged
to repair. The Commission shall study the question of economic hardship for the
applicant and shall determine whether property can be put to reasonable
beneficial use without the approval of the demolition application.
      (6)   When a property is damaged by fire, a storm or other unexpected
event, the owner or tenant may receive approval from the Chairperson or Vice-
Chairperson of the Commission for work to be done in response to this
emergency. In situations requiring temporary action, an owner may do work to
protect temporarily his or her property from further damage; provided, he or
she reports this work to the Commission within ten business days.
      (7)   Any applicant denied a permit under KRS 82.650 to 82.670 shall
first have right of appeal to the City Council. The decision of the City
Council is then appealable to Oldham Circuit Court.
(Ord. 7, Series 2022, passed 11-2-2022)
§ 151.24 APPLICATION PROCESS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Application. Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness shall supply the following information and be subject to the
following process:
      (1)   Applicant shall supply the Commission with their full contact
information, drawings of the proposed work, photographs of the existing
building or site and adjacent properties, information about the building
materials to be used, specifics about the construction and any other
information needed or requested by the Commission to make the determinations
required by this chapter.
      (2)   The Commission shall hold a hearing on each certificate of
appropriateness within 30 days after a completed application is received by the
Commission. Applicants shall be given prior notice of the public meetings
relating to their application and shall be given the opportunity to present
evidence in favor of their application.
      (3)   The Commission shall approve or disapprove each application, and
its decision shall be in writing with findings of fact supporting its decision
using the criteria contained in this subchapter and the design guidelines for
the district. The Commission may suggest modifications to an application and
may then approve a certificate of appropriateness providing for revisions in
the plans submitted.
   (B)   Enforcement. The regulations of the overlay district(s) shall be
enforced by the city and the Commission as follows:
      (1)   A certificate of appropriateness shall remain valid for one year
after it is issued. Work is required to start before the end of the one-year
period. If the approved work has not been completed within two years after the
certificate of appropriateness was issued, the Commission shall review the
situation and may require an application for a certificate of appropriateness
for the work that remains to be done.
      (2)   All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness
shall conform to the provisions of such certificate. It shall be the
responsibility of the city and the Commission to inspect from time to time any
work being performed to assure such compliance.
      (3)   Stop work, injunction. In the event any construction is being
performed without the required certificate of appropriateness, the city shall
issue a stop work order. All work shall cease on the designated property. The
Commission shall meet with the owner or tenant to resolve the problem. The City
Attorney may seek in Circuit Court injunction and any other appropriate relief
in order that the intent of this chapter shall be carried out.
      (4)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500 per day. Each day a
violation continues shall be a separate violation, up to the following maximum
penalties: $1,000 for a first offense, $2,000 for a second similar offense
occurring within 12 months, $3,000 for a third similar offence occurring within
12 months.
(Ord. 7, Series 2022, passed 11-2-2022)
CHAPTER 152: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
   
152.01   Intent and declaration of public policy
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Administration
   
152.04   Permit procedure
   
152.05   Removal of signs
   
152.06   Variances
   
152.07   Prohibited signs
   
152.08   Sign illumination
   
152.09   Material and style
   
152.10   Temporary sign requiring a sign permit
   
152.11   Permanent sign requiring a permit
   
152.12   Signs not requiring a permit
   
152.13   Nonconforming signs
   
152.14   Protection of First Amendment rights
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 INTENT AND DECLARATION OF PUBLIC POLICY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the use of signs which are
compatible with their surroundings, appropriate to the activity which displays
the sign, expressive of the identity of the individual activities and the
community as a whole and legible in the circumstances they are seen.
   (B)   The City Council wishes to promote safety of persons and property by
providing that signs do not create traffic hazards by distracting or confusing
motorists, impairing the ability of motorists to see pedestrians, other
vehicles, obstacles or to read traffic signs, that signs do not create a hazard
due to collapse, fire, collision, decay or abandonment and that they promote
the aesthetics, safety, health, morals and general welfare and protection of
adequate light and air within the city by regulation of their posting,
displaying, erection, use and maintenance.
   (C)   It is the further intent of the City Council to promote the efficient
transfer of general public and commercial information through the use of signs,
to protect the public welfare and to enhance the overall appearance and
economic value of the landscape and preservation of the unique natural
environment that distinguishes the city.
   (D)   These sign regulations shall apply to all exterior and window signs in
the city.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions as set out in the Oldham
County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, relating to signs, as may be modified
from time to time, shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall have the responsibility and full authority to administer and
enforce all provisions of this chapter, through the city’s designated
enforcement official or officer. The Mayor shall delegate primary enforcement
of this chapter to the appropriate city official, such as the Chief of Police,
City Attorney or other authorized city official as appropriate.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.04 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No sign or sign structure, except as provided in §
152.12 shall be erected, displayed, altered, relocated or replaced until a sign
permit has been issued. For the purpose of this chapter, all signs are
considered accessory uses of real property and shall be located on the premises
of the principal use to which they pertain.
   (B)   Applications for sign permits shall be submitted on a form provided by
the city, shall be accompanied by the requisite review fee and shall contain or
have attached at a minimum the following information in either written or
graphic form:
      (1)   Application date;
      (2)   Name, address and telephone number of the sign owner and, if
different, the owner of the land on which the sign will be erected;
      (3)   Address of the property where the sign or sign structure will be
erected;
      (4)   Signature(s) of the sign owner and, if different, the owner of the
land on which the sign will be displayed;
      (5)   Location of the sign on the property;
      (6)   Type of sign (for example, monument or wall) and general
description of structural design and construction materials;
      (7)   Drawings of the proposed sign which shall contain specifications
indicating color samples, height, perimeter and area dimensions, means of
support, method of illumination if any and any other significant aspect of the
proposed sign; and
      (8)   Any other information requested by the City Administrator in order
to carry out the purpose and intent of these regulations.
   (C)   The permit review fee as required by this section shall be set
periodically by the City Council and shall be set initially at $20.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.05 REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The city may remove or order the removal of any sign constructed after
the enactment of this chapter which is not in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter. Ten days notice shall be given to the sign and/or land owner
prior to removal.
   (B)   If the city shall find any sign an immediate peril to persons or
property, the sign shall be removed. If the city cannot locate the sign owner
or lessor for immediate removal of the sign, the city shall have the sign
removed by city employees.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.06 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The City Council may grant variances to allow for variations to the
criteria specified in this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council may consider applications for variances only in
situations where the applicant has been denied a sign permit by the city. The
City Council may grant a variance if it finds that the following physical
conditions exist:
      (1)   The zoning lot on which an activity is located is unusually shaped
or exhibits unusual topography; and
      (2)   Such physical characteristics prevent legal signage from
identifying the activity as compared to legal signage identifying other
activities in the immediate area.
   (C)   The Mayor, at his or her discretion, may grant a variance for a
temporary sign which will exist for a period not to exceed 14 days.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.07 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following types of signs are prohibited unless specifically stated
otherwise in this chapter:
   (A)   Swinging signs;
   (B)   Snip signs;
   (C)   Banners (except as permitted in §
152.10);
   (D)   Off-premises signs;
   (E)   A sign which contains any moving, flashing, animated lights, visible
moving or moveable parts, or giving the appearance of animation;
   (F)   Roof signs;
   (G)   Vehicle signs;
   (H)   Any sign which emits a sound, odor or visible matter;
   (I)   Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required
door, window, fire escape or other required exit way;
   (J)   Any sign and/or sign structure which obstructs the view of, may be
confused with or purports to be a governmental or traffic direction/safety
sign;
   (K)   Any sign or sign structure other than free-standing and vertical wall
extension, any portion of which extends above the parapet, building roof line
or canopy against which the sign is located;
   (L)   Signs using the words stop, danger or any other word, phrase, symbol
or character in a manner that misleads, confuses or distracts a vehicle driver;
   (M)   Moving message and time and temperature signs;
   (N)   Except as otherwise provided, no sign whether temporary or permanent,
except by a public agency, is permitted within any street or highway right-of-
way;
   (O)   Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, rocks or other
natural features, telephone or utility poles or painted on the roofs of
buildings visible from any public thoroughfare;
   (P)   Subdivision identification ensigns;
   (Q)   Abandoned or dilapidated signs;
   (R)   Any sign which exhibits statements, words or pictures of obscene,
pornographic or immoral subjects;
   (S)   Portable signs (except those denoting personal events such as
birthdays and anniversaries which are not in place for more than five
consecutive days);
   (T)   Signs affixed to a private residence or dwelling or displayed upon the
grounds thereof, except one personal identification sign not exceeding two
square feet and one non-illuminated “For Sale” or “For Rent” sign not exceeding
seven and one-half square feet;
   (U)   Inflatable signs;
   (V)   Real estate pointer (arrow) signs;
   (W)   Canopy signs;
   (X)   Painted wall signs; and
   (Y)   Rotating signs.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.08 SIGN ILLUMINATION.
   (A)   Electrical requirements. Electrical requirements pertaining to signs
shall be as prescribed under the electrical codes of the Commonwealth of
Kentucky and Oldham County, as they may change from time to time, and as they
have been adopted by the city.
   (B)   Permissible means. If illuminated, signs shall be illuminated only by
the following means:
      (1)   By a white, steady stationary light of reasonable intensity
shielded and directed solely at the sign;
      (2)   By white interior light; and/or
      (3)   Eight sources to illuminate signs shall be shielded from all
adjacent residential buildings and streets and shall not be of such brightness
so as to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or auto drivers or so as to
create a nuisance to adjacent residential districts and shall comply with the
applicable restrictions (for example, off premises spill-over into residential
area) of §
150.01.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.09 MATERIAL AND STYLE.
   (A)   Signs shall not have light reflecting backgrounds but may use light
reflecting lettering.
   (B)   The various parts of a sign shall be compatible.
   (C)   A multi-faced sign shall have the same name and same message on all
used faces.
   (D)   It is the intent of this chapter to encourage signs of standard
geometric shapes.
   (E)   Except in the C1 zoning district, signs shall not be of or contain a
commercial sponsor name or motif (soda bottles, hamburgers or other figures) or
other outdoor commercial displays.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.10 TEMPORARY SIGN REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Temporary commercial and residential construction/development
phase signs shall be limited to two signs per development, not to exceed one
per street entrance. The maximum width shall be four feet; the maximum area
shall be 16 square feet, with a maximum of two sides per sign.
      (2)   Removal of signs from single-family subdivisions shall be required
when 80% of the lots are sold.
   (B)   Banners to be placed above the public right-of-way advertising an
event to occur within the city that is sponsored by the city or a non-profit
organization based in the city or affiliated with a similar organization within
the city.
      (1)   Should the city deny a permit under this section, the applicant may
appeal to the City Council.
      (2)   Any banner placed under this section shall remain in place for no
more than 30 consecutive days and at its lowest point above the public right-
of-way shall be no less than 13 and one-half feet above the right-of-way.
      (3)   Banners may only be permitted within the CN, C1 and O zoning
districts.
   (C)   Temporary banners are allowed, with permit, for any business. No free-
standing banners are permitted, all banners must be affixed to the building. No
business shall have banners that collectively exceed one square foot for every
lineal foot of the building frontage. The permit may be revoked if the
appearance of the banner becomes a safety hazard or is in disrepair. Each
permit is good for one year, to periodically display banners attached to the
building.
   (D)   Temporary directional signs for walks and runs are allowed in the
right of way for limited time for a specific event
   (E)   Churches and schools shall not be exempted from the sign ordinance,
however, they shall be subject to special regulation in regard to their public
events as follows:
      (1)   Total event signage (including, but not limited to, fish fry,
picnic, festival) shall be limited to a total of 32 square feet for all
signage;
      (2)   No event signage shall be placed prior to 30 days before the event
and must be removed within three days after the event;
      (3)   All signage must be placed on school/church property, no off-
premise signage allowed, unless the sign has been historically placed in the
same off-site location without compliant from the landowner for more that ten
consecutive years; and
      (4)   Additional temporary, permanent, or semi-permanent (recurring)
signage for churches and schools may be considered and approved, but only after
application to the city and only on a case by case basis; provided that the
city specifically finds that the additional signage, (a) will not unduly
detract from the aesthetics of the community, (b) is limited, effective and
safe, and (c) will not tend to encourage sign proliferation.
   (F)   The city maintains a marquee sign on which events are announced. The
guidelines for use by the public are as follows:
      (1)   The city shall have priority over all other proposed uses by other
organizations. Next in priority are other non-profit organizations, which may
also ask to use the marquee on a first come first served basis;
      (2)   The city reserves the right to deny any request; and
      (3)   All requests must be made 21 days in advance.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-1, passed 2-3-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-
3, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 152.11 PERMANENT SIGN REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Permits shall be required for allowed permanent signs that conform to the
following criteria.
   (A)   Within the AG-1; CO-1; T; R-1; R-1A; R-2; R-2A; R-3 and R-4A. The
Oldham County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to
time, shall determine what signage is allowed within the AG-1; CO-1; T; R-l; R-
1A; R-2; R-2A; R-3 and R-4A zoning classifications, with the exception that
within all those districts within Pewee Valley, the only type of sign allowed
shall be monument and/or wall/marquee type and the height of signs is capped at
ten feet. The setback and maximum sign area from any monument type sign shall
be that allowed under the Oldham County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may
be amended from time to time, for the AG-1; CO-1; T; R-l; R-l A; R-2; R-2A; R-
3 and R-4A zoning classification.
   (B)   Within the R-4 zoning classification. The Oldham County Comprehensive
Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, shall determine what
signage is allowed within the R-4 zoning classification, with the exception
that within any R-4 districts within Pewee Valley, the only type of sign
allowed shall be monument and/or wall/marquee type and the height of signs is
capped at ten feet. The setback and maximum sign area from any monument type
sign shall be that allowed under the Oldham County Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, for the R-4 zoning
classification under free standing signs. The setback and maximum sign area
from any wall/marquee type sign shall be that allowed under the Oldham County
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, for the R-
4 zoning classification under wall signs.
   (C)   Within O-l; O-2 and C-N zoning districts. The Oldham County
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, shall
determine what signage is allowed within the O-l; O-2 and C-N classification,
with the exception that within any O-l; O-2 and C-N districts within Pewee
Valley, the only type of sign allowed shall be monument and/or wall/marquee
type and the height of signs is capped at ten feet. The setback and maximum
sign area from any monument type sign shall be that allowed under the Oldham
County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, for
the O-l; O-2 and C-N zoning classification under free standing signs. The
setback and maximum sign area from any wall/marquee type sign shall be that
allowed under the Oldham County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be
amended from time to time, for the O-l; O-2 and C-N zoning classification under
wall signs.
   (D)   Within all the C-1; C-2; C-3 and C-4 zoning districts. The Oldham
County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time,
shall determine what signage is allowed within the C-l; C-2; C-3 and C-4 zoning
districts, with the exception that within all C-l; C-2; C-3 and C-4 districts
within Pewee Valley, the only type of sign allowed shall be monument and/or
wall/marquee type and the height of signs is capped at ten feet. The setback
and maximum sign area from any monument type sign shall be that allowed under
the Oldham County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time
to time, for C-l; C-2; C-3 and C-4 zoning districts under free-standing signs.
The setback and maximum sign area from any wall marquee type sign shall be that
allowed under the Oldham County Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as may be
amended from time to time, for C-l; C-2; C-3 and C-4 zoning district under wall
signs. Additionally, the following limitations apply.
      (1)   Single commercial establishments. Single commercial establishments
shall be limited to one sign per street frontage not to exceed two signs.
      (2)   Retail/shopping center. Centers with four or more establishments
planned as an integrated development shall be authorized to erect signs based
on the following criteria:
         (a)   Center identification signs shall be limited to one monument
type sign per street entrance not to exceed two signs per development;
         (b)   Signs shall be of monument and/or wall/marquee type;
         (c)   The minimum area of the sign shall be ten square feet, the
maximum area shall be 30 square feet, and maximum height shall be five feet;
and
         (d)   Backlighting and indirect lighting are recommended. Internal
lighting is allowed when that lighting illuminates sign graphics (lettering and
logos) only and the remainder of the sign is opaque (transmitting no light).
      (3)   Sidewalk sandwich signs. Sidewalk sandwich signs shall be limited
to one per business. The height cannot exceed four feet when standing and two
and one-half feet in overall width. The sign must be placed within 12 feet of
the front entrance of the business establishment.
      (4)   Gasoline filling stations.
         (a)   Petroleum products pumps and dispensers which are within view of
a public way shall be permitted to display only information required by law
and, in addition, the brand name and type of product being dispensed.
         (b)   Premises which dispense retail bulk petroleum products by pump
shall be permitted one additional sign on the premises announcing the price per
gallon of no more than four products with characters not exceeding 12 inches in
height. In lieu of the one additional sign permitted above, the price per
gallon may be displayed on each individual pump structure with characters not
exceeding six inches in height.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.12 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Permits shall not be required for allowed signs conforming with the
following specified criteria.
   (A)   Real estate signs - residential.
      (1)   Residential real estate signs shall be limited to one per lot.
      (2)   The size and height shall be limited 30 inches by 36 inches.
      (3)   Signs must be removed within five days of closing.
   (B)   Builder identification sign.
      (1)   Builder identification signs shall be limited to one per property.
      (2)   The size and height shall be limited to 30 inches by 36 inches.
      (3)   The sign must be removed within five days after the closing.
   (C)   Commercial real estate or lease signs.
      (1)   Retail/shopping centers and office complexes shall be limited to
one sign per street entrance to the development.
      (2)   Zoning lots with one commercial establishment shall be limited to
one sign per vacancy.
      (3)   The maximum size and height of freestanding signs shall be 12
square feet and three feet in height.
      (4)   Signs erected for multi-tenant developments alone street frontage
for the purpose of indicating the availability of property for sale or lease
must be removed when the development has reached 80% occupancy. All other
categories of commercial property real estate or lease sign must be removed
within five days of the closing or lease of the property.
   (D)   Political signs.
      (1)   The maximum size shall be six square feet.
      (2)   Political signs shall not be posted more than 30 days prior to the
election to which the sign relates and shall be removed within five days after
the election to which the sign pertains.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.13 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Any sign that meets all legal requirements when constructed but that
is not in compliance with this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming sign.
   (B)   Nonconforming signs must be removed if:
      (1)   Fifty percent of the sign has been damaged or destroyed. At that
point, the sign must be erected in conformance with these regulations. If the
damage or destruction is less than 50%, the sign may be restored but shall not
be enlarged in any manner;
      (2)   The sign has not been used for a period of six months or longer;
      (3)   The sign is relocated on the same or different premises; or
      (4)   There are any modifications to the sign or its message other than
routine maintenance.
   (C)   The city may remove or order the removal of any sign which falls into
categories set forth in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(4) above, provided,
however, that the city shall give ten days notice of the intent to remove the
sign to the owner of the sign and to the owner of the property upon which the
sign is constructed. The city may, following the notice, remove the sign at the
city’s expense and bill the owner for all costs, such costs constituting a lien
on the property of the sign’s owner until the owner reimburses the city for
such expense.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.14 PROTECTION OF FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS.
   Any sign, display or device allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu
of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not
direct attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service
for sale, and that complies with all other requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not otherwise provided shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $100 for each offense. Each day the offense exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-3-2008)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Regulations Adopted
   
153.01   Regulations adopted by reference
Cross-reference:
   Additional amendments and other subdivision-related legislation, see
T.S.O. IV
REGULATIONS ADOPTED
§ 153.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city adopts in its entirety, as if set forth in full herein, the Oldham
County Subdivision Regulations, as recorded in the Oldham County Clerk’s
office.
(Ord. 2007-2, passed 4-2-2007)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONING CHANGES
      
II.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   DEDICATIONS AND ACCEPTANCES
      
IV.   SUBDIVISION CHANGES
TABLE I: ZONING CHANGES
Prior Code KOC No. Ord. No. Date Passed P & Z Docket No. Description
Prior Code KOC Ord. No.       Date Passed P & Z Docket No. Description
No.
                                                           Adopting,
                                                           ratifying, and
                                                           affirming the
                                                           zoning maps, the
                                                           Comprehensive
                                                           Zoning Regulations
920.2          1974-          8-26-1974   –              and Land Use map
                                                           of the Oldham
                                                           County - LaGrange
                                                           - PeeWee Valley -
                                                           Crestwood Planning
                                                           and Zoning
                                                           Commission
                                                           Amending Zoning
920.3          1977-          11-7-1977   –              Regulations
                                                           regarding
                                                           breezeways
                                                           Amending Zoning
                                                           Regulations
920.4          1982-          5-3-1982    –              regarding mobile
                                                           homes, off street
                                                           parking
                                                           Amending Zoning
                                                           Regulations
920.5          1983-          8-1-1983    –              regarding
                                                           veterinarian
                                                           equipment
                                                           Amending Zoning
920.6          1984-          8-6-1984    –              Regulations
                                                           regarding building
                                                           permits, fees
                                                           Rezoning the tract
920.7          1985-          8-5-1985    –              know as the Bishop
                                                           property
                                                           Amending Zoning
920.8          1987-          3-2-1987    –              Regulations
                                                           regarding portable
                                                           signs
                                                           Amending Zoning
920.9          1987-          12-2-1987   –              Regulations
                                                           regarding zoning
                                                           maps
                                                           Rezoning a .404-
920.12         1995-3         5-1-1995    –              acre tract of land
                                                           located at 406
                                                           Central Avenue
                                                           Proposal to amend
920.14         –            –         –              Zoning Regulations
                                                           regarding banners,
                                                           streamers, signs
                                                           Amending the
                                                           dimension and area
                                                           requirements for
930.1          –            10-6-1997   –              R-1 residential
                                                           districts
                                                           governing minimum
                                                           lot size and
                                                           minimum lot width
                                                           Rezoning a 26-acre
                                                           tract of land
920.15         1998-11        11-3-1998   –              located on the
                                                           south side of
                                                           Floydsburg Road
                                                           (Pike property)
                                                           Amending Zoning
                                                           Regulations to
920.16         2001-          9-4-2001    –              support and
                                                           encourage
                                                           agriculture
                                                           Amending Zoning
920.17         2001-          9-4-2001    –              Regulations
                                                           regarding firing
                                                           ranges
                                                           Amending Zoning
                                                           Regulations
920.18         2004-          4-5-2004    –              regarding scenic
                                                           corridors, adult
                                                           business
                                                           Amending Zoning
                                                           Regulations
                                                           regarding new
–            2004-6         10-2-2004   –              residential
                                                           development and
                                                           adequate public
                                                           school facilities
                                                           Rezoning the tract
–            2005-1         2-7-2005    PZ-04-030        of land located at
                                                           7602 KY 22
                                                           Amending Zoning
                                                           Regulations
–            2005-2         2-7-2005    PZ-04-026        regarding
                                                           resubmittal of
                                                           denied
                                                           applications
                                                           Amending Zoning
–            2005-3         2-7-2005    PZ-04-025        Regulations
                                                           regarding Planned
                                                           Unit Developments
                                                           Amending the
                                                           dimension and area
                                                           requirements for
–            2005-4         2-7-2005    –              R-1 residential
                                                           districts
                                                           governing minimum
                                                           lot size and
                                                           minimum lot width
                                                           Amending Zoning
–            2005-7         5-2-2005    –              Regulations
                                                           regarding
                                                           administration
                                                           Regulations signs
–            2005-14        12-5-2005   –              within the
                                                           Interstate 71
                                                           Corridor
                                                           Amending Zoning
–            2006-9         12-4-2006   –              Regulations
                                                           regarding road
                                                           capacity standards
                                                           Repealing and
                                                           replacing the
–            2007-1         4-2-2007    PZ-06-045        existing Oldham
                                                           County
                                                           Comprehensive
                                                           Zoning Ordinance
–            2009-3         3-2-2009    PZ-08-013        Amending the
                                                           Zoning Regulations
                                                           Amending the
                                                           Zoning Regulations
–            2009-4         4-6-2009    –              regarding design
                                                           guidelines for the
                                                           scenic corridor
                                                           Adopting the
                                                           Oldham County
                                                           Comprehensive
–            2010-6         11-1-2010   PZ-10-006        Zoning Regulations
                                                           changes to R4A
                                                           Residential
                                                           District
                                                           Adopting the
                                                           Oldham County
                                                           Comprehensive
–            2010-7         11-1-2010   PZ-10-009        Zoning Regulations
                                                           regarding access
                                                           management
                                                           standards
                                                           Adopting the
                                                           Oldham County
                                                           Comprehensive
–            2011-4         7-6-2011    PZ-11-005        Zoning Regulations
                                                           regarding changes
                                                           to sidewalk
                                                           regulations
                                                           Repealing and
                                                           replacing certain
–            2016-04        11-7-2016   –              sections of the
                                                           Oldham County
                                                           Comprehensive
                                                           Zoning Ordinance
                                                           Repealing and
                                                           replacing certain
–            2018-3         7-2-2018    –              sections of the
                                                           Oldham County
                                                           Zoning Ordinance
                                                           Adopting a
–            2019-5         12-2-2019   –              Comprehensiv e
                                                           Zoning Ordinance
                                                           Update
                                                           Approving and
–            2020-5         8-3-2020    –              regulating short-
                                                           term rentals
                                                           Banning short-term
–            2021-1         2-1-2021    –              rentals, repealing
                                                           Ord. 5-2020
                                                           Approval of
                                                           rezoning, approval
                                                           of a development
                                                           plan and binding
–            2021-3         4-5-2021    PZ-20-016 & 17   elements for
                                                           property located
                                                           at 7400 & 7607
                                                           Friendship Drive,
                                                           containing 47.07
                                                           acres
                                                           Repealing and
                                                           replacing the
–            2021-4         3-3-2021    –              existing Oldham
                                                           County
                                                           Comprehensive Plan
                                                           Establishing a
                                                           Pewee Valley
–            7, Series 2022 11-2-2022   –              Overlay District
                                                           Commission and
                                                           regulations
                                                           Establishing a
–            8, Series 2022 12-7-2022   –              Pewee Valley Town
                                                           Center Overlay
                                                           District
                                                           Establishing a
–            1, Series 2023 6-7-2023    –              Pewee Valley
                                                           Commercial Overlay
                                                           District
                                                           Adopting a
–            5, Series 2023 9-6-2023    –              Comprehensive
                                                           Zoning Ordinance
                                                           update
                                                           Amending short-
–            7, Series 2023 12-6-2023   –              term rentals
                                                           regulations
                                                        
 
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Prior Code KOC No. Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Prior Code KOC No. Ord. No.            Date Passed Description
                                                   Participation in Law
320.3              1980-2              4-7-1980    Enforcement Foundation
                                                   Program Fund
610.1              1980-9              9-2-1980    Cable television franchise
                                                   agreement
                                                   Oldham County Planning and
920.11             1993-9              12-6-1993   Zoning joint planning unit
                                                   agreement amended
                                                   Franchise agreement between
610.5              1996-1              5-6-1996    the city and TCI TKR of
                                                   Jefferson County, Inc.
                                                   Cable television franchise
610.6              1998-7              5-4-1998    agreement; assignment from
                                                   TCI TKR, Inc., to Intermedia
                                                   Partners of Kentucky, L.P.
                                                   Approving joint and
                                                   cooperative program;
240.4              2003-2              4-7-2003    participation in Kentucky
                                                   Municipal Risk Management
                                                   Association
                                                   Approving lease agreement
–                2004-7              11-1-2004   with Kentucky League of
                                                   Cities Funding Trust
                                                   Relating to the approval of
–                Mun. Order 3-1-2010 1-2010      the two-year extension
                                                   option to the city's garbage
                                                   contract
                                                   Relating to the approval of
                                                   an agreement between the
–                Mun. Order 2-2010   3-1-2010    Commonwealth of Kentucky
                                                   Transportation Cabinet and
                                                   the city for the
                                                   construction of a sidewalk
                                                   Approving the execution of a
                                                   municipal aid co-op program
                                                   contract between the city
–                Res. –            5-3-2010    and the Commonwealth of
                                                   Kentucky, Transportation
                                                   Cabinet, Department of Rural
                                                   and Municipal Aid
                                                   Relating to the approval of
                                                   an agreement between the
–                Mun. Order 3-2010   11-1-2010   Commonwealth of Kentucky,
                                                   Transportation Cabinet, and
                                                   the city for installation of
                                                   railroad crossing gates
                                                   Approving the execution of a
                                                   municipal aid co-op program
                                                   contract between the city
–                Res. –            6-1-2011    and the Commonwealth of
                                                   Kentucky, Transportation
                                                   Cabinet, Department of Rural
                                                   and Municipal Aid
–                2012-1              2-6-2012    Approving a lease for the
                                                   financing of a project
                                                   Repealing and replacing an
–                2020-2              - -2020     ordinance relating to cable
                                                   television services
                                                 
 
Cross-reference:
   Franchise regulations, see
Ch. 113
TABLE III: DEDICATIONS AND ACCEPTANCES
 
Prior Code KOC No. Ord. No. Date Passed Description
620.4              1967-    5-1-1967    Dedicating Rebel Drive and Colonel Way
620.9              1986-2   4-7-1986    Dedicating Rosswoods Drive, Ridgewood
                                        Drive and Mount Mercy Place
                  2019-4   11-4-2019   Accepting and dedicating Rest Cottage
                                        Lane.
                                      
 
 
 
TABLE IV: SUBDIVISION CHANGES
 
Prior Code KOC No. Ord. No. Date Passed P & Z Docket No. Description
                                                         Adopting the Oldham
920.13             1996-    3-4-1996    –              Subdivision
                                                         Regulations
                                                         Amending Subdivision
930.2              –      11-2-1998   –              Regulations regarding
                                                         sidewalks
                                                         Amending Subdivision
–                2006-9   12-4-2006   –              Regulations regarding
                                                         road capacity
                                                         standards
                                                         Repealing and
                                                         replacing the existing
–                2007-2   4-2-2007    –              Oldham County
                                                         Subdivision
                                                         Regulations
                                                      
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code KOC
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Section Code Section
KRS Section        Code Section
6.050              32.48
6.955 - 6.975      33.04
15.520             36.04
16.220             72.22
Ch. 18A            112.03
18A.225(2)         112.03
18A.228            112.03
Ch. 31          34.16
42.450 - 42.495    33.04
Ch. 44             114.17
Ch. 45A            34.16
Ch. 56             34.16
Ch. 61             32.21
61.168             34.16
61.169             34.16
61.805             151.22
61.810             34.01,
                   38.49
61.823(2) - (4)    91.15
61.870 - 61.884    34.17
61.872(4)          34.06
61.872(5)          34.07
61.872(6)          34.08
61.874(1)-(3)      34.12
61.874(3),(4)      34.13
61.874(5)          34.14
61.874(6)          34.15
61.878             34.01,
                   34.16
61.878(1)          34.16
61.878(6)          34.16
61.880             34.09
61.880(1)          34.16
61.884             34.11
62.060             31.04
65.067             31.04
65.120             Ch. 72
65.8840            92.01 -
                   92.03
82.082             150.125
82.650 - 82.670    151.23
Ch. 83A            31.20
83A.010(5)         10.02
83A.010(6)         10.02
83A.010(8)         10.02
83A.030(1)         30.02
83A.040(1),(2),(6) 31.21
83A.040(2)(c)      31.21
83A.040(2)(d)      31.21
83A.040(3)         31.21
83A.040(4)         32.01
83A.040(5)         32.02
83A.040(6)         32.02
83A.040(7)         31.21,
                   32.02
83A.040(8)         31.21,
                   32.02
83A.040(9)         31.03
83A.050            31.20
83A.060            36.05,
                   38.03
83A.060(1)         32.35
83A.060(2)         32.36
83A.060(3)         32.37
83A.060(4),(7)     32.38
83A.060(5)         32.40
83A.060(6)         32.22
83A.060(8)         32.41,
                   32.42
83A.060(9)         32.43
83A.060(10)        32.44
83A.060(11)        32.45
83A.060(12),(13)   32.46
83A.060(14)        32.47
83A.060(15)        32.48
83A.070            31.02
83A.075            31.02
83A.080            38.02
83A.080(1),(2)     31.35
83A.080(2)         31.03
83A.080(3),(4)     31.20
83A.085            31.36
83A.130            150.128
83A.130(1)         30.01
83A.130(2)         30.02
83A.130(3)         31.21
83A.130(4)         31.21
83A.130(5)         32.20
83A.130(6)         32.39
83A.130(7)         31.21
83A.130(8)         31.21
83A.130(9)         31.21
83A.130(10)        31.21
83A.130(11)        32.03,
                   32.21
83A.130(12)        32.03
83A.130(13)        32.03
83A.175            32.02
Ch. 90             36.04
91A.010            33.01
91A.010(8)         10.02
91A.020            33.02
91A.030            33.03
91A.030(7)         32.63
91A.040            33.04
91A.050            33.04
91A.060            33.05
91A.080(2)         112.02
91A.080(3),(10)    112.03
91A.080(8)         112.05
91A.080(8),(9)     112.04
91A.200            33.11
91A.210            33.10
91A.220            33.11
91A.230            33.12
91A.240            33.12
91A.250            33.14
91A.260            33.14
91A.270            33.16
91A.280            33.17
91A.290            33.18
91A.510            150.126
Ch. 95             36.04
Ch. 107            33.11
Ch. 116 - 121      31.20
131.010(6)         112.04
131.190            34.16
132.285            35.01
134.800            35.04
134.810            35.04
Ch. 136            35.05
Ch. 149            93.21
Ch. 150            93.21
Ch. 154            34.16
174.100            91.15
174.100(1)         91.16
174.100(2)         91.17
174.100(3)         91.18
174.100(4)         91.19
174.100(5)         91.20
186.020            72.22
186.560            71.25
186A.190           72.22
189.020            71.27
189.221            70.06
189.2226           70.06
189.285            73.02
189.287            73.01
189.290            71.25
189.330(8)         71.02
189.338            70.15
189.450(5),(6)     72.03
189.580            71.15
189.725            72.08
189.751 - 189.753  96.01
189.930            71.26
189.990(1)         72.99
189.993(8)         71.99
Ch. 198B           150.002
198B.070           150.002
198B.990(1)        150.999
218B.010           111.01
Ch. 227            93.21
227.990(1)         150.999
Ch. 241            114.01
Chs. 241 - 244     114.99
Ch. 243            114.01 ,
                   114.22
243.020            114.18
243.360            114.02
243.630            114.09
Ch. 244            114.01,
                   114.12
244.050            114.14
244.083            114.13
244.150            114.16
244.160(2)         114.01
257.100            90.06
257.100(4)         90.01
281.605(12)        72.22
304.17B-005        112.03
318.990            150.999
Ch. 322            150.101
376.275            96.01
376.275(1) - (4)   72.22
411.500 - 411.570  Ch. 92
                   33.04,
Ch. 424            33.14,
                   150.062
424.120            33.04
424.220            33.04
436.600            90.04,
                   90.99
446.010(1)         10.02
446.010(2)         10.02
446.010(6)         10.02
446.010(9)         10.02
446.010(10)        10.02
446.010(12)        10.02
446.010(13)        10.02
446.010(14)        10.02
446.010(15)        10.02
446.010(17)        10.02
446.010(18)        10.02
446.010(23)        10.02
446.010(26)        10.02
446.010(27)        10.02
446.010(28)        10.02
446.010(31)        10.02
446.010(33)        10.02
446.010(37)        10.02
446.010(39)        10.02
446.010(43)        10.02
446.010(46)        10.02
446.010(47)        10.02
446.010(49)        10.02
446.020(1)         10.03
446.020(2)         10.03
446.030            10.04
446.050            10.05
446.060            10.06
446.080(1)         10.03
446.080(3)         10.03
446.080(4)         10.03
446.090            10.07
446.100            10.08
446.110            10.09
446.140            10.01
525.125            90.03
525.130            90.03,
                   90.99
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE KOC
KOC No. Date Passed Code Section
KOC No. Date Passed Code Section
–     11-6-1989   Ch. 74, Sch. I
–     11-1-2004   T.S.O. II
–     2-7-2005    T.S.O. I
–     10-3-2005   32.21
120.1   1-3-1967    32.21
120.36  3-2-1998    150.016,
                    150.999
150.2   1-4-1974    37.15,
                    37.16
                    38.01 -
                    38.03,
                    38.15 -
                    38.18,
160.1   11-5-1994   38.30 -
                    38.32,
                    38.45 -
                    38.51,
                    38.99
160.2   1-12-1995   38.31
220.31  11-4-2002   112.02,
                    113.01
                    32.60 -
220.5   8-3-1981    32.68,
                    33.03
230.11  3-4-1991    31.20
230.15  11-1-1993   37.01 -
                    37.03
230.25  8-6-2001    31.35
230.26  2-2-2004    31.02
240.4   4-7-2003    T.S.O. II
320.10  1-5-2004    36.01 -
                    36.06
320.2   2-3-1975    130.07
320.3   4-7-1980    T.S.O. II
450.1   5-5-1975    113.20 -
                    113.27
520.2   11-4-1968   Ch. 74, Sch. I
520.3   10-5-1970   Ch. 74, Sch. I
520.4   6-5-1978    70.06,
                    70.99
520.5   9-5-1978    70.06,
                    70.99
520.6   6-3-1985    Ch. 74, Sch. I
540.2   4-7-1964    72.03
540.3   9-3-1968    96.01,
                    96.02
540.5   10-6-1986   Ch. 75, Sch. I
610.1   9-2-1980    T.S.O. II
610.4   11-1-1993   113.01 -
                    113.08
610.5   5-6-1996    T.S.O. II
610.6   5-4-1998    T.S.O. II
                    91.45 -
620.13  7-2-2001    91.48,
                    91.99
                    91.45 -
620.14  4-7-2003    91.48,
                    91.99
620.3   11-1-1966   51.02
620.4   5-1-1967    T.S.O. III
620.9   4-7-1986    T.S.O. III
820.1   9-15-1914   51.01,
830.1   2-7-1972    50.03,
                    50.99
830.2   12-7-1998   50.02,
                    50.99
920.11  12-6-1993   T.S.O. II
920.12  5-1-1995    T.S.O. I
920.13  3-4-1996    T.S.O. I
920.14  - -         T.S.O. I
920.15  11-3-1998   T.S.O. I
920.17  9-4-2001    T.S.O. I
920.18  4-5-2004    T.S.O. I
920.3   11-7-1977   T.S.O. I
920.4   5-3-1982    T.S.O. I
920.5   8-1-1983    T.S.O. I
920.6   8-6-1984    T.S.O. I
920.7   8-5-1985    T.S.O. I
920.8   3-2-1987    T.S.O. I
920.9   12-2-1987   T.S.O. I
950.1   2-1-1971    150.055 -
                    150.063
950.2   2-1-1971    150.045
950.3   9-4-1979    150.015,
                    150.999
950.4   10-5-1981   150.001
950.5   4-15-2002   150.030 -
                    150.034
1010.6  5-2-1988    95.02,
                    95.99
                    93.20 -
1010.7  1-3-1994    93.22,
                    93.99
1010.9  3-6-1995    95.01,
                    95.99
1020.7  9-15-1914   130.06
1020.18 9-15-1914   130.04
1020.24 9-15-1914   130.05
1020.25 8-3-1970    130.02
1020.27 1-3-1984    130.02
1020.30 5-2-1988    95.03,
                    95.99
1020.31 5-2-1988    130.03
1020.32 5-2-1988    130.02
1020.33 8-1-1988    130.01
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.          Date Passed Code Section
–               - -         T.S.O. I
1967-             5-1-1967    T.S.O. III
1974-             8-26-1974   T.S.O. I
1977-             11-7-1977   T.S.O. I
1980-2            4-7-1980    T.S.O. II
1980-9            9-2-1980    T.S.O. II
1982-             5-3-1982    T.S.O. I
1983-             8-1-1983    T.S.O. I
1984-             8-6-1984    T.S.O. I
1985-             8-5-1985    T.S.O. I
1986-2            4-7-1986    T.S.O. III
1987-             3-2-1987    T.S.O. I
1987-             12-2-1987   T.S.O. I
1993-9            12-6-1993   T.S.O. II
1995-3            5-1-1995    T.S.O. I
1996-             3-4-1996    T.S.O. I
1996-1            5-6-1996    T.S.O. II
–               10-6-1997   T.S.O. I
1998-7            5-4-1998    T.S.O. II
1998-11           11-3-1998   T.S.O. I
–               11-2-1998   T.S.O. IV
2001-             9-4-2001    T.S.O. I
2003-2            4-7-2003    T.S.O. II
2004-             4-5-2004    T.S.O. I
2004-6            10-2-2004   T.S.O. I
2004-7            11-1-2004   T.S.O. II
2005-1            2-7-2005    T.S.O. I
2005-2            2-7-2005    T.S.O. I
2005-3            2-7-2005    T.S.O. I
2005-4            2-7-2005    T.S.O. I
                              150.081 -
2005-6            4-4-2005    150.089,
                              150.999
2005-7            5-2-2005    T.S.O. I
2005-8            6-6-2005    150.080
2005-9            - -2005     113.40
2005-10           8-1-2005    35.05
–               10-3-2005   32.21,
                              91.45
2005-14           12-5-2005   T.S.O. I
2006-8            10-2-2006   Adopting Ordinance
2006-9            12-4-2006   T.S.O. I,
                              T.S.O. IV
2007-1            4-2-2007    151.01,
                              T.S.O. I
2007-2            4-2-2007    153.01,
                              T.S.O. I
2007-3            4-2-2007    91.60
2008-2            1-7-2008    112.02,
                              112.03
                              152.01 -
2008-3            3-3-2008    152.14,
                              152.99
2009-1            5-4-2009    150.100 -
                              150.112
                              150.125 -
                              150.137,
2009-2            6-1-2009    Ch. 150, Appendices A,
                              B, &
                              C
2009-3            3-2-2009    T.S.O. I
2009-4            4-6-2009    151.10,
                              T.S.O. I
2009-9            9-10-2009   Ch. 74, Sch. II
2009-10           10-5-2009   33.06
2010-4            10-4-2010   Adopting Ordinance
2010-6            11-1-2010   T.S.O. I
2010-7            11-1-2010   T.S.O. I
Mun. Order 1-2010 3-1-2010    T.S.O. II
Mun. Order 2-2010 3-1-2010    T.S.O. II
Mun. Order 3-2010 11-1-2010   T.S.O. II
Res. -            5-3-2010    T.S.O. II
Res. -            6-1-2011    T.S.O. II
2011-4            7-6-2011    T.S.O. I
2011-7            10-3-2011   32.21
2012-1            2-6-2012    T.S.O. II
2013-2            - -2013     92.01 -
                              92.04
2014-1            2-3-2014    152.10
2015-3            10-5-2015   152.10
                              114.01 -
2016-1            3-7-2016    114.21,
                              114.99
2016-4            11–7-2016 T.S.O. I
2016-05           12-5-2016   91.01 -
                              91.04
2018-3            7-2-2018    T.S.O. I
-- --             9-6-2018    Adopting Ordinance
2019-4            11-4-2019   T.S.O. III
2019-5            12-2-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-6            1-6-2020    Adopting Ordinance
2020-2            - -2020     T.S.O. II
                              110.10,
2020-5            8-3-2020    110.99,
                              T.S.O. I
2020-6            10-5-2020   Adopting Ordinance
                              110.10,
2021-1            2-1-2021    110.99,
                              T.S.O. I
2021-3            4-5-2021    T.S.O. I
2021-4            3-3-2021    T.S.O. I
5, Series 2022    6-6-2022    114.07,
                              114.22
6, Series 2022    10-5-2022   32.21
                              151.20 -
7, Series 2022    11-2-2022   151.24,
                              T.S.O. I
8, Series 2022    12-7-2022   T.S.O. I
1, Series 2023    6-7-2023    T.S.O. I
5, Series 2023    9-6-2023    T.S.O. I
7, Series 2023    12-6-2023   T.S.O. I
6, Series 2023    11-1-2023   130.08
2, Series 2024    7-3-2024    91.04
3, Series 2024    8-7-2024    35.01 -
                              35.03
4, Series 2024    9-4-2024    111.01,
                              111.02
5, Series 2024    12-4-2024   Ch. 74, Sch. I
                             
 
