ROLLING FIELDS, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Code current through Ordinance 25-04, passed 9-8-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
MAYOR
Dan Tafel
COMMISSIONERS
Weston Adams
Eric Harden
McCauley Ricketts
Christopher Hartley
CITY CLERK
Rob Webb
CITY TREASURER
Joanna Nugent
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
   
10.19   Application within territorial boundaries
   
10.20   Ordinance enforcement
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and designated as the
Rolling Fields Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may
be substituted. Title heads, chapter heads, and section and division heads or
titles, and explanatory notes and cross-references, do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to those
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and maintained by
the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information on
vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards.
(KRS 446.010(55))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code shall
denote the City of Rolling Fields irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   COMMISSION. The City Commission.
(KRS 83A.010(3))
   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company, or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company, or association.
(KRS 446.010(10))
   COUNTY. Jefferson County, Kentucky.
   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted.
(KRS 446.010(12))
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust, or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by authority
of this state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Commission.
(KRS 83A.010(6), KRS 91A.010(4))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
business trust, statutory trust, or limited liability company, includes all
those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(18))
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Commission.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Commissioner.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes,
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine, or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(KRS 446.010(26))
   MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Rolling Fields, Kentucky.
   OATH. Includes affirmation in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH.
(KRS 446.010(28))
   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited PARTNERSHIPS.
(KRS 446.010(30))
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables granted police powers,
coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional
officers, marshals, police officers, and other persons with similar authority
to make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies, and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even-numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected, and the election in odd-numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(KRS 446.010(39))
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   SWORN. Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of
office without a lawful incumbent therein, when the person elected or appointed
to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has been no
election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies whether
the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the state,
county, city, or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of the
City Commission.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases, and
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to that meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event,
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the public office
in which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation, or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a day on which the
public office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and
legally closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days
just mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall mean the
time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or
compliance with the notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include those acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of the City Commission in
enacting any ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held
unconstitutional, the remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the
ordinance provides otherwise, or unless the remaining parts are so essentially
and inseparably connected with and dependent upon the unconstitutional part
that it is apparent that the City Commission would not have enacted the
remaining parts without the unconstitutional part; or unless the remaining
parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the intent of the City Commission.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is REVIVED when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of the City Commission.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of the City Commission as long as it takes effect prior to
the effective date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
the City Commission which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of the City Commission, as long
as the repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the
original amendment.
   (E)   No other action of the City Commission repealing a repealer or an
amendment shall have the effect of reviving the original language of the
repealer or amendment, as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the City
Commission, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall
remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section, or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances
until the City Commission shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(KRS 83A.090)
   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
      or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.19 APPLICATION WITHIN TERRITORIAL BOUNDARIES.
   All provisions of these codified ordinances are limited in application to
the territorial boundaries of the city.
§ 10.20 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   ENFORCEMENT, as used herein, refers to legal action taken to achieve a
remedy in those instances where violation or non-compliance with an ordinance
is not corrected following notice of same or to impose a penalty where such
response is appropriate for the violation or non-compliance. Legal action is
required as such forced remedies or penalties must rely on the power of the
courts for execution.
   (B)   As provided for by Kentucky Revised Statutes, any aggrieved party may
undertake enforcement of the provisions of a municipal ordinance through legal
action filed in the county’s District Court. In this instance, the costs of and
time required for such action must be borne by the filing party.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
Statutory references:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065
   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Boundaries; incorporation areas
§ 11.01BOUNDARIES; INCORPORATION AREAS.
   The city, known as “Rolling Fields, Kentucky,” be and the same is
established as a municipal corporation of the Home Rule, within the following
described boundaries shown on the map filed with the petition filed herein, and
more particular described as follows:
Beginning at a point in the northeast corner of the intersection of Pennington
Lane and Old Brownsboro Road; and running thence with the north line of Old
Brownsboro Road north 50 degrees 47 minutes, 30 seconds east, 1328.66 feet to a
point; thence running north 34 degrees one minute, 30 seconds west, 2126.02
feet to a point in the south line of a tract owned by the Louisville Country
Club Realty Company; thence south 53 degrees, nine minutes west, 498.83 feet;
thence north 89 degrees, 11 minutes west, 1141.67 feet; thence north 79
degrees, 48 minutes west, 512.86 feet to another point in the line of property
of the Louisville Country Club Realty Company; thence south 47 degrees, 14
minutes, 30 seconds west, along a line of the Louisville Country Club Company’s
property, 721.40 feet to a point; thence south 34 degrees, zero minutes east,
2739.98 feet; thence north 70 degrees five minutes east, 1275.13 feet to a
point in the east line of Pennington Lane; thence with the east line of
Pennington Lane south eight degrees, ten minutes east, 100 feet, more or less,
to the point of beginning, said property being all of the lots in Rolling
Fields, sections numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4 except for lots numbered 18 and 25 in
section numbered 1 and lots 1, 2, and 3, Block ‘A’ in the section numbered 2.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   CITY POLICIES
      
34.   CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
      
35.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Open meetings and records
   
30.03   Form of government
§ 30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regularly scheduled city meetings occur every second Monday of the
month beginning at 6:30 p.m. at Second Presbyterian Church located at 3701 Old
Brownsboro Road Louisville, KY 40207.
   (B)   Special meetings may be called as provided by law.
§ 30.02 OPEN MEETINGS AND RECORDS.
   All meetings of a quorum of the city legislative body shall be open to the
public, and all public records of the city shall be available for inspection by
any person in accordance with KRS 61.805 to 61.884.
§ 30.03 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   The city shall be governed under the Commission form of government as
provided by KRS Chapter 83A.
   (B)   The city shall be governed by an elective official who shall be called
“Mayor” and be elected by legislative body members who shall be called City
Commissioners, and which together shall be known as the “City Commission,” and
by such other officers and employees as may be provided for by statute of city
ordinance.
   (C)   All legislative, executive, and administrative authority of the city
shall be vested in and exercised by the City Commission. The Commission shall
enforce the Commission Plan, ordinances, and orders of the city and all
applicable statutes. The Commission shall maintain liaison with related units
of local government respecting interlocal contraction and joint activities. The
Commission shall supervise all departments of the city government and the
conduct of all city officers and employees under its jurisdiction, and may
require each department to make such reports as it finds necessary.
   (D)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and may vote
in all proceedings. All bonds, notes, contracts, and written obligations of the
city authorized by ordinance or resolution shall be executed by the Mayor on
behalf of the city.
   (E)   Regular meetings of the City Commission shall be held at least once a
month at such times and places are as fixed by ordinances. Special meetings may
be called by the Mayor or a majority of the City Commissioners. In the call,
the Mayor or City Commissioner shall designate the purpose, time, and place of
the special meeting with sufficient notice for the attendance of Commission
members and for compliance with the KRS Chapter 61. At a special meeting, no
business may be considered other than that set forth in a designation of
purpose.
   (F)   (1)   The Commission shall, by ordinance, establish all appointive
offices and the duties and responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules,
and regulations for the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   The Commission shall, by ordinance, provide sufficient revenues to
operate city government and shall appropriate such funds in a budget which
shall provide for the orderly management of city resources.
      (3)   The Commission shall promulgate procedures to ensure orderly
administration of the functions of city government in compliance with statute,
ordinance, or order.
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
31.01   Pay rates
   
31.02   Mayor
   
31.03   City Clerk
   
31.04   City Treasurer
§ 31.01 PAY RATES.
   The Mayor, City Commissioners, and City Clerk shall be compensated for each
regular or special City Commission that they attend. Said compensation shall be
determined by the Commissioners at the beginning of each fiscal year.
§ 31.02 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Commission and may vote
in all proceedings.
   (B)   An appointment of all non-elected city officials shall require
nomination by a Commission member and approval (majority vote) by the City
Commission.
§ 31.03 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   There is created a non-elective city office to be known as the “City
Clerk.”
   (B)   The City Clerk shall be appointed by the Commission.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall be at least 21 years of age and of good moral
character.
   (D)   The duties and responsibilities of the City Clerk shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintenance and safekeeping of the records of the city; and
      (2)   Performance of all duties and responsibilities required by a city
clerk by statute or ordinance.
   (E)   The salary of the City Clerk is to be determined by the Commission.
§ 31.04 CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall receive and safely keep all city funds coming
into his or her hands. He or she shall pay out city funds and debts of the
city.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the City Commission
showing the state of the finances of the city and the amounts received and
spent during the month.
   (C)   The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Commission.
   (D)   The salary of the City Treasurer is established at an amount as may be
from time to time fixed by order of the Commission.
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Investment Committee
Police
   
32.15   City Police Department established
   
32.16   Additional authorities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 INVESTMENT COMMITTEE.
   The members of the Investment Committee of the city shall be:
   (A)   The Mayor;
   (B)   The City Clerk;
   (C)   The City Treasurer;
   (D)   Any individual optionally appointed by the City Commission; and
   (E)   A sufficient number of City Commissioners to be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Commission who, along with the Mayor, constitute
a quorum of the Committee.
(Order 94-, passed - -1994)
POLICE
§ 32.15 CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is created a Police Department for the city.
      (1)   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, who shall
be director of the Department, and such other members and officers as may be
provided for from time to time by the City Commission, which shall also provide
by resolution for their number, grade, compensation, and regulation.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see
to the enforcement of all ordinances of the city, and all statutes effective in
the city, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to
arrest violators thereof. Every member of the Police Department is hereby
declared to be a conservator of the peace and a peace officer under Kentucky
Revised Statutes.
      (3)   The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports
concerning the activities of his or her department as may be required by
statute, ordinance, the City Commission, or the Mayor. The Chief shall be
responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions,
and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve subject to the
orders of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police will function under the
operational supervision of the Mayor.
      (4)   The Chief of Police shall be authorized to serve writs, summonses,
and other processes, but no other officer shall serve such summonses or
processes except on order of the Chief of Police.
      (5)   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner and to avoid the
use of unnecessary force.
      (6)   The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations for the guidance of the members of the Department as he or she
shall see fit. Such rules, when approved by the City Commission, shall be
binding upon the members.
      (7)   The Chief of Police shall serve for such term as may be provided by
law, but may be removed in the manner provided by law for the removal of an
officer.
      (8)   To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Police
Department, a person must be a resident of the county, at least 21 years of
age, able to read and write the English language intelligibly, sober, moral,
and sagacious. No person who has been convicted of a felony is eligible for
appointment.
      (9)   Every member of the Police Department shall take an oath to
faithfully perform the duties of his or her office and that he or she possesses
the required qualifications.
   (B)   In the event the city enters into any interlocal cooperation agreement
with another city in the county for the sharing of police services, any police
officer appointed hereunder shall be eligible, upon the approval of such other
city or cities to the agreement, to serve as police officers pursuant to the
terms of such interlocal cooperation agreement.
   (C)   The Mayor, with the approval of the City Commission, may appoint any
legally qualified reputable person as a special police officer to serve for
such term and upon such conditions as may be designated by the terms of such
appointment. Special police officers shall have all of the powers of a
conservator of the peace, and shall receive no compensation from the city
unless such compensation is ordered by the City Commission. Appointments may be
revoked at any time by the Mayor, the City Commission, or the Chief of Police.
   (D)   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in the prosecution or a violation of a city
ordinance or a state or federal law, and after law.
(Ord. 82-2, passed 3-11-1982)
§ 32.16 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of KRS 65.210 et seq., the Mayor of the
city is authorized to enter into an interlocal cooperation agreement with the
City of Indian Hills, Kentucky, in substantially the form attached to the
ordinance from which this section is derived.
   (B)   Pursuant to KRS 527.020(3), the city does expressly authorize each
uniformed, salaried police officer appointed by the city to carry concealed
deadly weapons on or about his or her person at all times within the
commonwealth.
(Order 82-2, passed 3-11-1982; Order 82-3, passed 5-3-1982; Order 85-2, passed
7-1-1985)
CHAPTER 33: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   Record keeping
   
33.02   Defense and indemnification of city employees
§ 33.01 RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Clerk of the city to record the
proceedings of the legislative body of the city. With regard to the enactment
of any ordinance, the Clerk shall record the vote of each member of the
legislative body.
   (B)   The Clerk and the presiding officer shall sign the official record of
each meeting of the legislative body.
   (C)   All ordinances adopted by the legislative body shall, at the end of
each month, be indexed in the following manner.
      (1)   The city budget, appropriations of money, and tax levies shall be
indexed and maintained by fiscal year.
      (2)   All other ordinances shall be kept in a minute book or order book
in the order adopted and indexed in a composite index.
(Ord. 81-1, passed 6-1-1981)
§ 33.02 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACTION IN TORT. Any claim for monetary damages based upon negligence,
intentional tort, nuisance, products liability, and strict liability and shall
also include any wrongful death or survival-type action.
      EMPLOYEE. All full- and part-time employees of the city, but shall not
include any independent contractor or any employee, agent, supplier, or
subcontractor of any independent contractor.
      OFFICER. Any elected official of the city, City Clerk, City Treasurer,
City Tax Collector, City Engineer, and the Attorney for the city.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (E) below, the city shall, without cost
to the officer or employee, provide for the legal defense of any officer or
employee in any action in tort arising out of an act or omission occurring
within the scope of the officer’s or employee’s employment or public duties
with the city.
   (C)   The city may provide for the defense of any officer or employee
through its own legal counsel or by employing independent legal counsel or by
purchasing insurance which requires the insurer to defend. If the city defends
through its own legal counsel, and its legal counsel determines that the
interests of the officer or employee and the city conflict, the city shall
obtain the written consent of the employee for such representation or shall
provide independent representation. An employee may have his or her own legal
counsel to assist in the defense at the expense of the employee.
   (D)   Upon receiving service of a summons and complaint in any action in
tort brought against him or her, an officer or employee shall, within ten days
of his or her receipt of service, give written notice of the claim and make a
request that the city provide a defense to the action. The notice of claim and
request for defense shall be filed with the Mayor.
   (E)   The city may refuse to provide for the defense of any action in tort
brought against an officer or employee of the city if it determines and
notifies the employee in writing that:
      (1)   The act or omission was not within the actual or apparent scope of
the employee’s employment;
      (2)   The employee acted or failed to act because of fraud, malice, or
corruption; or
      (3)   A timely request to defend was not made in accordance with division
(D) above.
   (F)   If the city refuses to provide an officer or employee with a defense
and the officer or employee provides his or her own defense, the officer or
employee shall be entitled to recover all necessary and reasonable costs of
said defense from the city if the act or omission is judicially determined to
have arisen out of the actual or apparent scope of the employee’s employment
and the employee is found to have acted without fraud, malice, or corruption.
   (G)   Subject to the limitations set forth in division (H) below and
provided that the city shall not pay any award of punitive or exemplary
damages, the city shall pay any judgment rendered against an officer or
employee in action in tort, or any compromise or settlement of such action.
   (H)   The city may refuse to pay any judgment, compromise, or settlement in
any action in tort against an officer or employee, or if the city pays any
judgment, compromise, or settlement, it may recover from the officer or
employee the amount of such payment and the costs to defend, if:
      (1)   The officer or employee acted or failed to act because of fraud,
malice, or corruption;
      (2)   The action was outside the actual or apparent scope of the
employee’s employment;
      (3)   The employee willfully failed or refused to assist the defense of
the action; or
      (4)   The employee compromised or settled the claim without the consent
of the City Commission.
   (I)   An officer or employee who is being provided a defense in an action in
tort by the city shall not enter into any compromise or settlement of the
action without the approval of the City Commission.
   (J)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver for any defense
which the city may assert in any action in tort brought against it or any
officer or employee of the city. Defense by the city of any action shall not be
deemed an admission by the city that the acts of the officer or employee were
within the actual or apparent scope and course of such person’s office or
duties.
(Ord. 1, 1986, passed 5-5-1986)
CHAPTER 34: CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Title
   
34.02   Findings
   
34.03   Purposes and authority
   
34.04   Definitions
Standards of Conduct
   
34.15   Conflicts of interest in general
   
34.16   Conflicts of interest in contracts
   
34.17   Receipt of gifts
   
34.18   Use of city property, equipment, and personnel
   
34.19   Representation of interests before city government
   
34.20   Misuse of confidential information
   
34.21   Post-employment restriction
   
34.22   Honoraria
   
34.23   Nepotism prohibited
Financial Disclosure
   
34.35   Who must file
   
34.36   When to file statements; amended statements
   
34.37   Form of the statement of financial statements
   
34.38   Control and maintenance of the statements of financial interests
   
34.39   Noncompliance with filing requirement
Enforcement
   
34.55   Board of Ethics created
   
34.56   Alternate members
   
34.57   Facilities and staff
   
34.58   Power and duties of the Board of Ethics
   
34.59   Filing and investigation of complaints
   
34.60   Notice of hearings
   
34.61   Hearing procedure
   
34.62   Appeals
   
34.63   Limitation of actions
   
34.64   Advisory opinions
   
34.65   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited
 
   
34.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Rolling Fields
Code of Ethics.”
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.02 FINDINGS.
   The City Commission finds and declares that:
   (A)   Public office and employment with the city are public trust;
   (B)   The vitality and stability of the government of this city depends upon
the public’s confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed officers
and employees. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private
interests and public duties of a city officer or employee, that confidence is
imperiled; and
   (C)   The government of this city has a duty to provide its citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are being
faithfully performed, and to make its officers and employees aware of the
standard which the citizenry rightfully expects them to comply with while
conducting their public duties.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.03 PURPOSES AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It is the purposes of this chapter to provide a method of assuring
that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the city shall be clearly established, uniform in
their application, and enforceable, and to provide the officers and employees
of the city with advice and information concerning potential conflicts of
interest which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
   (B)   It is the further purpose of this chapter to meet the requirements of
KRS 65.003 as enacted by the 1994 Kentucky General Assembly.
   (C)   This chapter is enacted under the power vested in the city by KRS
82.082 and pursuant to requirements of KRS 65.003.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF ETHICS. The City Board of Ethics which is created and vested by
this chapter with the responsibility of enforcing the requirements of the
city’s code of ethics.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation, or any legal entity through which business is conducted for
profit.
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city office.
An individual is a CANDIDATE when the individual files a notification and
declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a declaration
of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State.
   CITY. The City of Rolling Fields, Kentucky.
   CITY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, nonstock corporation, or
other entity created, either individually or jointly, by this city.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the city. The term EMPLOYEE
shall not include any contractor or subcontractor or any of their employees.
   FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent, or grandchild.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in the
officer’s or employee’s household, or a person claimed by the officer or
employee, or the officer’s or employee’s spouse, as a dependent for tax
purposes.
   OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is one of the following:
   (A)   The Mayor;
   (B)   A City Commission member;
   (C)   The City Clerk;
   (D)   The City Treasurer;
   (E)   The City Manager;
   (F)   The City Administrator (administrative officer);
   (G)   Any person who occupies a nonelected office created under KRS 83A.080;
or
   (H)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who has been
appointed to the governing body of the agency by the city.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
§ 34.15 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.
   Every officer and employee of the city, and every city agency, shall comply
with the following standards of conduct.
   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any officer
or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any business,
transaction, or activity, which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of the officer’s or employee’s public duties.
   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to use his
or her official position with the city to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself or herself, or others.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or refrain from taking
any discretionary action, or agree to take or refrain from taking and
discretionary action, or induce or attempt to induce any other officer or
employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary action, on any matter
before the city in order to obtain a financial benefit for any of the
following:
      (1)   The officer or employee;
      (2)   A family member;
      (3)   An outside employer;
      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or any family member
has a financial interest; and/or
      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any family
member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other business or
professional relationship.
   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any provision
in this section if, by reason of the officer’s or employee’s participation,
vote, decision, action, or inaction, no financial benefit accrues to the
officer or employee, a family member, an outside employer, or a business, as
defined in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) above, as a member of any business,
occupation, profession, or other group, to any greater extent than any gain
could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of the business,
occupation, profession, or other group.
   (E)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial interest
which the officer or employee believes or has reason to believe may be affected
by his or her participation, vote, decision, or other action taken within the
scope of his or her public duties shall disclose the precise nature and value
of the interest, in writing, to the governing body of the city or city agency
served by the officer or employee, and the disclosure shall be entered on the
official record of the proceedings of the governing body. The officer or
employee shall refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that
is the subject of the disclosure.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.16 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly or
through others undertake, execute, hold, or enjoy, in whole or in part, any
contract made, entered into, awarded, or granted by the city or a city agency,
except as follows.
   (A)   The prohibition in this section shall not apply to contracts entered
into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for the city office, before
an appointed officer was appointed to a city or city agency office, or before
an employee was hired by the city or a city agency. However, if any contract
entered into by a city or city agency officer or employee before he or she
became a candidate, was appointed to office, or was hired as an employee, is
renewable after he or she becomes a candidate, assumes the appointed office, or
is hired as an employee, the prohibition in this section shall apply to the
renewal of the contract.
   (B)   The prohibition in this section shall not apply if the contract is
awarded after public notice and competitive bidding, unless the officer or
employee is authorized to participate in establishing the contract
specifications, awarding the contract, or managing contract performance after
the contract is awarded. If the officer or employee has any of the authorities
set forth in the preceding sentence, then the officer or employee shall have no
interest in the contract, unless the requirements set forth in division (C)
below are satisfied.
   (C)   The prohibition in this section shall not apply in any case where the
following requirements are satisfied.
      (1)   The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature of
the officer’s or employee’s interest in the contract are publicly disclosed at
a meeting of the governing body of the city or city agency.
      (2)   The disclosure is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
      (3)   A finding is made by the governing body of the city or city agency
that the contract with the officer or employee is in the best interests of the
public and the city or city agency because of price, limited supply, or other
specific reasons.
      (4)   The finding is made part of the official record of the governing
body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.17 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
   No officer or employee of the city agency shall directly or indirectly,
through any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift having a fair
market value of more than $200, whether in the form of money, service, loan,
travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing, or promise, or any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence, or could reasonably be expected to influence the officer
or employee in the performance of his or her public duties.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.18 USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT, AND PERSONNEL.
   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any city
time, funds, personnel, equipment, or other personal or real property for the
private use of any person, unless:
   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated city policy; and/or
   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to the
extent and upon the terms that such use is available to the general public.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.19 REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall represent
any person or business, other than the city, in connection with any cause,
proceeding, application, or other matter pending before the city or any city
agency.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from representing
another employee or employees where the representation is within the context of
official labor union or similar representational responsibilities.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee from
representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own interests.
   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from making any
inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no compensation, reward,
or other thing of value is promised to, given to, or accepted by the officer,
whether directly or indirectly, in return for the inquiry.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.20 MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall intentionally
use or disclose information acquired in the course or his or her official
duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to further his or
her personal financial interest or that of another person or business.
Information shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to disclosure
pursuant to the State Open Records Act, KRS 61.872 to 61.884, at the time of
its use or disclosure.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.21 POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall appear or
practice before the city or any city agency with respect to any matter on which
the officer or employee personally worked while in the service of the city or
city agency for a period of one year after the termination of the officer’s or
employee’s service with the city or city agency.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.22 HONORARIA.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city agency shall accept any
compensation, honorarium, or gift with a fair market value greater than 200 in
consideration of an appearance, speech, or article unless the appearance,
speech, or article is both related to the officer’s or employee’s activities
outside of municipal service and is unrelated to the officer’s or employee’s
service with the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer or employee of the
city or any city agency from receiving and retaining from the city or on behalf
of the city actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
officer or employee in connection with an appearance, speech, or article,
provided that the officer or employee can show by clear and convincing evidence
that the expenses were incurred or received on behalf of the city or city
agency and primarily for the benefit of the city or city agency and not
primarily for the benefit of the officer or employee or any other person.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.23 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall advocate,
recommend, or cause any of the following of a family member to an office or
position of employment with the city or a city agency:
      (1)   Employment;
      (2)   Appointment;
      (3)   Promotion;
      (4)   Transfer; or
      (5)   Advancement.
   (B)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall supervise or
manage the work of a family member.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action relating to the
employment or discipline of a family member, except that this prohibition shall
not prevent an elected or appointed official from voting on or participating in
the development of a budget which includes compensation for a family member,
provided that the family member is included only as a member of a class of
persons or a group, and the family member benefits to no greater extent than
any other similarly situated member of the class or group.
   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any relationship
or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which existed prior to
September 1, 1994.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
§ 34.35 WHO MUST FILE.
   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interests with the Board
of Ethics:
   (A)   Elected city officials;
   (B)   Candidates for elected city office;
   (C)   Member of the Board of Ethics created by this chapter; and
   (D)   Nonelected officers and employees of the city or any city agency who
are authorized to make purchases of materials or services, or award contracts,
leases, or agreements involving the expenditure of more than $5,000.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.36 WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The initial statement of financial interests required by this section
shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official
designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics, no later
than 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. All subsequent
statements of financial interest shall be filed no later than January 31 of
each year, provided that:
      (1)   An officer or employee newly appointed to fill an office or
position of employment with the city or a city agency shall file his or her
initial statement no later than 30 days after the date of the appointment; and
      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his or her initial statement
no later than 30 days after the date on which the person becomes a candidate
for elected city office.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time for
filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.
   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information contained
in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board, the officer or
employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of the material
change, file an amended statement with the Board.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.37 FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form prescribed by
the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official designated by the Board of
Ethics. The Board, or the designated administrative official, shall deliver a
copy of the form to each officer and employee required to file the statement,
by first class mail or hand delivery, no later than January 1 of each year. The
failure of the Board, or the designated administrative official, to deliver a
copy of the form to any officer or employee shall not relieve the officer or
employee of the obligation to file the statement.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.38 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the official custodian of the statements
of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance of the
statements of financial interests. The statements of financial interests shall
be maintained by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official designated
by the Board of Ethics as the custodian, as public documents, available for
public inspection immediately upon filing. Until changed by the Board of
Ethics, the City Clerk is hereby named the DESIGNATED ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
and the CUSTODIAN for all purposes under this chapter.
   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the Board, or
the designated administrative official, for a period of five years after
filing, provided that:
      (1)   Upon the expiration of three years after a person ceases to be an
officer or employee of the city or a city agency, the Board shall cause to be
destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of those statements
filed by the person; and
      (2)   Upon the expiration of three years after any election at which a
candidate for elected city office was not elected or nominated, the Board shall
cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of those
statements filed by the person.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.39 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.
   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative official, shall notify
by certified mail each person required to file a statement of financial
interests who fails to file the statement by the due date, files an incomplete
statement, or files a statement in a form other than that prescribed by the
Board. The notice shall specify the type of failure or delinquency, shall
establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall be remedied, and
shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 34.55 BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics, which shall have the
authorities, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of not less than one nor more than
five members who shall be appointed by the executive authority of the city,
subject to the approval of the City Commission. The initial members of the
Board of Ethics shall be appointed within 60 days of the effective date of this
chapter. No member of the Board of Ethics shall hold any elected or appointed
office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of employment with the city or
any city agency. The members shall serve for a term of three years; except that
when the Board consists of more than one member, appointments shall be made for
one, two, or three years as designated in the appointment so as to create
staggered terms. All terms shall expire on December 31 of the designated year.
Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a resident of the city for a
least one year prior to the date of the appointment and shall reside in the
city throughout the term in office. The members of the Board of Ethics shall be
chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for integrity and
their knowledge of local government affairs. The members may be re-appointed
for any number of consecutive terms.
   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the executive
authority, subject to the approval of the City Commission for misconduct,
inability, or willful neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of
Ethics is removed from office under this section, the member shall be afforded
the opportunity for a hearing before the executive authority and the City
Commission.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the
executive authority, subject to the approval of the City Commission. If a
vacancy is not so filled 60 days, the remaining members of the Board of Ethics
shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation,
unless otherwise approved by the City Commission, but shall be reimbursed for
all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties.
   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter, elect a chairperson from among the
membership. The chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.
   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary, upon the
call of the chairperson or at the written request of a majority of the members.
   (H)   The presence of a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum
and the affirmative vote of a number of a number of members equal to a quorum
shall be necessary for any official action to be taken. Any member of the Board
of Ethics who has a conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be
considered by the Board shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall
disqualify himself or herself from voting on the matter, and shall not be
counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.
   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics and
the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in
the minutes.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.56 ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
   The executive authority of the city, with the approval of the City
Commission, may appoint two alternate members of the Board of Ethics who may be
called upon to serve when any regular member of the Board is unable to
discharge his or her duties. An alternate member shall be appointed for a term
of one year. Alternate members shall meet all qualifications and be subject to
all of the requirements of this chapter that apply to regular members.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.57 FACILITIES AND STAFF.
   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the City Commission in the
annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics, either directly or
by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials, supplies, and staff
needed for the conduct of its business.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.58 POWER AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.
   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate complaints,
hold hearings, and make findings of fact and determinations with regard to
alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings
requiring persons to submit, in writing and under oath, reports and answers to
questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order testimony to be
taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Board who has the
power to administer oaths;
   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating to
an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board;
   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this chapter to the
executive authority of the city, the City Commission, the governing body of any
city agency, the County Attorney, or other appropriate person or body, as
necessary;
   (E)   To render advisory opinions to city and city agency officers and
employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this chapter;
   (F)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter with regard to all officers
and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to its terms by
issuing appropriate orders an imposing penalties authorized by this chapter;
   (G)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests that are
required to be filed by this chapter and to ensure that the statements are
available for public inspection in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the State Open Record Act, being KRS 61.870 to 61.884;
   (H)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or City Commission of
the city; and
   (I)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the
rules, regulations, and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter or any state or federal law.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.59 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant under oath, and shall meet any other requirements
established by the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge
receipt of a complaint to the complainant within ten working days from the date
of receipt. The Board shall forward within ten working days to each officer or
employee of the city or city agency who is the subject of the complaint a copy
of the complaint and a general statement of the applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board of
Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations contained
in the complaint. The Board shall afford a person who is the subject of the
complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the complaint. The
person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear and be
heard under oath, and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.
   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being
conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board except:
      (1)   The Board may turn over to the commonwealth’s attorney or County
Attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings;
      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly disclose the
existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board may publicly confirm the
existence of the inquiry, and, at its discretion, make public any documents
which were issued to either party;
   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary inquiry
whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether it alleges
a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this chapter. If the Board
concludes that the complaint is outside of its jurisdiction, frivolous, or
without factual basis, the Board shall immediately terminate the inquiry,
reduce the conclusion to writing, transmit a copy of its decision to the
complainant and to all officers or employees against whom the complaint was
filed;
   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry,
that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains allegations
sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation, the
Board shall notify the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint
and may:
      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances such as, lack of significant
economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee, lack of economic loss to
the city its taxpayers, or lack of significant impact on public confidence in
city government issue, in writing, a confidential reprimand to the officer or
employee concerning the alleged violation and provide a copy of the
confidential reprimand to the executive authority and governing body of the
city or city agency; or
      (2)   Initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation.
   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false complaint
alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter by an officer or employee
of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.60 NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order setting
the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the order is issued, unless
the alleged violator petitions for and the Board consents to a later date. The
order setting the matter for hearing, along with a copy of any pertinent
regulations of the Board relating to the hearing shall be sent to the alleged
violator within 24 hours of the time the order setting a hearing is issued.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.61 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The State Rules of Civil Procedure and the State Rules of Evidence
shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics; however, the
hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in accordance
with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board so as to afford
all parties the full range of due process rights required by the nature of the
proceedings.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged violator, or his
or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine all
documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board in connection with the
matter to be heard. The Board shall inform the alleged violator, or his or her
representative, of any exculpatory evidence of its possession.
   (C)   All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to call
and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses, to
submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall have the
right to be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who may be
adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the Board, with or
without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention, or may file
a written statement regarding the adverse mention for incorporation into the
record of the proceeding.
   (E)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless the
members vole to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.
   (F)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall, as
soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for the purpose
of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination whether a
violation of this chapter has been proven. Within 30 days after completion of
the hearing, the Board shall issue a written report of its findings and
conclusions.
   (G)   If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this chapter
has occurred is shall immediately send written notice of this determination to
the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint and to the party
who files the complaint.
   (H)   If the Board concludes in its report that in consideration of the
evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of a
violation of this chapter, the Board may:
      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the
violation;
      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the violations and
provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and governing body
of the city or city agency with which the violator serves;
      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the governing
body that the violator be sanctioned as recommended by the Board, which may
include a recommendation for discipline or dismissal, or removal from office;
      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty of not
more than $1,000; and/or
      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this chapter or state laws
to the County Attorney or Commonwealth’s Attorney of the jurisdiction for
prosecution.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.62 APPEALS.
   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
chapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the Circuit Court of
the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board. The Board shall
transmit to the Clerk of the Court all evidence considered by the Board at the
public hearing.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.63 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law,
an action for a violation of this chapter must be brought within one year after
the violation is discovered.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.64 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning matters
under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer or
employee of the city or a city agency who is covered by this chapter.
   (B)   A advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state
relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory opinion
shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in writing, by the
requestor.
   (C)   The Board may adopt regulations, consistent with the State Open
Records Law, being KRS 61.870 to 61.884, to establish criteria under which it
will issue confidential advisory opinions. All other advisory opinions shall be
public documents, except that before an advisory opinion is made public, it
shall be modified so that the identity of any person associated with the
opinion shall no be revealed.
   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived either:
      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion; or
      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Board, if a person makes or
purports to make public the substance or any portion of an advisory opinion
requested by or on behalf of the person. The Board may vote to make public the
advisory opinion request and related materials.
   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be binding on the
Board in any subsequent proceeding concerning the facts and circumstances of
the particular case if no intervening facts or circumstances arise which would
change the opinion of the Board if they had existed at the time the opinion was
rendered. However, if any fact determined by the Board to be material was
omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the Board shall not be
bound by the opinion.
   (F)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be admissible in
the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for violation of
this chapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
§ 34.65 REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall subject to
reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any official
authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to discourage,
restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce, or discriminate against any
person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges, or otherwise brings to
the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency or official of the
city or the commonwealth any facts or information relative to an actual or
suspected violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting disciplinary or
punitive action if an officer or employee of the city or any city agency
discloses information which he or she knows:
      (1)   To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless disregard
for its truth or falsity;
      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of the
State Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884; or
      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in this chapter,
any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found by the
Board of Ethics to have violated any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil fine imposed by the
Board of Ethics not to exceed $1,000, which may be recovered by the city in a
civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails to pay the penalty
within a prescribed period of time.
   (B)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, any officer or employee of the city or any agency who is found by the
Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of this chapter shall forfeit to
the city or the city agency an amount equal to the economic benefit or gain
which the officer or employee is determined by the Board to have realized as a
result of the violation. The amount of any forfeiture may be recovered by the
city in a civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender fails to pay the
amount of the forfeiture within a prescribed period of time.
   (C)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under this
chapter, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer or employee of the
city or any city agency is guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion, or other disciplinary
action by the executive authority of the city or city agency, or by any other
officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline. Any action to
remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of this chapter
shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the city and all applicable laws of the commonwealth.
   (D)   Any violation of §
34.16 shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the court
may void and contract entered into in violation of §
34.16, additionally, a violation of §
34.16 shall be grounds for removal from office or employment with the city in
accordance with any applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules,
or regulations of the city.
   (E)   (1)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who
fails or refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the notice
under §
34.40 within the time period established in the notice shall be guilty of a
civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine imposed by the Board in an
amount not to exceed $25 per day, up to a maximum civil fine of $500. Any civil
fine imposed by the Board under this division (E) may be recovered by the city
in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender fails or refuses to pay
the penalty within a prescribed period of time.
      (2)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial
interests which he or she knows to contain false information or intentionally
omits required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Ord. 94-03, passed - -1994)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
   
35.01   Non-payment of city taxes
   
35.02   Fiscal year
   
35.03   County tax assessment designated
   
35.04   Tax levied
   
35.05   Payment of taxes
   
35.06   Use of tax proceeds
§ 35.01 NON-PAYMENT OF CITY TAXES.
   The penalty for non-payment of all city tax bills shall continue at 15% of
the face amount of each bill, if not paid by the end of the second month
following the month when the bills are mailed, plus interest of 1.5% of the
face amount of the bill for each month after the bill is due.
(Ord. 83-3, passed 12-5-1983)
§ 35.02 FISCAL YEAR.
   The city shall operate on a fiscal year beginning July 1 of each year and
ending on June 30 of the following year.
§ 35.03COUNTY TAX ASSESSMENT DESIGNATED.
   The city elects to use the Louisville Metro Property Valuation
Administration tax assessment of all real estate located in the city as of
January 1 of each year as the basis for ad valorem taxes for the city for the
fiscal year ending June 30 of such year.
§ 35.04 TAX LEVIED.
   An ad valorem tax for each fiscal year of the city shall be levied by
ordinance at a rate per each $100 of all real estate assessed for taxation and
subject to taxation by the city under the assessment date of January 1 of the
subject year, as made by the Louisville Metro Property Valuation Administrator.
§ 35.05 PAYMENT OF TAXES.
   The payment of tax bills shall be made to the City Treasurer and shall be
subject to the discounts and penalties listed below and the collection remedies
provided by law.
   (A) A discount in an amount determined by yearly ordinance of the face
amount of the bill may be allowed if the tax is paid on or before December 31
of the tax year.
   (B)   The face amount of the bill shall be payable during January of the tax
year.
   (C)   All delinquent tax collection expenses incurred by the city, including
lien filing and release fees, attorney’s fees of not less than 25%, and cost of
initiating legal action, shall be deemed a penalty in addition to that
specified above and shall be encompassed within the city’s lien.
§ 35.06 USE OF TAX PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds of such taxes, penalties, and interest are to be placed in the
General Fund of the city and are to be used for the general operating purposes
and expenses of the city such as the purchase of city supplies, purchase and
maintenance of city property, street repair, garbage collection, police
protection, and all other necessary and proper municipal functions as may be
properly ordained or resolved by the City Commission.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: SEWER
Section
   
50.01   Installation of under-driveway flood control systems by the MSD
§ 50.01 INSTALLATION OF UNDER-DRIVEWAY FLOOD CONTROL SYSTEMS BY THE MSD.
   (A)   In accordance with its authority to regulate the appearance and
aesthetics of city easements, the city mandates that the Metropolitan Sewer
District use drainage pipes only for drainage control under driveways unless
one or more of the following conditions exist.
      (1)   There is an economic justification for MSD to do otherwise.
      (2)   There is a functional justification for MSD to do otherwise.
      (3)   A homeowner specifically requests another system.
   (B)   If any of these conditions exist, the city requires that it be
notified at least two months prior to commencement of the project so its City
Engineer can review the project.
(Res. 01-1, passed 12-20-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Speed regulations
   
70.02   Stop intersections
   
70.03   Reckless driving
   
70.04   Police Department; powers and duties
   
70.05   Enforcement authority
   
70.06   Temporary regulations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SPEED REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any vehicle on any street or road
of the city at a greater rate of speed than is reasonable or prudent, having
regard for the traffic and the use of the highways, provided that there shall
be a maximum rate of speed of 20 mph on all streets and roads, and no person
shall operate any vehicle in excess thereof.
(Ord. 3, passed 6-2-1958; Ord. passed 6-4-1973; Motion passed 12-5-2023)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   Any person operating a motor vehicle who fails to observe a stop sign at any
intersection within the city limits shall be subject to a penalty as provided
in §
70.99.
(Ord. 6, passed 11-3-1958; Ord. passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person operating a motor vehicle in a reckless or improper manner shall
be subject to a penalty as provided in §
70.99.
(Ord. 7, passed 11-3-1958; Ord. passed 6-4-1973) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 POLICE DEPARTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
§ 70.05 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of the city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department.
§ 70.06 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate
unusual traffic problems, the City Commission or any authorized city official
shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to impose such traffic
regulations as he or she may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed
two weeks. If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended
order.
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
70.01, or any rules or regulations made in compliance therewith, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $50 and not more than $100.
   (C)   Any person violating §
70.02 shall be subject to a fine of $50 for each offense.
   (D)   Any person violating §
70.03 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 nor less than $50 for
each offense.
(Ord. 3, passed 6-2-1958; Ord. 6, passed 11-3-1958; Ord. 7, passed 11-3-1958;
Ord. passed 6-4-1973; Ord. passed 6-4-1973)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Definition
   
71.02   Commercial vehicle parking
   
71.03   Inoperable vehicles
   
71.04   Driveways
   
71.05   Cumulative periods of parking
   
71.06   Prima facie evidence
   
71.07   Owner of property where parked
   
71.08   Enforcement
Parking on Streets
   
71.20   Prohibited parking places
   
71.21   Parking on left
   
71.22   Parking on private property
   
71.23   Prohibited purposes for parking
   
71.24   Ten-minute parking limit
   
71.25   Moving vehicles
   
71.26   Prima facie evidence
   
71.27   Fire hydrants
   
71.28   Exceptions
   
71.29   Enforcement
   
71.30   Vehicle pull-off areas
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Storage of inoperative or unfit for further use motor vehicles, boats and/or
trailers, and campers as nuisance, see §
90.15
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL-TYPE VEHICLE or COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Motor vehicles meeting any
one of the following classifications:
      (1)   Having dual rear wheels;
      (2)   Having a design load carrying capacity of over one ton;
      (3)   Designed to carry more than 12 passengers, including driver; or
      (4)   Any vehicle designed to carry business equipment such as having
racks or storage bins (exclusive of a single tool box).
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 71.02 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING.
   No commercial-type vehicle, airplane, boat, boat trailer, housecar,
recreational vehicle (RV), bus, mobile home, trailer, camper, tractor, or part
of such vehicle shall be parked or stored on any properly zoned single-family
residential or on the side of any street adjacent to such properly, in the
city, except in a garage.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   No vehicle which is inoperable shall be parked or kept on any lot
(except in the garage) or on any street in the city.
   (B)   Any vehicle not having current license plates and current insurance
shall be deemed INOPERABLE.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 DRIVEWAYS.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
71.01 through
71.03, any motor vehicle, exclusive of commercial-type vehicles and inoperable
vehicles, may be parked on any legal driveway of residential property for
continuous periods not to exceed seven days.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 CUMULATIVE PERIODS OF PARKING.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
71.01 through
71.03, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the temporary parking on a legal
driveway or street:
   (A)   For cumulative periods of 12 days or less during any calendar year; or
   (B)   For continuous periods of 72 hours or less of a motor vehicle being
used in connection with improvements to or maintenance of the residence served
during such periods of construction or maintenance, or while such vehicle is
being prepared for use or prepared for storage.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   The fact that any vehicle which is illegally parked is registered in the
name of a person, firm, or corporation shall be considered prima facie proof
that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 71.07 OWNER OF PROPERTY WHERE PARKED.
   The owner of any property on which there is any vehicle parked in violation
of this subchapter shall be subject to the same penalties as the owner of the
vehicle or person illegally parking or storing the vehicle.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any violation of this subchapter shall subject the offender to fines,
penalties, and forfeitures that may be imposed by law, and the city may secure
injunctions and abatement orders, when appropriate, to ensure compliance with
its ordinances as authorized by KRS 83A.065.
   (B)   This subchapter may be enforced by any one or all, or a combination
of, the remedies authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999)
PARKING ON STREETS
§ 71.20 PROHIBITED PARKING PLACES.
   No person shall park, stop, or leave standing, any vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with traffic or in compliance with directions of a
police officer or traffic control device:
   (A)   In any intersection or within 30 feet thereof;
   (B)   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal or sign on the approaching side or
within the same area across therefrom;
   (C)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 16 feet;
   (D)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway or
the use of a ramp provided for persons with disabilities;
   (E)   On or across any sidewalk or upon the unpaved portion of any public
right-of-way within the city; or
   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.21 PARKING ON LEFT.
   No vehicle shall be parked with its left side next to the edge of the
roadway, except on one-way streets.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.22 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, or upon any
unpaved area of private property.
   (B)   Parking on grass is not permitted.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23 PROHIBITED PURPOSES FOR PARKING.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing, painting, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.24 TEN-MINUTE PARKING LIMIT.
   No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time longer
than ten minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.25 MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into
any such prohibited area.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.26 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   The fact that any automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the
name of a person, firm, or corporation shall be considered prima facie proof
that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 71.27 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No vehicle shall be parked within ten feet of any fire hydrant.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.28 EXCEPTIONS.
   The restrictions contained herein shall not apply to emergency or police
vehicles when in use on official business or pursuant to KRS 189.940, nor shall
it apply where the owner’s driveway is under construction or repair for periods
of less than 48 hours.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 71.29 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any violation of this subchapter shall subject the offender to fines,
penalties, and forfeitures that may be imposed by law, and the city may secure
injunctions and abatement orders, when appropriate, to ensure compliance with
its ordinances as authorized by KRS 83A.065.
   (B)   This subchapter may be enforced by any one or all, or a combination
of, the remedies authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 71.30 VEHICLE PULL-OFF AREAS.
   (A)   Definition of pull-off parking areas. VEHICLE PULL-OFF PARKING AREAS
shall mean and include any type of pad constructed or placed within the public
right-of-way between a street and residential property line for the purpose of
parking a vehicle.
   (B)   Regulation of pull-off parking areas.
      (1)   Use of pull-off parking areas shall comply with all city parking
ordinances including, but not limited to, this chapter.
      (2)   A city permit application shall be required prior to construction
of a new vehicle pull-off parking area, or modification to an pre-existing
vehicle pull-off parking area.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a complete permit application, the city may
consider the construction of, or modification to, a vehicle pull-off parking
area within the right-of-way. Neither construction of, or modification to, a
vehicle pull-off parking area shall begin without the express consent from the
city.
      (4)   All pull-off areas must be constructed so as not to block or
redirect drainage. If drainage pipe is used, it must be maintained and cleared
by the homeowner. The city maintains the right to clear or repair any
impediment to drainage pipes on all new and existing parking areas if the
homeowners do not comply in maintaining the drainage pipe and surrounding
contour of the property allowing for drainage.
      (5)   Vehicle pull-off parking areas shall not extend into the side
setbacks.
      (6)   Construction of an approved vehicle pull-off parking area shall
commence within one calendar year following the date of issue of a permit. Upon
expiration of such time, reapplication shall be required.
      (7)   Should, for any reason, the paved lane, street, or roadway be
widened, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to move any
obstruction that would then become in violation of any division of this section
herein. Should a previously permitted vehicle pull-off parking area be affected
by such widening, any alteration to that area shall require re-application as
set forth herein.
(Ord. 25-01, passed 6-9-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Criminal.
         (a)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
71.01 through
71.08 shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $100.
         (b)   Where Kentucky Revised Statutes mandate a fine higher than that
stipulated herein, the fine contained in Kentucky Revised Statutes shall apply.
         (c)   Any continuing violation of this code of ordinances shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense for each day on which a violation
occurs or continues, and a separate penalty may be imposed therefor.
      (2)   Civil.
         (a)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
71.01 through
71.08 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in an amount equal to two
times the minimum fine prescribed in §§
71.01 through
71.08, with a minimum civil penalty of $50 for each violation.
         (b)   The civil penalty provided herein may be recovered by the city
in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 20 days after the offender has been cited for the ordinance
violation. As used herein, CITED shall mean notified of the violation and the
penalty in writing by an elected or appointed official of the city or the
official attorney for the city. The civil penalty may be used as an alternative
to or in conjunction with the criminal penalties authorized herein.
   (C)   (1)   Criminal.
         (a)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
71.20 through
71.29 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
         (b)   Where Kentucky Revised Statutes mandate a fine higher than that
stipulated herein, the fine contained in Kentucky Revised Statutes shall apply.
         (c)   Any continuing violation of §§
71.20 through
71.29 shall be considered a separate and distinct offense for each day on which
a violation occurs or continues, and a separate penalty may be imposed
therefor.
      (2)   Civil.
         (a)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
71.20 through
71.29 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in an amount equal to two
times the minimum fine prescribed in §§
71.20 through
71.29, with a minimum civil penalty of $50 for each violation.
         (b)   The civil penalty provided herein may be recovered by the city
in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 20 days after the offender has been cited for the ordinance
violation. As used herein, CITED shall mean notified of the violation and the
penalty in writing by an elected or appointed official of the city or the
official attorney for the city. The civil penalty may be used as an alternative
to or in conjunction with the criminal penalties authorized herein.
   (D)   Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of §
71.30 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than $10 nor more
than $100 for each offense. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 99-05, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 25-01, passed
6-9-2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCES, HEALTH, AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCES, HEALTH, AND SANITATION
Section
Temporary Storage Structures, Dumpsters, and Accessory Structures
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Regulation; temporary storage units and dumpsters
   
90.03   Exceptions
   
90.04   Enforcement procedures
Nuisances
   
90.15   Nuisances prohibited
   
90.16   Enforcement
   
90.17   Nuisance created by others
 
   
90.99   Penalty
TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURES, DUMPSTERS, AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DUMPSTERS. Storage container units designed for waste materials of a size
greater than 100 gallons, not including any of the containers provided by or
approved for use by any waste disposal company hired by the city for garbage,
yard waste, or recycling.
   TEMPORARY (OR PORTABLE) STORAGE UNITS. Sometimes referred to as PODS, any
storage device, trailer, vehicle, or other container or receptacle (with or
without wheels) designed and used primarily for the temporary storage of
building material, household goods, personal items, and other material on the
limited basis. The term shall not include dumpsters, which are described
separately herein.
(Ord. 09-3, passed 9-10-2009)
§ 90.02 REGULATION; TEMPORARY STORAGE UNITS AND DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   Temporary storage units and temporary dumpster units shall be allowed
only upon the issuance of a permit by the city. Permits shall be displayed on
the outside of the container in such manner as to be plainly visible from the
nearest street. The fee for permits shall be $50 per unit per month, as set
forth in §
150.05.
   (B)   Each permit application must be filled out and signed by the owners of
the lot on which the temporary storage unit is to be located and contain all
relevant contact information for both the owners and the company from which the
unit is to be rented. The permit application shall be accompanied by a drawing
showing where the unit is to be located and, whenever possible, the unit must
be located on the lot behind the rear wall of the principal structure and on a
hard surface. Such unit shall be located no closer than ten feet to any
property line. If the lot configuration makes it impossible for the storage
unit to be placed, a case by case review of the placement shall be made by the
city as to whether to issue a special permit for another location on the lot,
or adjacent to the lot, given due regard to the public health, safety, and
aesthetics.
   (C)   No temporary storage or dumpster unit may be used to contain any
hazardous material. Any possible hazardous material must be disclosed to the
city at the time the permit application is made for review by the proper city
official, prior to the issuance of any permit.
   (D)   Storage and dumpster units must be in good condition, with no
significant rust or deterioration. They cannot be greater than eight feet in
height, ten feet in width, and 20 feet in length. No more than two can be
placed on any residential lot at one time, except for commercially zoned
properties, provided they also meet the minimum requirement of the general
development/detailed development plan for the site, binding elements, and
current regulation of such items in the Metro Louisville zoning regulations.
   (E)   Permits are good for a period of 21 days. At the expiration of the 21-
day period, applicants may seek to extend their permits for an additional 21
days by seeking an extension for cause from the city.
   (F)   Extension of a permit will cost $50 for only one additional 21-day
extension.
(Ord. 09-3, passed 9-10-2009) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any property, which has properly applied for and been granted by the
Louisville Metro Zoning Authority the right to locate temporary storage on the
site, is exempt from this regulation as it relates to storage units. This
exemption is utterly conditional on full compliance with the general
development/detailed development plan for the site, binding elements, and
current regulation of such items in the Metro Louisville zoning regulations.
   (B)   Commercial, office, or multi-family zoned property whose garbage
pickup is through a permanent dumpster pickup is exempt from this regulation,
as it relates to dumpster units. This exemptions is utterly conditional on full
compliance with the general development/detailed development plan for the site;
binding elements, and current regulation of such items in the Metro Louisville
zoning regulations.
   (C)   In the case of emergencies, such as floods, wind storms, fires, or
other acts of God, or human-made disasters, the City Mayor shall be allowed to
suspend the enforcement of this subchapter as to the city as a whole, or areas
of the city, for a time period appropriate for the community to deal with such
emergency conditions.
   (D)   Due to the physical requirements of construction, or re-construction
of buildings and houses, special rules shall govern the both temporary storage
units and dumpsters at construction or re-construction sites. On any site on
which a building permit is to be issued, prior to the city issuing a letter of
compliance, the applicant shall submit all information required under §
90.02(A) or (B), however, the City Mayor is authorized to extend the time the
units may remain on site; the number of units allowed and the locations they
may be placed. This decision shall be made with due regard to the physical
limitation of the work to be accomplished on the site, on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 09-3, passed 9-10-2009)
§ 90.04 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful in the city for the owner of a property to permit
any structure upon the property to become unfit and unsafe for human
habitation, occupancy, or use or to permit conditions to exist in the structure
which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of
the structure, the occupants of neighboring structures, or other residents of
the city.
   (B)   The city may establish, by ordinance, reasonable standards and
procedures for the enforcement of this section. The procedures shall comply
with all applicable statutes, administrative regulations, or codes. Proper
notice shall be given to property owners before any action is taken pursuant to
this section, and, prior to the demolition of any unfit or unsafe structure,
the right to a hearing shall be afforded the property owner.
   (C)   The city shall have a lien against the property for the reasonable
value of labor and materials used in remedying the situation. The affidavit of
the responsible officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the amount of
the lien and the regularity of the proceedings pursuant to this statute, and
shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. The lien shall be notice
to all persons from the time of its recording and shall bear interest
thereafter until paid. The lien created shall take precedence over all other
subsequent liens, except state, county, school board, and city taxes, and may
be enforced by judicial proceeding.
   (D)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (C) above or any
other remedy authorized by law, the owner of a property upon which a lien has
been attached pursuant to this section shall be personally liable for the
amount of the lien, including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges
and the city, county, or urban-county may bring a civil action against the
owner and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt
owed.
NUISANCES
§ 90.15 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any resident to do any act, thing, occupation,
condition, or use of property which shall continue for such a length of time as
to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort, health,
repose, or safety of the public;
      (2)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct, or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
stream, ditch, or drainage; or
      (3)   Essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property, or tend to depreciate the value of property of others.
   (B)   The following conditions are declared a nuisance and are in violation
of this subchapter:
      (1)   Dumping rubbish, leaves, branches, grass clippings, shrubbery
pruning, or any other trash in the drainage areas or ditches within the common
areas, easements, and/or public areas in the city, other than as permitted to
access for sanitation services pickup;
      (2)   Garbage cans and other waste materials maybe placed at curb-side
not earlier than the day prior to the collection and must be removed to behind
the house (so as to not be visible from the roadway) not later than the day of
collection;
      (3)   Weeds (i.e., non-ornamental or crop material) or grass higher than
nine inches in height;
      (4)   Pets that continually bark, howl, whine, or make noise loudly or
threaten to attack or attack persons or other animals, roam loose, chase cars
or other vehicles, including bicycles, or get into residents’ garbage, whether
open or otherwise;
      (5)   Branches, trees, or shrubs which hang lower than eight feet above
any sidewalk or street within the city right-of-way or easement;
      (6)   Plants or shrubs that grow up or to extend onto any street,
sidewalk, or traffic sign or street sign which will obstruct the passage or
view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
      (7)   Any growth, refuse, trash, garbage, or scrap material which
attracts rodents or otherwise is a nuisance to the public to accumulate and
remain upon any property within the city;
      (8)   Motor vehicles, boats and/or trailers, and campers, which are
inoperative or unfit for further use for which they were intended, unless
stored within a garage;
      (9)   Parking any vehicle or trailer in the front yard of any residence
except on the made driveway and in accordance with §§
71.01 through
71.07 and 71.20 through 71.27;
      (10)   PULL-OFF PARKING AREAS, vehicular parking areas adjacent to the
city’s roadways and extending into the yards of residences, may not be used for
permanent parking during hours when such use is a traffic hazard for the
traveling public, and in no event can be used for parking for a period of time
longer than ten minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any
day;
      (11)   Any exterior of a residential property if it remains in an
unfinished, or dilapidated condition for an unreasonable length of time, which
is to be determined by the city considering the circumstances. UNFINISHED
CONDITION hereby means that the residential property has not been completely
sided with a commonly used wood, metal, plastic, brick, or stone exterior
siding product, or that such exterior material is peeling, faded, or otherwise
unkempt;
      (12)   Any type of signage in the single-family residential areas of the
city that is not in compliance with the Metro Louisville Land Development Code,
such as more than one single-family residential occupant sign exceeding one
square foot, business signage on vehicles where such signage is over two square
feet and conspicuously parked so as to constitute a sign, or more than one
rent/sale sign exceeding 12 square feet, which remains in place more than seven
days after closing or sale or lease;
      (13)   Parking of any boat or recreational vehicle (not in compliance
with the Metro Louisville Land Development Code), except behind the front wall
of a residence. If the lot is so situated as to make this impossible, the home
owner must make best efforts to screen and shield such boat or recreational
vehicle from view;
      (14)   Above ground pools;
      (15)   Commercial yard services, roofers, contractors, or any other
service provider, which occur outside the following time periods: Monday
through Thursday, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;
      (16)   Use of exterior materials for any primary or accessory structure
that are not in keeping with the surrounding existing primary and secondary
structures in city; and
      (17)   Habitual placement of play equipment and other accessory structure
in the front or side yards of any residence (not in compliance with the Metro
Louisville Land Development Code).
(Ord. 07-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 10-3, passed 8-12-2010; Ord. 21-03, passed
6-10-2021) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If after informal contact from an official of the city, the offense
remains without resolution, the city, through its duly elected and/or appointed
officials, will give written notice by regular U.S. Mail to the offending owner
or occupant of the property in question of the existence of the offending
condition.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant fails to remove or abate the condition
immediately or within ten days from the date the notice is mailed, the city may
proceed to remove or abate the condition and add the cost of same, together
with interest thereon 12% per annum, to the next property tax bill and/or place
a lien on the property in question to secure the payment thereof.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 3-20-2008)
§ 90.17 NUISANCE CREATED BY OTHERS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance is created or contributed to by the owner, occupant, or person having
control or management of the premises, but merely that the nuisance is created
or contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests, or other persons for whose
conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for whose conduct
the owner or operator is not responsible but by the exercise of reasonable care
ought to have become aware of.
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Criminal.
         (a)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.03 shall be guilty of a violation and fined not less than $50 nor more than
$100.
         (b)   Where Kentucky Revised Statutes mandate a fine higher than that
stipulated herein, the fine contained in Kentucky Revised Statutes shall apply.
         (c)   Any continuing violation of §§
90.01 through
90.03 shall be considered a separate and distinct offense for each day on which
a violation occurs or continues, and a separate penalty may be imposed
therefor.
      (2)   Civil.
         (a)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.03 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in an amount equal to two
times the minimum fine prescribed in division (B)(1) above with a minimum civil
penalty of $50 for each violation.
         (b)   The civil penalty provided herein may be recovered by the city
in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 20 days after the offender has been cited for the ordinance
violation. As used herein, CITED shall mean notified of the violation and the
penalty in writing by an elected or appointed official of the city or the
official attorney for the city. The civil penalty may be used as an alternative
to or in conjunction with the criminal penalties authorized herein.
   (C)   (1)   Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of §§
90.15 or
90.16 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.
      (2)   Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense, up to the following maximums. On first violation, the maximum total
fine for each person cited is $1,000. On the second violation within the same
year, the maximum total fine for each person cited is $2,000. On the third
violation within the same year, the maximum total fine for each person cited is
$3,000.
(Ord. 07-04, passed 3-20-2008; Ord. 09-3, passed 9-10-2009; Ord. 21-04, passed
8-13-2021)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
111.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS
      
112.   GARAGE SALES
CHAPTER 110: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
110.01   Imposition of license fee
   
110.02   Fees to be paid to General Revenue Fund
   
110.03   Life insurance policies
   
110.04   Amount of fee for policies other than life insurance
   
110.05   Due date; interest and refunds
   
110.06   Written breakdown of collections
   
110.07   Inspection of records and accounts
   
110.08   Liability of agents
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   There is imposed on each insurance company a license fee for the privilege
of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the
city, on a calendar-year basis, based upon the following.
   (A)   PREMIUMS are defined as premiums actually collected by an insurance
company within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of policies and
contracts of insurance on risks located within the city and includes premiums
on new policies and contracts of insurance and on renewal business, as well as
all other classes of premiums, less all premiums returned to policy holders.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) below, the license fee
imposed upon each insurance company which issues any insurance policy or
contract of insurance shall be the following percentage of premiums on those
classes of insurance which such company is authorized to issue (the BASE FEE).
The base fee shall not apply to premiums exempted by state or federal law.
 
             Fire and Casualty                                    All Other
             Allied   Liability Vehicle Inland Marine Health Life Risks Taxed
             Perils   Only
Initial Rate 5%       5%        5%      5%            0%     5%   5%
 
   (C)   In addition to the base fee, an additional license fee is hereby
imposed upon each insurance company with respect to premiums, which additional
license fee shall be equal to the amount by which the credit for City LGPT is
allowable under KRS 91A.080(12), against the Metro LGPT, in excess of the base
fee under division (B) above.
   (D)   The city and Metro currently impose a 5% LGPT on casualty liability
premiums. Assume Metro hereafter adopts an ordinance increasing its countywide
LGPT rate on casualty liability premiums to 10% and provides that ordinance to
the State Commissioner of Insurance on or before March 23, 2019 (100 days prior
to the July 1, 2019 effective date) so that the increase in the Metro LGPT rate
will be effective July 1, 2019. Beginning July 1, 2019, the City LGPT rate on
casualty liability premiums will also be a total of 10%.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.02 FEES TO BE PAID TO GENERAL REVENUE FUND.
   The license fee or tax established by this chapter is imposed and levied for
the purpose of general revenue funds and shall be paid into the General Fund of
the city.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.03 LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES.
   The license fee or tax imposed by a city upon each insurance company with
respect to life insurance policies may be based upon the first year’s premiums
and shall be applied to the amount of the premiums actually collected within
each calendar quarter upon the lives of persons residing within the corporate
limits of the city.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.04 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE INSURANCE.
   (A)   The license fee or tax imposed upon each insurance company with
respect to any policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be of the
premiums actually collected by the insurance company within each calendar
quarter on risks located within the corporate limits of the city on those
classes of business which the insurance company is authorized to transact, less
all premiums returned to policyholders.
   (B)   The license fee or tax shall also not apply to premiums:
      (1)   Received on policies of group health insurance provided for state
employees under KRS 18A.225;
      (2)   Received on policies insuring employers against liability for
personal injuries to their employees or the death of their employees caused
thereby, under the provisions of KRS Chapter 342;
      (3)   Received on health insurance policies issued to individuals;
      (4)   Received on policies issued through Kentucky Access created in KRS
Chapter 304 Subtitle 17B;
      (5)   Received on policies for high deductible health plans, as defined
in 26 U.S.C. § 223(c)(2);
      (6)   Received on multi-state surplus lines, defined as non-admitted
insurance as provided in Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act, Pub. Law No. 115-203; or
      (7)   Paid to insurance companies or surplus lines brokers by non-profit
self-insurance groups or self-insurance entities whose membership consists of
cities, counties, charter county government, urban-county government,
consolidated local government, unified local government, school districts, or
any other political subdivisions of the commonwealth.
   (C)   No license fee or tax imposed under this section shall apply to
premiums paid to insurers of municipal bonds, leases, or other debt instruments
issued by or on behalf of a city, county, charter county government, urban-
county government, consolidated local government, special district, non-profit
corporation, or other political subdivision of the commonwealth. However, this
exemption shall not apply if the bonds, leases, or other debt instruments are
issued for profit or on behalf of for-profit or private organizations.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.05 DUE DATE; INTEREST AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30
days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (B)   Any insurance company or agent that overpays any license fee or tax to
a city shall be refunded the amount overpaid. If it is determined that an
insurance company or agent paid a license fee or tax to a city based upon
premiums collected upon lives or risks which are discovered to be located
outside the legal corporate limits of the city which was paid the license fee
or tax, the insurance company or agent shall be refunded those license fees and
taxes within 90 days’ notice to the city paid.
   (C)   License fees which are not paid on or before the due date shall bear
interest at the tax interest rate as defined in KRS 131.010(6) from the date
due until paid.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.06 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine;
   (D)   Fire and allied perils;
   (E)   Health; and
   (F)   Life.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.07 INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Every insurance company subject to license fees or tax shall maintain
records adequate to support the reports required to be filed under this
chapter.
   (B)   Authority is given to the city or a representative thereof to make
inspection of the books, accounts, and records of the agent or insurance
company to verify the correctness of any report or breakdown of collections.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 LIABILITY OF AGENTS.
   This section applies to insurance agents and surplus lines brokers to the
extent they are responsible for collection, reporting, and payment of license
fees or taxes pursuant to KRS 91A.080.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Pursuant to KRS 91A.080, willful failure to properly collect and remit the
license fees or taxes imposed by this chapter may constitute grounds for the
revocation of the license issued to an insurance company or agent under the
provisions of KRS Chapter 304 or may result in other penalties being imposed by
the State Office of Insurance.
(Ord. 19-01, passed 3-14-2019)
CHAPTER 111: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License required
   
111.04   Standards for issuance
   
111.05   Date and duration of license
   
111.06   License not transferable
   
111.07   License certificate to be displayed
   
111.08   Revocation or suspension
   
111.09   Appeal and review
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Commission does find (pursuant to KRS 92.330) that it is
necessary to provide for the licensure and taxing of rental properties as
businesses, because renting of property in exchange for compensation is in fact
a business and the operation of rental property can be detrimental to property
values and community appearance and interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
adjacent property or premises. Further, there are conditions in the operation
of rental property which (unless corrected) can be hazardous or injurious to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. KRS 92.280 grants
authority to the city to tax and license rental businesses and to establish a
clear and concise communication process between the city and each owner of each
rental unit. This updated information and communication process is essential
for the city to make sure that it can address any detrimental property
conditions, or health or safety violation at the rental property, quickly and
efficiently.
   (B)   The fee for the annual license going to the General Fund of the city
to help defray the cost of maintaining current contact information for all
rental properties in the city and also the cost of providing city services,
such as lighting, police protection and public work expenditures, which the
rental properties use each day.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Carrying on, transacting, or exercising, for gain or economic
benefit, either directly or indirectly, enterprise, the collection of rent from
residential real property within city (including short-term rental as defined
herein), conducted by an individual, partnership, firm, joint venture,
association, corporation, or any other entity; but shall not include allowing a
person to occupy property without charging rent.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, firm, joint venture, fiduciary,
association, or corporation. Whenever PERSON is used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty in the nature of a fine, the word, as applied to a
partnership or other form of unincorporated enterprise shall mean the partners
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and
directors thereof.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A dwelling unit that is rented, leased, or otherwise
assigned for a tenancy for less than 15 consecutive days duration, where no
meals are served. This term does not include hotels or motel rooms, extended
stay lodging facilities, bed and breakfast inns, or boards and lodging house
rooms.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall collect rent from a residential dwelling in the city
without first applying for and obtaining a license from the City Clerk or other
duly authorized issuing authority. The fee for a license shall be $150. This
fee and license requirement shall apply to any person renting their real
property including short term rentals. No person shall conduct any business in
the city that is not allowed by the Land Development Code of Metro Louisville/
Jefferson County or KRS (state law) and federal law.
   (B)   Registration of rental dwellings applications shall include:
      (1)   The address of the rental dwelling;
      (2)   The name, residence address, business address, business phone
number and personal phone number of the owner and each of its principals,
officers, and partners, if applicable, and the local agent of the rental
property. One of the names and addresses must be specified for city
communications;
      (3)   If the owner of a rental dwelling, or a responsible member or
officer of the owner, does not reside within 60 miles of the city, the owner
shall designate a responsible local agent, who shall be legally responsible for
operating such rental dwelling in compliance with this chapter, this code of
ordinances, and other applicable laws or regulations. All official notices may
be served on the responsible local agent, and any notice so served shall be
deemed to have been served upon the owner of record; and
      (4)   Verification that all state and city taxes levied and assessed
against the rental dwelling that are due and payable at the time of the filing
of the application have been paid. Delinquencies on such taxes may result in
the denial of an application for registration or re-registration under this
section.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner to provide
inaccurate information for the registration or re-registration of rental
dwellings or to fail to provide information required by the application.
   (D)   All rental property must be kept in compliance with the city code of
ordinances, as well as all Metro Louisville Ordinances (including, but not
limited to, Chapter 156), and Land Development Code as a condition of operating
a rental property in the city. Each rental dwelling shall provide measures
acceptable to the city to prevent any excessive noise at any property line.
Each rental dwelling shall provide measures acceptable to the city to prevent
violations of the city’s parking ordinance by tenants of the rental unit.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant
shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Conviction of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Prior violations of city or Louisville Metro ordinances; or
      (4)   Has been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have
committed prior fraudulent acts.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018)
§ 111.05 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein
specified.
   (B)   In no event shall a license be granted to any business or any person
for a longer time than one year.
   (C)   No person shall offer short-term rental of his or her property for a
period longer than a total of 15 days total in the same calendar year (365
days). The license for short-term rentals will expire after the property has
been rented short-term for a period of 15 days cumulative.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted in
a prominent place upon the licensed premises the license certificate.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Any license may be revoked by the City Commission at any time for
conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the time of issuance,
would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any misrepresentation of a
material fact in the application discovered after issuance of the license; for
violation of any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance relating
to the operation of the business or enterprise for which the license has been
issued; for violation of any city ordinance or upon conviction of a licensee
for any federal, state, or municipal law or ordinance involving moral
turpitude.
   (B)   The revocation shall become effective upon notice served upon the
licensee or posted upon the premises affected.
   (C)   As a preliminary to revocation, the City Commission may issue an order
suspending the license, which shall become effective immediately upon service
of written notice to the licensee. This notice shall specify the reason for
suspension and may provide conditions under which reinstatement of the license
may be obtained. Upon compliance with these conditions within the time
specified, the license may be restored.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018)
§ 111.09 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   In case any applicant has been denied a license, or if his or her license
has been revoked or suspended, the applicant or licensee shall within three
business days have the right to appeal to the City Commission from the denial,
revocation, or suspension. Notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the
City Clerk who shall fix the time and place for a hearing which shall be held
not later than one week thereafter. The City Clerk shall notify the Mayor and
all members of the Commission of the time and place of the hearing not less
than 24 hours in advance thereof.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined $500. Each day of non-compliance after the
violation notice is issued shall constitute an additional violation, up to the
following maximums. On first violation, the maximum total fine for each person
cited is $2,500. On second violation, the maximum total fine for each person
cited is $5,000. On third violation, the maximum total fine for each person
cited is $10,000.
(Ord. 18-2, passed 7-12-2018)
CHAPTER 112: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Garage sales prohibited
   
112.03   Enforcement
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALES. All sales entitled “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “estate sale,”
“attic sale,” “rummage sale,” “flea market sale,” or any similar casual sale of
multiple items (more than five in number) of tangible personal property from a
residence or residential property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
   GOODS. Any goods, furniture, fixtures, equipment, or personalty, capable of
being the object of a sale.
   PERSON. Individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations, and corporations,
and shall include both the owner(s) of the item(s) being sold and the person(s)
advertising or selling.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 9-20-2001)
§ 112.02 GARAGE SALES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall advertise or conduct a garage sale in the city.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 9-20-2001) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter shall subject the offender to fines,
penalties, and forfeitures that may be imposed by law, and the city may secure
injunctions and abatement orders, when appropriate, to ensure compliance with
its ordinances as authorized by KRS 83A.065.
   (B)   This chapter may be enforced by any one or all or a combination of the
remedies authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 9-20-2001)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Criminal.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense, and the sale of
each item sold shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Where the Kentucky Revised Statutes mandates a fine higher than
that stipulated herein, the fine contained in the Kentucky Revised Statutes
shall apply.
   (B)   Civil.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty equal to the greater of $50 per item
sold or $500.
      (2)   The civil penalty provided herein may be recovered by the city in
civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty
within 20 days after the offender has been cited for the ordinance violation.
As used herein, CITED shall mean notified of the violation and the penalty in
writing by an elected or appointed official of the city or the official
attorney for the city, or any police department serving the city. The civil
penalty may be used as an alternative to or in conjunction with the criminal
penalties authorized herein.
(Ord. 01-03, passed 9-20-2001)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Littering
   
130.02   Taking or defacing property
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place or throw
any filth, waste, or refuse matter, of any kind, upon the streets or rights-of-
way of the city or to permit any person in his, her, their, or its employment
to do so.
(Ord. passed 10-5-1970) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 TAKING OR DEFACING PROPERTY.
   Any person who, unlawfully but without felonious intent, takes, carries
away, defaces, or damages any property or thing of value not his or her own,
whether it be public or private property, shall be fined in accordance with §
130.99 for each offense.
(Ord. 8, passed 11-3-1958) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating §
130.01 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
   (C)   Any person who violates §
130.02 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 8, passed 11-3-1958; Ord. passed 10-5-1970)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   Building and demolition permits; letters of compliance
   
150.02   Design standards
   
150.03   Prohibited uses
   
150.04   Waiver
   
150.05   Permits and fees
§ 150.01 BUILDING AND DEMOLITION PERMITS; LETTERS OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Subsequent to the issuance of any building or demolition permit from
Metro Louisville, the city must be given the opportunity to review said permit
application and plans to determine if the project (and its site) is in
compliance with this chapter. The city shall evidence the determination as to
whether the project complies with the city’s building and design ordinance by
issuance of a letter of compliance notification. It is a responsibility of the
resident to make application and provide all needed information for the
issuance of the letter of compliance.
   (B)   Activities which would not trigger an application to Metro Louisville
for a building or demolition permit, through Metro Louisville and the State
Building Code, may nevertheless be subject to prior review by the city. Those
activities requiring prior review and a letter of compliance include any
structure not attached to the house, fence, and wall installations and
extensions. The city shall determine whether the project complies with this
chapter by issuance of a letter of compliance. It is a responsibility of the
resident to make application and provide all needed information for the
issuance of the letter of compliance, prior to construction.
   (C)   Letter of compliance authority are good for only six months from
issuance. If the project is not complete at the expiration of one year, the
letter of compliance is invalid and the applicant must reapply.
   (D)   The purpose of the letter of compliance process is compliance with
these design guidelines, which in no way attempts to regulate or inspect issues
relating to the Building Code of the state, which is the responsibility of
Metro Louisville. Any fence, wall, driveway, HVAC system, addition, garage, or
structure built prior to the effective date of this chapter is allowed to
remain. This chapter does not require the city to conduct inspections required
by the State Building Code.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 6-11-2015)
§ 150.02 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   All construction in all zoning districts (including accessory
structures) shall have building architecture in keeping with the general
character of the existing architecture in the city, in terms of style, type of
materials, design, and appearance. Rooflines, pitches, and material must be in
keeping to the character of the neighborhood, in terms of style, type of
material, design, and height. The orientation of any primary structure on its
lot to the street must be uniform with its surrounding structures.
   (B)   In all residential zoned areas, the exterior finishes must be brick or
stone, with glass, vinyl, wood, and cement board or other material to be used
only as accents, trims, or soffits. Such accents or trim shall not exceed 30%
of any individual facade, and the term FACADE includes the total surface of one
side of a building for all levels.
   (C)   In all residential zoned areas, all fences and walls must not be
installed in such a way as to obstruct drainage. All fence and wall materials
must match the general style and materials of the neighborhood, in terms of
style, type of material, and design. Fences will not exceed six feet in height
and will not extend past the front facade of the residence.
   (D)   Appropriate, minimum landscaping is required on all residential lots.
The landscaping must be in keeping with the general character of the
neighborhood. If landscaping (including turf and grass replacement) is removed,
replacement must occur within a reasonable time frame, but in no event longer
than 90 days from removal, unless permission is requested in writing and
received in writing from the city.
   (E)   The side yard from house to property line should be a minimum of eight
feet and a total of 18 feet for both sides. Any structure which exists at the
time of the effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to remain as a
grandfathered use.
   (F)   No applicant who is requesting a letter of compliance can receive such
approval if the applicant’s property is otherwise in violation of the city’s
ordinances, or owes outstanding taxes or fees to the city.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 6-11-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.03 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   No outbuildings or accessory structure are allowed on any lot in the
city, with the exception that a child’s playhouse not larger than 120 square
feet is allowed, as are other types of play structures, such as swing and play
sets. No such play structures are allowed past the front wall of any residence.
Any play structure must be kept in good condition, no peeling paint or
deteriorated condition. No utility connection of any type may be allowed in a
child’s playhouse. Any outbuilding or accessory structure which existed for at
least one year prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to
remain as a grandfathered use. Any expansion, substantial construction or
reconstruction, moving, or replacement shall render such structure’s
grandfather status ineffective.
   (B)   No outside clothes drying lines are allowed on any lot in the city.
   (C)   No window-unit air conditioners are allowed on any lot in the city.
   (D)   No above-ground swimming pools are allowed on any lot in the city,
with the exception that a kiddie pool of no more than 100 square feet is
allowed, temporarily. No hot tubs are allowed to be placed beyond the front
wall of the principal structure.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 6-11-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.04 WAIVER.
   The City Commission understands that due to site-specific conditions,
imposition of these standards may be inappropriate, or work an undue hardship.
Therefore, the City Commission may waive any part of these standards on a case
by case basis, but only for good cause shown by the property owner.
(Ord. 15-03, passed 6-11-2015)
§ 150.05 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The following permit fees apply:
Permit Fee
Permit                                    Fee
Building/addition/remodeling/demolition   $150
Driveway/parking area/circular drives     $150
Dumpsters and portable storage containers $50/month
Excavation with heavy equipment           $100
Fences/walls                              $50
Roofs and solar panels                    $100
Swimming pools                            $150
Utility installations                     $100
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CONTRACTS AND INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   STREET OPENINGS, WIDENINGS, AND VACATIONS
TABLE I: CONTRACTS AND INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res./Order No. Date Passed  Description
Ord./Res./Order No. Date Passed  Description
Order 82-1          3-11-1982      Interlocal agreement with the City of Indian
                                   Hills for police services.
Order 98-01         2-17-1998      Contract with Pruitt Professional Services
                                   for garbage collection.
Order 00-1          8-17-2000      Interlocal agreement with the City of Indian
                                   Hills for police services.
                                   Interlocal agreement to enter into Metro
Order 13-1          6-13-2013      Louisville Partnership Program for capital
                                   projects.
                                   Interlocal agreement with Louisville/
R. 16-1             1-14-2016      Jefferson County Metro for communications
                                   services.
                                   Interlocal agreement improving the joint and
25-04               9-8-2025       cooperative program for self-insurance,
                                   insurance, and the investment of public
                                   funds.
                                  
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res./Order No. Date Passed  Description
Order 85-1          6-3-1985       Granting a 15-year CATV franchise to Storer
                                   Communications.
                                   Transferring a franchise from Intermedia
Order 99-1          10-4-1999      Partners of Kentucky to Insight
                                   Communications Company.
                                   Confirming the Insight Kentucky Partners
R. 11-1             9-8-2011       franchise continues after its merger with
                                   Time Warner Cable.
                                   Confirming the Insight Kentucky Partners
R. -                1-12-2012      franchise continues after its merger with
                                   Time Warner Cable.
15.4                9-10-2015      Extending a CATV franchise with Insight
                                   Kentucky Partners.
                                  
 
TABLE III: STREET OPENINGS, WIDENINGS, AND VACATIONS
 
Ord./Res./Order No. Date Passed  Description
R. 09-01            9-10-2009      Widening Brownsboro Road at the Country Lane
                                   intersection.
                                  
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Orders
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cite Code Section
KRS Cite                 Code Section
18A.225                  110.04
Chapter 61               30.03
61.805 to 61.884         30.02
61.810                   34.61
                         34.58;
61.870 to 61.884         34.64;
                         34.65
61.872 to 61.884         34.20
65.003                   34.03
65.210 et seq.           32.16
82.082                   34.03
Chapter 83A              30.03
83A.010(3)               10.02
83A.010(6)               10.02
83A.010(8)               10.02
                         10.99;
83A.065                  71.08 -
                         71.29;
                         112.03
83A.080                  34.04
91A.010(4)               10.02
91A.010(8)               10.02
91A.080                  110.08;
                         110.99
91A.080(12)              110.01
92.280                   111.01
92.330                   111.01
131.010(6)               110.05
189.940                  71.28
Chapter 304              110.99
Chapter 304 Subtitle 17B 110.04
Chapter 342              110.04
446.010(1)               10.02
446.010(2)               10.02
446.010(9)               10.02
446.010(10)              10.02
446.010(12)              10.02
446.010(13)              10.02
446.010(14)              10.02
446.010(15)              10.02
446.010(17)              10.02
446.010(18)              10.02
446.010(23)              10.02
446.010(25)              10.02
446.010(26)              10.02
446.010(27)              10.02
446.010(28)              10.02
446.010(30)              10.02
446.010(31)              10.02
446.010(33)              10.02
446.010(37)              10.02
446.010(39)              10.02
446.010(43)              10.02
446.010(46)              10.02
446.010(47)              10.02
446.010(49)              10.02
446.010(55)              10.02
446.020(1)               10.03
446.020(2)               10.03
446.030                  10.04
446.050                  10.05
446.060                  10.06
446.080(1)               10.03
446.080(3)               10.03
446.080(4)               10.03
446.090                  10.07
446.100                  10.08
446.110                  10.09
446.140                  10.01
527.020(3)               32.16
534.040(2)(c)            10.99
                         
 
 REFERENCES TO ORDERS
Order No. Date Passed Code Section
Order No. Date Passed Code Section
82-1      3-11-1982   TSO Table I
82-2      3-11-1982   32.16
82-3      5-3-1982    32.16
85-1      6-3-1985    TSO Table II
85-2      7-1-1985    32.16
94-       - -1994     32.01
98-01     2-17-1998   TSO Table I
99-1      10-4-1999   TSO Table II
00-1      8-17-2000   TSO Table I
13-1      6-13-2013   TSO Table I
                     
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
01-1     12-20-2001  50.01
09-01    9-10-2009   TSO Table III
11-1     9-8-2011    TSO Table II
-        1-12-2012   TSO Table II
16-1     1-14-2016   TSO Table I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
3        6-2-1958       70.01;
                        70.99
6        11-3-1958      70.01;
                        70.99
7        11-3-1958      70.03;
                        70.99
8        11-3-1958      130.02;
                        130.99
10       1-5-1959       TSO Table II
-        10-5-1970      130.01;
                        130.99
-        6-4-1973       70.01;
                        70.99
-        6-4-1973       70.03;
                        70.99
81-1     6-1-1981       33.01
82-2     3-11-1982      32.15
83-3     12-5-1983      35.01
1, 1986  5-5-1986       33.02
                        34.01 -
                        34.04;
                        34.15 -
                        34.23;
94-03    - -1994        34.35 -
                        34.39;
                        34.55 
                        34.65;
                        34.99
                        71.01 -
99-04    9-7-1999       71.08;
                        71.99
                        71.20 -
99-05    9-7-1999       71.29;
                        71.99
                        112.01 -
01-03    9-20-2001      112.03;
                        112.99
                        90.15;
07-04    3-20-2008      90.16;
                        90.99
                        90.01 -
09-3     9-10-2009      90.03;
                        90.99
10-3     8-12-2010      90.15
15-03    6-11-2015      150.01 -
                        150.04
15.4     9-10-2015      TSO Table II
                        111.01 
18-2     7-12-2018      111.09;
                        111.99
                        110.01 
19-01    3-14-2019      110.08;
                        110.99
21-03    6-10-2021      90.15
21-04    8-13-2021      90.99
25-01    6-8-2025       71.30;
                        71.99
25-04    9-8-2025       TSO Table I
                       
 
