Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Springfield. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained in
PDF format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to March
2025, please contact the City.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
Legislation
Legislation
 
Ord. No. Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                    Amending Ord. 2001-017 relating to revolving loan fund
2022-009 12-12-2022  
                    TSO Table III
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
 
SPRINGFIELD, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through Ord. 2025-003, passed 3-11-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
Chris Essex         Mayor
City Councilmembers  
Daniel Bishop        
Willie Ellery        
Michael Hale         
Carolyn Hardin       
John Pettus          
Lance Smith          
Jessica Hart        City Administrator/Clerk
Marie Blandford     Financial Officer
Elizabeth Coulter   City Attorney
Sue Mudd            Chief of Police
Forrest Carrico     Fire Chief
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
Springfield, Kentucky Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Title heads, chapter heads and section and division
heads or titles, and explanatory notes and cross references, do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to those
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and maintained by
the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information on
vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards.
(KRS 446.010(55))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code shall
denote the City of Springfield, Kentucky irrespective of its population or
legal classification.
   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(10))
   COUNCIL. The city legislative body.
(KRS 83A.010(5))
   COUNTY. Washington County, Kentucky.
   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted.
(KRS 446.010(12))
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by authority
of this state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor.
(KRS 83A.010(6), KRS 91A.010(4))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership,
business trust, statutory trust or limited liability company, includes all
those incorporated or formed by authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(18))
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Council member.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
(KRS 446.010(26))
   MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Springfield, Kentucky.
   OATH. Includes affirmation in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH. (KRS 446.010(28))
   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited PARTNERSHIPS.
(KRS 446.010(30))
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables granted police powers,
coroners, jailers, metropolitan and urban-county government correctional
officers, marshals, police officers and other persons with similar authority to
make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even-numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected and the election in odd-numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
(KRS 446.010(39))
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   SWORN. Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of
office without a lawful incumbent therein, or when the person elected or
appointed to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has
been no election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies
whether the VACANCY is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the
state, county, city or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
Council.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to that meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in
which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public
office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just
mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall mean the
time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or
compliance with the notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include those acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides otherwise,
or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with
and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is apparent that Council
would not have enacted the remaining parts without the unconstitutional part;
or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of
being executed in accordance with the intent of Council.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of Council.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the effective
date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
Council which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council, as long as the
repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original
amendment.
   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall
have the effect of reviving the original language of the repealer or amendment,
as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the purpose effected
prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall remain in effect
and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances
until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   The method of amendment set forth in KRS 83A.060(3) should be used by
the city to amend, add or repeal a chapter, section or division of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
      (KRS 83A.090)
   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 for each
offense.
Statutory references:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065
   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY GOVERNMENT
      
31.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
32.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
33.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
      
34.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   CITY POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Form of government
City Officials
   
30.15   Election procedure
   
30.16   Mayor
   
30.17   City Clerk
City Council
   
30.30   Presiding Officer
   
30.31   Meetings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 83A.020, the city hereby elects to retain the
organization and structure of its city government existing of July 14, 1980
being that of a Mayor-Council plan governed by KRS 83A.130, immediately before
the effective date of nonemergency legislation enacted by the 1980 Regular
Session of the General Assembly.
   (B)   For the purposes of the organization and structure of the government
of the city, KRS 83A.130 shall direct and control the organization and
structure of city government.
   (C)   Pursuant to KRS 83A.020, ordinances and resolutions of the city are
hereby declared to remain in force and effect, and any such ordinance citing or
relying on a section of Kentucky Revised Statutes repealed by the 1980 Regular
Session of the General Assembly shall be deemed to refer to such repealed
statute for purposes of structure, procedure and operation only, and not for
the grant of any power or authority found in such section.
(Prior Code, § 240.4)
CITY OFFICIALS
§ 30.15 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Election of city officers in the city shall be in accordance with
nonpartisan city election laws as provided in KRS 83A.045, 83A.170 and 83A.175.
   (B)   As of the effective date of this section, the nonpartisan primary
election for the nomination of candidates to elected city offices is hereby
eliminated as authorized by KRS 83A.045(2)(b).
   (C)   All candidates for elected city offices shall file their nomination
papers with the County Clerk no later than 68 days before the day fixed by KRS
Chapter 118 for holding the regular election.
   (D)   All nomination papers shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m.
prevailing local time when filed on the last day on which such papers are
permitted to be filed.
   (E)   The election of candidates to all elected offices shall be governed by
the provisions of this section and by the applicable provisions of KRS Chapter
83A and Chapters 116 through 121. The city will not conduct a nonpartisan
primary election.
(Ord. 89-001, passed 1-20-1989)
§ 30.16 MAYOR.
   (A)   The compensation to be paid to the Mayor for his or her term shall be
established by ordinance.
   (B)   When the absence or disability of the Mayor shall prevent his or her
serving in the office and performing the duties and responsibilities of the
Mayor during a national, state or local emergency, these duties shall be
administered temporarily by the longest serving Council person per KRS 83A.040.
(Ord. 90-002, passed 2-12-1990; Ord. 2015-001, passed 2-10-2015)
§ 30.17 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   There is hereby established the city office to be known as the City
Clerk.
   (B)   The office of the City Clerk shall be filled by appointment, by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council.
   (C)   The duties of the office of City Clerk shall be as follows:
      (1)   Attends City Council meetings and takes minutes;
      (2)   Maintains safe keeping of official city records, including
ordinances, municipal orders and executive order books;
      (3)   Performs duties of the custodian of records, pursuant to KRS
61.870; and
      (4)   Performs related work as required by the Mayor and all duties and
responsibilities required of the City Clerk by statute or ordinance.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall take the constitutional oath of office upon
appointment and prior to performing his or her duties hereunder.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall post bond in the amount of $25,000 for faithful
performance of duties outlined herein, this may be combined with other city
employee bonding requirements.
(Prior Code, § 230.02) (Ord. 91-007, passed 10-14-1991)
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.30 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   Pursuant to KRS 83A.130(5), within 30 days after the biennial election of
City Council members, the Council shall elect by nomination and roll-call vote
one of its members to preside at City Council meetings in the absence of the
Mayor.
(Ord. 90-001, passed 1-8-1990)
§ 30.31 MEETINGS.
   Pursuant to the requirements of KRS 83A.130(11), regular meetings of the
City Council are hereby scheduled in the City Council Meeting Room of City Hall
at 127 West Main Street, Springfield, Kentucky at 4:30 p.m., prevailing time,
on the second Tuesday of each calendar month.
(Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-20-2023)
CHAPTER 31: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Funds
   
31.01   Revolving Loan Fund
Procurement Standards
   
31.15   Methods of procurement
   
31.16   Contracts
   
31.17   Documentation
   
31.18   Locally owned, minority owned, female owned and small business
   
31.19   Code of conduct
 
   
31.99   Penalty
FUNDS
§ 31.01 REVOLVING LOAN FUND.
   (A)   A goal of the City Council is job creation and retention. The city’s
Revolving Loan Fund represents one effort to achieve this goal. Since the
monies in this Fund are limited, objectives of the City Council are to approve
projects that are sound and capable of repaying their loan and to maximize
earnings through investment. These objectives will help maintain and ensure the
growth of the Fund for use by future prospective businesses.
   (B)   (1)   Establishment of Revolving Loan Fund Board.
         (a)   The City Council hereby establishes a Revolving Loan Fund Board
composed of the members of the existing City Industrial Authority.
         (b)   The RLF Board will establish, evaluate and carry out policy,
establish loan conditions and recommend disposition of loans under the SRLF.
         (c)   The Mayor shall serve as loan fund manager and will act as
liaison between potential borrowers and the SRLF Board of Directors. The Mayor
may delegate this authority or request assistance as is needed.
         (d)   In addition, three members of the Board will serve as a Loan
Review Committee. This Loan Review Committee will, with the assistance of the
RLF manager, review all loan requests and make recommendations to the full
Board regarding the various requests.
      (2)   Processing fees. A fee of $250 shall be charged to cover the costs
of processing an application. This fee shall be levied only on those applicants
desiring to submit an application for consideration. No charge shall be made
for initial contact or preliminary discussions required for the development of
a possible application. No charge to the city for projects.
      (3)   Technical and managerial assistance.
         (a)   Due to their involvement with and knowledge of other sources of
financing, the Lincoln Trail Area Development District shall provide technical
and managerial assistance and secretarial support to the SRLF Board and
potential applicants.
         (b)   Technical assistance shall consist of: working with applicant
and other loan participants to develop a feasible project; seeking additional
loan sources which may be available; reviewing proposals; and advising the SRLF
Board and manager on merits of the loan.
      (4)   Servicing of loans. The city’s Revolving Loan Fund will not
directly engage in the servicing of its portfolio. The Board will negotiate
with outside sources, preferably the first lender, who possess the necessary
skills to service the loans.
      (5)   Monitoring of loan. The RLF manager will conduct a monitoring visit
of each project at least twice a year to determine if there are any problems
that jeopardize the loan. The RLF and servicing agency will keep each other
informed about problems they encounter. If so desired, the Board may request
periodic financial reports from the company as a condition of loan approval.
      (6)   Solicitation of loans. The Revolving Loan Fund will recruit
potential borrowers through several methods. The RLF manager will actively
solicit participation through private lenders, referrals from the State
Development Block Grant Program and other sources as appropriate. These
development agencies will be in the position of making RLF program information
available to various enterprises with which they have contact.
   (C)   (1)   Eligible applicants.
         (a)   The applicant must be registered sole proprietor partnership or
corporation established for the purpose of doing business in the city, or the
city or its agency.
         (b)   The applicant must possess good character and reputation.
Character references will be required. References may include creditors, past
employers or others who possess knowledge of the applicant.
      (2)   Eligible projects.
         (a)   Acquisition and assembly of land for industrial or commercial
use;
         (b)   Acquisition of properties with redevelopment potential for
industrial or commercial use;
         (c)   The start-up and/or expansion of industries in the city;
         (d)   The rehabilitation and renovation of useable vacant building for
specific industrial or commercial use; and
         (e)   Other projects determined to be in the best interest of the
citizens of the city generally accepted to improve the climate for attracting
new business and to benefit existing business.
      (3)   Ineligible projects.
         (a)   Businesses serving alcoholic beverages;
         (b)   Rolling stock (i.e., trucks, forklifts, automobile);
         (c)   Speculative building;
         (d)   Loans to retire existing debt;
         (e)   Working capital;
         (f)   Business activity located outside the boundaries of the city;
and
         (g)   Any other projects determined not to be in the best interests of
the citizens of the city.
      (4)   Eligible costs. Loans made under the SRLF can be used to finance:
         (a)   Land costs. All related costs related to the acquisition and
development of land for industrial or commercial use;
         (b)   Building costs. All costs associated with acquisition,
construction and rehabilitation of buildings for industrial or commercial use,
including leasehold improvements;
         (c)   Machinery and equipment costs. All related costs associated with
the acquisition and installation of machinery and equipment; and
         (d)   Facility development costs. Costs for facility development
necessary for project completion (i.e., water lines, sewer lines, access
reads).
   (D)   The following factors will be considered in the loan review process
for all SRLF loan applications.
      (1)   Highest priority will be given to projects creating at least one
job per every $5,000 of RLF monies. Except under exceptional circumstances, the
SRLF will not consider projects where the ratio exceeds $10,000 per new long-
term job created. Jobs used for purposes of this ratio are those existing at
the end of two years after start-up. Construction jobs in the building of a
facility are not included.
      (2)   No SRLF loans shall be made if funding is otherwise available from
private lenders on terms that would allow for the successful completion of the
project.
      (3)   No SRLF loans can be used to refinance existing debt.
      (4)   The SRLF will not participate in projects outside the geographical
boundary of the city.
   (E)   The SRLF shall exercise flexibility in negotiating terms with the
participating financial institutions. The following conditions, however, are
set as minimum guidelines.
      (1)   The SRLF reserves the right to sell its interest in a loan package
where the Board deems advisable.
      (2)   The SRLF would accept convertible subordinated debt, with or
without deferral provisions for either principal and/or interest.
      (3)   Where appropriate in debt position, liens will be taken covering
all assets. A subordinated position will not be accepted where an inordinate
amount of risk is evident.
      (4)   Personal guarantees may be required of owners who control at least
20% of the company.
      (5)   The SRLF will impose the following maximum term requirements and
restrictions on loans.
 
                       Maximum Length of Terms
Machinery and equipment 7-12 years or the usable life of the equipment
Real estate             10-20 years
 
      (6)   Rates will be negotiated by the SRLF Board, but in no case shall it
be less than 5%.
      (7)   In negotiating terms for potential borrowers, terms will not be
made that cannot feasibly be met. A thorough credit analysis will be undertaken
prior to negotiating loan terms.
      (8)   There will be no provision for repayment of money borrowed by the
city.
   (F)   (1)   Initial meeting. The initial meeting that the RLF manager will
conduct with a potential borrower will be to determine eligibility, generally
discuss the project and explain the application process and needed information.
At this point, projects which are ineligible or which do not look strong should
be referred to proper funding sources or discouraged from applying. The loan
manager will indicate that the following items will be required from the
applicant prior to the next meeting:
         (a)   Three-year financial statements, if applicable;
         (b)   A brief description of the request, including total project
cost, amount of loan requested, purpose of loan and terms requested;
         (c)   The loan fund manager and the potential borrower will take a
first cut at structuring the loan package;
         (d)   An economic impact statement, including the number and type of
jobs to be retained and/or created at the end of two years;
         (e)   Historical financial data; and
         (f)   Any other items requested of applicant by the RLF manager or
Board.
      (2)   Loan application process. Upon determination of applicant
eligibility, the borrower will complete the loan application form. Prior to
this, the borrower will have been issued full information regarding standard
conditions and federally required assurances and conditions. In conjunction
with the above cited standard forms, the SRLF Board of Directors shall request
the following information, much of which will be included as part of the
applicant’s business plan:
         (a)   Financial information, where relevant, which shall include:
            1.   Current audited financial statement, including balance sheets,
income statement with auditor’s footnotes and supporting statements for the
applicants three most recent fiscal years, where applicable, and audited
consolidated financial and income statements, with auditor’s footnotes, of any
parent company for the three most recent fiscal years, also where applicable;
            2.   Most recent interim financial statements of the applicant and,
if applicable, of its parent company, certified by officers of the respective
companies and maintained current during the loan application process; and
            3.   Projected pro forma balance sheets, income statements, cash
flow and supporting statements of the applicant, quarterly, from the date of
the latest interim financial statement to the date of the commencement of
project operation. The statements and balance sheets should reflect the
applicant’s ability to repay debt principal out of earnings within the first
three years of operation.
         (b)   The non-financial information as the RLF Board of Directors
deems is necessary to substantiate the pro forma projections. These may
include, but not be limited to:
            1.   Estimates, firm quotations, receipts, contracts, orders,
invoices, leases or equivalent documentation from architects, engineers,
contractors, sub-contractors, material suppliers, lessors or others involved in
the sale, lease or construction of fixed assets, if any, for applicant’s
project, including schedules of implementation; and
            2.   Any backup information regarding the applicant’s operating
costs, including projected employment by job category and applicable wage rate,
cost and availability of raw materials and energy.
         (c)   General information about company management capabilities,
including resumes of top management and detailed marketing strategies;
         (d)   Such additional information as the SRLF Board of Directors may
require regarding collateral, appraisals, valuations of nonprofit assets and
guarantees;
         (e)   Completed applications; and
         (f)   Signed statement of assurances.
   (G)   (1)   Application review and evaluation.
         (a)   Upon completion of the SRLF full application, the RLF Loan
Review Committee will carry out a loan review and submit its recommendation for
approval or disapproval and the basis for such recommendation to the full
Board. The RLF will then consider the recommendation made by the RLF Loan
Review Committee. The Board may solicit or allow additional comment or
advisement if it so desires. The Board shall then make its recommendations to
the City Council to approve or deny the loan.
         (b)   The SRLF Board of Directors will utilize and fully consider all
loan selection criteria to ascertain whether the proposed project is consistent
with the economic development strategy for the city. The SRLF Board will
determine whether all loan requirements can be met and shall apply their
financial experience and judgment to the project having considered all
available information.
      (2)   Loan Fund Board approval. Upon final approval, the SRL Board
Chairperson will forward the entire package to the RLF’s bank, with a request
to draw down funds to the borrower.
   (H)   The SRLF will closely coordinate all loan closing activity with the
first participation lender to avoid duplication and to hold closing costs to a
minimum. The RLF, working with the participating lender, will make all
necessary preparation for the closing. After scheduling the date of closing,
the RLF will prepare the information and documentation for closing, including:
      (1)   RLF agreement;
      (2)   Participating agreement between RLF and the first position lender;
      (3)   Promissory on mortgage notes;
      (4)   Check from the SRLF; and
      (5)   All closing costs incurred, which will be paid by the borrower at
the time of closing.
   (I)   (1)   The SRLF full loan application form is attached to the ordinance
codified in this section as Appendix 1.
      (2)   (a)   Every six months, the RLF manager will monitor the projects
in the RLF portfolio, evaluate the loans made and determine progress made in
obtaining goals and objectives cited in the SRLF administration plan. Factors
such as jobs created, jobs retained, potential for future job creation, tax
revenues created, types of jobs created, minority and/or women’s business
assisted and the ratio of RLF dollars to jobs retained/created will be
considered in this evaluation process. Results of all project evaluations will
be presented to the SRLF Board and the City Council in an annual report of RLF
activity.
         (b)   All assurances as specified in Community Development Block Grant
regulations shall be agreed to by the borrower in order to receive funds. No
application shall be approved unless the statement of assurances is properly
signed. The loan manager will notify the Department of Local Government of
projects prior to action by the Board. This notification process shall be to
ensure conformance with CDBG regulations.
         (c)   Investment of idle funds shall be in conformance with state
statutes as they relate to investment practices of local governments.
      (3)   Since the monies that help fund this Revolving Loan Fund come from
repayment of loans made from grants received from the Community Development
Block Grant Program, each activity funded under the SRLF program must meet at
least one of the three national objectives identified in Title I of the Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended in 1983, hereafter referred
to as the Act, § 104(b)(3). The three objectives are:
         (a)   Benefit to low and moderate income persons;
         (b)   Prevention or elimination of slums or blight; and
         (c)   Meeting community development needs having a particular urgency.
      (4)   In addition to the procedures for loans set out above, the city may
spend funds out of RLF for projects that meet the three national objectives
identified above after review by the RLF Board and approved by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 910.0) (Ord. 86-010, passed - -; Ord. 88-012, passed 9-12-1988)
PROCUREMENT STANDARDS
§ 31.15 METHODS OF PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   All procurements made by the city will be made in accordance with the
following procurement standards. Procurement transactions, regardless of method
or dollar value, will maximize open and free competition. The city shall not
engage in procurement practices which may be considered restrictive in trade.
Purchases will be reviewed by the city department heads to prevent duplication
and to ensure that costs are reasonable.
   (B)   Procurements shall be made by one of the following methods: small
purchase procedures; competitive sealed bids; competitive negotiation; and
noncompetitive negotiation.
      (1)   Small purchases. Purchases of supplies, equipment and services
which cost between $15,000 and $40,000 will require written estimates, but no
legal advertisement is required. The city will solicit written responses from
at least three vendors, and if no such responses are available, a statement
explaining the procurement will be prepared and filed. For purchases of less
than $15,000, efforts will be made to get the lowest and best prices, but
written records of such efforts are not necessary.
      (2)   Competitive sealed bids.
         (a)   Bidding will be employed when detailed specifications for the
goods or services to be produced can be prepared and the primary basis for
award is cost. When the cost of a contract, lease or other agreement for
materials, supplies, equipment or contractual services other than those
personal or professional exceeds $40,000, an invitation for bids (IFB) notice
will be prepared. This notice will be published at least once in at least one
official newspaper of general circulation within the city. This newspaper
notice will appear not less than seven days and not more than 21 days before
the due date for bid proposals. The Chief Elected Official may also solicit
sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers by sending them a copy of
such notice.
         (b)   The IFB will include a general description of the goods or
services to be procured, the bid deposit and bond performance required (if
applicable), the location where bid forms and specifications may be secured,
the time and place for opening bids and whether the bid award will be made on
the basis of the lowest bid price or the lowest evaluated price. If the lowest
evaluated price is used, the measurable criteria to be utilized must be stated
in the IFB. The newspaper notice must also contain language which calls to the
attention of bidders all applicable requirements which must be complied with,
such as § 3 of the 1068 Housing Act, § 109 of the 1974 Housing and Community
Development Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5301 et seq.), the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
U.S.C. §§ 2000d et seq.), Executive Order 11246 and the Davis-Bacon Act (40
U.S.C. §§ 3141 through 3148).
         (c)   Sealed bids will be opened in public at the time and place
stated in the IFBs. The bids will be tabulated by the City Council at the time
of bid opening. The results of the tabulation and the bid documents will be
examined for accuracy and completeness by the department head which will make
recommendations to the City Council. In addition, the department head
determines whether all firms are responsive and responsible. The City Council
will award the contract to the responsive and responsible bidder with the
lowest bid price or the lowest evaluated bid price. After the bid award is made
by the City Council, a contract will be prepared for execution by the
successful bidder. After the contract is signed, all bid deposits will be
returned to all unsuccessful bidders.
         (d)   The city may cancel an invitation for bid or reject all bids if
it is determined in writing that such is in the best interest of the city. The
city may allow a vendor to withdraw a bid if requested at any time prior to the
bid opening. Bids received after the time set for bid opening shall be returned
to the vendor unopened.
      (3)   Competitive negotiation.
         (a)   The city will utilize competitive negotiations, regardless of
contract amount, upon a written determination that:
            1.   Specifications cannot be made specific enough to permit the
award of a bid on the basis of either the lowest bid price or the lowest
evaluated bid price (in other words, bidding is not feasible); and
            2.   The services to be procured are professional or personal in
nature.
         (b)   With the exception of procurement of certain professional
services (principally engineering services), competitive negotiations will
proceed as follows.
            1.   Proposals will be solicited through newspaper advertisement;
additionally, a request for proposal (RFP) may be prepared and mailed to
qualified vendors. The newspaper advertisement must be published at least seven
days and not more than 21 days before the date for receipt of the proposals.
The RFP will describe services needed and identify the factors to be considered
in the evaluation of proposals and the relative weights assigned to each
selection factor. The RFP will also state where further details regarding the
RFP may be obtained. The RFP will call attention to the same regulations
discussed in the bidding process. Requests for proposals will always include
cost as a selection factor.
            2.   Award must be made to the offerer whose proposal is determined
in writing by a review committee to be the top rated proposal according to the
systematic evaluation. Evaluations must be based on the factors set forth in
the request for proposal and a written evaluation of each response prepared.
The review committee may contact the firms regarding their proposals for the
purpose of clarification and record in writing the nature of the clarification.
If it is determined that no acceptable proposal has been submitted, all
proposals may be rejected. New proposals may be solicited on the same or
revised terms or the procurement may be abandoned.
      (4)   Noncompetitive negotiations.
         (a)   Noncompetitive negotiations may be used for procurements in
excess of $40,000 when bidding or competitive negotiations are not feasible.
The city may purchase goods and services through noncompetitive negotiations
when it is determined in writing by the Mayor that competitive negotiation or
bidding is not feasible and that:
            1.   An emergency exists which will cause public harm as a result
of the delay caused by following competitive purchasing procedures;
            2.   The product or service can be obtained only from one source;
            3.   The contract is for the purchase of perishable items purchased
on a weekly or more frequent basis;
            4.   Only one satisfactory proposal is received through RFP or RFQ;
or
            5.   The state has authorized the particular type of non-
competitive negotiation (example: the procurement of services by an Area
Development District).
         (b)   Procurement by non-competitive negotiation requires the
strictest attention to the observation of impartiality toward all suppliers.
(Ord. 2004-001, passed 3-9-2004; Ord. 2023-010, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 31.16 CONTRACTS.
   Generally, all procurement in excess of $15,000 will be memorialized and
supported by a written contract. Where it is infeasible or impractical to
prepare a contract, a written finding to this effect will be prepared and some
form of documentation regarding the transaction will also be prepared. The
contractual provisions required by the “Common Rule,” 24 C.F.R. part 85 will be
included in all contracts.
(Ord. 2004-001, passed 3-9-2004)
§ 31.17 DOCUMENTATION.
   All source documents supporting any given transaction (receipts, purchase
orders, invoices, RFP/RFQ data and bid materials) will be retained and filed in
an appropriate manner. Where feasible, source documents pertinent to each
individual procurement shall be separately filed and maintained. Where it is
infeasible to maintain individual procurement files, source documents will be
filed and maintained in a reasonable manner (examples include chronologically,
by vendor, by type of procurement and so forth). Whatever form of documentation
and filing is employed, the purpose of this section is to ensure that a clear
and consistent audit trail is established. At a minimum, source document data
must be sufficient to establish the basis for selection basis for cost
(including the issue of reasonableness of cost) and basis for payment.
(Ord. 2004-001, passed 3-9-2004)
§ 31.18 LOCALLY OWNED, MINORITY OWNED, FEMALE OWNED AND SMALL BUSINESS.
   Efforts will be made and documented to solicit participation of locally
owned, minority owned, female owned and small businesses. Where feasible,
evaluation criteria will include a factor with an appropriate weight for these
firms. A list of locally owned, minority owned, female owned and small
businesses and also minority businesses located within the trade region shall
be maintained and utilized when issuing IFBs, RFPs and RFQs. This list shall
also be consulted when making small purchases.
(Ord. 2004-001, passed 3-9-2004)
§ 31.19 CODE OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   Conflict of interest. No elected official, employee or designated
agent of the city will take part or have an interest in the award of any
procurement transaction if a conflict of interest, clear or apparent, exists.
   (B)   Acceptance of gratuities. No elected official, employee or designated
agent of the city shall solicit or accept gratuities, favors or anything of
monetary value from contractors, potential contractors, subcontractors or
potential subcontractors.
(Ord. 2004-001, passed 3-9-2004) Penalty, see §
31.99
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any elected official, employee or designated agency of the city who
knowingly and deliberately violates the provisions of §§
31.15 through
31.19 will be open to civil suit by the citizens of the city without the legal
protection of the city. Furthermore, such a violation of the procurement
standards is grounds for dismissal by the city.
(Ord. 2004-001, passed 3-9-2004)
CHAPTER 32: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Labor Unions
   
32.01   Public policy declaration
   
32.02   Agreement
   
32.03   Become or remain; no requirement
   
32.04   Abstain or refrain; no requirement
   
32.05   Payment; no requirement
   
32.06   Application to lawful contract
   
32.07   Intimidation and the like prohibited
Old-Age and Survivor’s Insurance
   
32.20   Authorization
   
32.21   Services covered
   
32.22   Administration
   
32.23   Contributions
   
32.24   Adjustments, refunds and interest on delinquent payments
   
32.25   Termination
   
32.26   Modification
Code of Ethics
   
32.40   Standards of conduct
   
32.41   Financial disclosure
   
32.42   Nepotism
   
32.43   Board of Ethics
Job Classifications
   
32.55   Classifications
 
   
32.99   Penalty
LABOR UNIONS
§ 32.01 PUBLIC POLICY DECLARATION.
   It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city that the right of
persons to work shall not be denied or abridged on account of membership or
non-membership in any labor union or labor organization.
(Prior Code, § 430.2)
§ 32.02 AGREEMENT.
   Any agreement of combination between any employer and any labor union or
labor organization whereby persons not members of the union or organization
shall be denied the right to work for the employer, or whereby the membership
is made a condition of employment or continuation of employment by the
employer, or whereby any such union or organization acquired an employment
monopoly in any enterprise, is hereby declared to be against public policy and
an illegal combination or conspiracy.
(Prior Code, § 430.2)
§ 32.03 BECOME OR REMAIN; NO REQUIREMENT.
   No person shall be required by an employer to become or remain a member of
any labor union or labor organization as a condition of employment or
continuation of employment.
(Prior Code, § 430.2)
§ 32.04 ABSTAIN OR REFRAIN; NO REQUIREMENT.
   No person shall be required by an employer to abstain or refrain from
membership in any labor union or labor organization as a condition of
employment or continuation of employment.
(Prior Code, § 430.2)
§ 32.05 PAYMENT; NO REQUIREMENT.
   No employer shall require any person, as a condition of employment or
continuation of employment, to pay any dues, fees or other charges of any kind
to any labor union or labor organization.
(Prior Code, § 430.2) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.06 APPLICATION TO LAWFUL CONTRACT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any lawful contract in
force on the effective date hereof, but they shall apply in all respects to
contracts entered into thereafter any to any renewals or extension of any
existing contract.
(Prior Code, § 430.2)
§ 32.07 INTIMIDATION AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   Any person, firm, association, corporation or labor union or organization
engaged in lockouts, lay-offs, boycotting, picketing, work stoppages or other
conduct, a purpose of which is to cause, force, persuade or induce any other
person, firm, association, corporation or labor union or organization to
violate any provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of illegal conduct
contrary to public policy; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent or make illegal the peaceful and orderly solicitation and
persuasion by union members of others to join a union, unaccompanied by any
intimidation, use of force, threat of use of force, reprisal or threat of
reprisal; and provided, that no such solicitation or persuasion shall be
conducted so as to interfere with or interrupt the work of any employee during
working hours.
(Prior Code, § 430.2) Penalty, see §
32.99
OLD-AGE AND SURVIVOR’S INSURANCE
§ 32.20 AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to execute, on behalf of the city, a contract
between the city and the State Agency of the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
System, which contract is in words and figures.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. An employee, as defined in § 210(k) of the Social Security Act,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through 1307, and any amendments thereto, and shall
include an officer.
      SERVICES. All services performed by individuals as employees of the
political subdivision, except:
         (a)   Any service performed by an employee in a position covered by a
retirement system on the date this agreement is made applicable to his or her
coverage group;
         (b)   Service performed by an employee who is employed to relieve him
or her from unemployment;
         (c)   Service performed in a hospital, home or other institution by an
inmate thereof;
         (d)   Covered transportation service (as defined in § 210(l) of the
Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through 1307);
         (e)   Service (other than agricultural labor or service performed by a
student) excluded from employment by any provisions of § 210(a) of the Social
Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through 1307, other than paragraph (8) of
said section; and
         (f)   Services of an emergency nature.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
§ 32.21 SERVICES COVERED.
   This plan includes all services performed by individuals for the political
subdivision except all elective officials.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
§ 32.22 ADMINISTRATION.
   The political subdivision agrees and has heretofore authorized and directed
the appropriate officers and employees to do and perform all things found
necessary by the state agency to the proper and efficient administration of the
plan, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of employment records
relating to both services, required contributions by both the political
subdivision and its employees and other data required by the state agency or
the Federal Security Administrator, to make such reports in such form and
containing such information as the state agency may, from time to time, require
and to comply with such provisions as the state agency or the Federal
Administrator may, from time to time, find necessary to assure the correctness
and verification of the reports.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
§ 32.23 CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The political subdivision will pay into the contribution fund
established by KRS 61.470, with respect to wages, as defined in KRS 61.420, at
such time or times as the state agency may by regulation prescribe,
contributions equivalent to the sum of the taxes which would be imposed by
I.R.C. §§ 1400 and 1410 if the services covered by this plan and agreement
constituted employment as defined in I.R.C. § 1426.
   (B)   (1)   The political subdivision agrees to levy a tax on all property
assessed for taxation by the political subdivision for each and every year this
contract shall be and remain in force, which levy shall be sufficient in
itself, or when added to any balance remaining from previous levies, to ensure
the payment of the obligations of the political subdivision to the state agency
imposed by this contract for the ensuing fiscal year; and the payment of the
obligations shall be specifically provided for in the political subdivision’s
budget for each and every year this agreement shall be and remain in force. In
determining the rate of taxation for the annual levies, the political
subdivision shall anticipate the collection of taxes in an amount not to exceed
90% of the levy. All collections pursuant to the levy shall be covered into a
revolving fund, to be created by the political subdivision, which shall be
devoted exclusively to the payment of the obligations imposed under this
contract, as when the same shall become due and payable, until all of the
obligations shall have been satisfied in full.
      (2)   Provided, however, for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1951, and
ending June 30, 1952, or for any subsequent fiscal year hereunder, the
foregoing requirements of this section may be dispensed with by the political
subdivision paying in advance into its revolving fund an amount of money
sufficient to meet the combined employer-employee contributions for the fiscal
year.
   (C)   (1)   The political subdivision agrees to and shall advance to the
contribution fund, provided for in KRS 61.470, an amount equal to the average
quarterly contributions provided for in division (A) above plus 10% thereof,
which shall be credited to the political subdivision in the contribution fund
account.
      (2)   The average quarterly contribution shall be arrived at in the first
instance by a fair estimate based on the payroll for the previous calendar
year; provided, however, that, the advancement may be adjusted from time to
time as the state agency may require, and, when adjusted, the estimate shall be
based on the payroll for the calendar quarter immediately preceding the date of
the adjustment. The advancement provided for herein may be used by the state
agency to offset any unpaid financial obligation incurred by the political
subdivision hereunder, and for no other purpose, and may be applied thereto
summarily, but the use shall not relieve the political subdivision of the
obligation to the state agency; provided, however, that no advancement by the
political subdivision shall be applied to the default of any other political
subdivision.
   (D)   The political subdivision will pay to the State Treasury, at such time
or times that the state agency may by regulation prescribe, an amount equal to
the political subdivision’s share of the cost of administration of the state
agency, such amount to be not greater than 5% of the contributions made by the
political subdivision under division (A) above.
   (E)   (1)   The political subdivision agrees that it shall impose upon each
of its employees, as to services which are covered by this plan and agreement,
a contribution with respect to his or her wages, not exceeding the amount of
the tax which would be imposed by § 1400 of the Federal Insurance Contribution
Act, 26 U.S.C. § 3101 if the services constituted employment within the meaning
of that Act, and to deduct the amount of the contribution from his or her wages
as and when paid.
      (2)   It is further understood that the contributions so collected shall
be paid into the contribution fund in partial discharge of the liability of the
political subdivision, but that failure to make the deduction shall not relieve
the employee or the political subdivision from liability therefor.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
§ 32.24 ADJUSTMENTS, REFUNDS AND INTEREST ON DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
   (A)   If more than the correct amount due under §
32.23 is paid with respect to any remuneration, proper adjustment (or refund,
if adjustment is impracticable) shall be made without interest in such manner
and at such times as the state agency shall prescribe.
   (B)   If the political subdivision does not make at the time or times due,
the payments required under this plan and agreement, there shall be added, or
part of the amount due, interest at the rate of 0.5% per month or fraction
thereof.
   (C)   Without prejudice to other available methods of collection, the state
agency in its discretion may deduct such delinquent amounts plus interest from
any other money payable to the political subdivision by any department, agency
or fund of the state.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
§ 32.25 TERMINATION.
   (A)   (1)   The political subdivision may request the state agency to take
all necessary steps with the Federal Security Administrator, pursuant to § 218
(g) of the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through 1307, to
terminate this plan and agreement either in its entire application to the
political subdivision or with respect to any coverage group.
      (2)   Upon good cause shown at a time in a manner to be specified by the
state agency, the state agency shall give notice to the Federal Security
Administrator required by § 218(g) of the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 301 through 1307 for the purpose of granting the requested termination to
the political subdivision.
   (B)   If the state agency, after notice and opportunity for hearing to the
political subdivision, finds that there has been a failure to comply
substantially with any provision contained in this plan and agreement or KRS
Chapter 61, it may terminate this plan in its entirety, the termination to take
effect at the time prescribed in the notice and on such conditions as may be
provided by regulations of the state agency, and as may be consistent with the
provisions of the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through 1307.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
§ 32.26 MODIFICATION.
   (A)   This plan and agreement may be modified, at the request of the
political subdivision, to include coverage groups or services in addition to
those now included by this plan.
   (B)   The modification must be consistent with KRS Chapter 61 and the
provisions of § 218 of the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 through
1307.
(Prior Code, § 240.1)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 32.40 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   Conflicts of interest.
      (1)   An elected or appointed officer or employee of the city shall not
intentionally participate in the discussion or vote, or make a decision in his
or her official capacity in any matter:
         (a)   In which the officer, employee or any immediate family member or
business associate will derive a monetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss
as the result of the officer’s or employee’s vote or decision; and/or
         (b)   Which relate specifically to a business in which the officer or
employee owns or controls an interest of $10,000 or more, or an interest of
more than 5%.
      (2)   No elected or appointed official of the city shall be deemed in
violation of these provisions if, by reason of the officer’s or employee’s
participation, vote, decision or action, no monetary or material gain accrues
to the officer or employee, family member or a business associate, as a member
of any business, occupation, profession or other group, to any greater extent
than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of the
business, occupation, profession or other group.
   (B)   Acceptance of gifts.
      (1)   No elected or appointed officer or employee of the city or any
independent agency to which the code of ethics applies shall knowingly accept
any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from
any person, firm or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested,
directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the
city; provided, however, that any such elected or appointed officer or employee
of the city who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign
contributions and services in connection with any such campaign as governed by
state statutes.
      (2)   However, no elected or appointed officer or employee of the city
shall be prohibited from giving or receiving: gifts from relatives; gifts
accepted on behalf of the city and transferred to the city; awards presented in
recognition of public service; commercially reasonable loans made in the
ordinary course of the lender’s business; or reasonable travel and travel-
related expenses, costs of admission, food and beverages and entertainment
furnished in connection with public events, appearances, ceremonies, economic
development activities or fact-finding trips related to official government
business.
   (C)   Use of city equipment and personnel. No elected or appointed officer
or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of city property (including
land, vehicles, equipment, personnel, materials and any other property) for
personal convenience or profit, except when the use is generally available to
citizens of the city or provided as a matter of city policy.
   (D)   Misuse of information. An elected or appointed officer or employee of
the city shall not intentionally disclose or use information acquired in the
course of his or her official duties, if the primary purpose of the disclosure
is to further his or her own economic interest or that of another person.
Information is considered confidential if it is not subject to disclosure
pursuant to the State Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 through 61.884 at the time
of its disclosure or use.
   (E)   Off-duty or outside employment. An elected or appointed officer or
employee of the city shall not accept any employment or enter into any
contracts that result in a conflict of interest with their duties as an
official or employee of the city. An employee of the city may be self-employed
or may take occasional part-time jobs if, in the opinion of his or her
supervisor/department head, there is no conflict with working hours, the
employee’s efficiency in his or her city work or other interests of the city.
Employees wishing to take off-duty employment shall have the written approval
of their supervisor/department head. City employment shall remain the first
priority, and if, at any time, the outside employment interferes with an
employee’s job requirements or performance for the city, the employee shall be
required to modify the conditions of the outside employment or terminate either
the off-duty employment or his or her city employment.
   (F)   Representation of persons before city government. No elected or
appointed officer or employee of the city or any business organization in which
an elected or appointed officer or employee has an interest shall represent any
person or party, other than the city, in connection with any cause, proceeding,
application or other matter pending before any agency of the city. Nothing
shall prohibit any elected or appointed officer or employee of the city or
member of his or her immediate family from representing himself, herself or
themselves in negotiations or proceedings concerning his, her or their own
interests. No elected or appointed officer or employee of the city shall be
prohibited from making an inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent if
no fee, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by
the officer or a member of his or her immediate family, whether directly or
indirectly in return thereof.
(Ord. 94-011, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 32.41 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The following individuals shall be required to file an annual
financial disclosure statement:
      (1)   Elected officers of the city;
      (2)   Candidates for elected offices of the city. For the purpose of this
division (A), a CANDIDATE is defined as one who files a notification and a
declaration for nomination for city office with the County Clerk or the
Secretary of State of the Commonwealth of Kentucky; or is nominated for office
under the provisions of KRS 83A.165, 83A.170 or 83A.175 for non-partisan
elections and KRS 118.105, 118.115, 118.325 or 118.760 for non-partisan
elections; or
      (3)   Officers   and employees with discretionary procurement authority
exceeding $500 per purchase.
   (B)   The financial disclosure statement should include the following
information:
      (1)   Name of filer;
      (2)   Current business address, business telephone number and home
address of filer;
      (3)   Title of filer’s public office or position or office sought;
      (4)   Occupations of the filer and his or her spouse;
      (5)   Information regarding each source of income of filer and filer’s
immediate family members (spouse and dependents living at home) from within the
state exceeding $10,000 during the preceding calendar year and the form of
income (i.e., salary, interest and the like). Specific dollar amounts do not
have to be listed; and
      (6)   Names and addresses of all business organizations located within
the state in which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had
at any time during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 or more.
Specific dollar amounts do not have to be listed.
   (C)   The financial disclosure statement shall be filed annually with the
Board of Ethics as a repository thereof and shall be filed within 30 days after
taking office or beginning employment.
   (D)   Within 30 days after there is a material change in any information
contained in a filed statement, the filer shall submit an amended statement
reflecting the change.
(Ord. 94-011, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 32.42 NEPOTISM.
   (A)   No elected or appointed official shall appoint, vote for the
appointment of, or recommend the appointment of, a family member to an office
or position of employment with the city.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a FAMILY MEMBER shall be defined as a
spouse, a child (including step-child), sibling, parent, mother-in-law, father-
in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.
   (C)   This section shall apply to full-time permanent employees of the city.
This provision shall not apply to part-time or seasonal employees so long as
the relationship is fully disclosed before the employment action is taken and
the minutes or municipal order reflects the relationship.
   (D)   This provision shall not apply to any person appointed to a city
office or employed by the city prior to the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 94-011, passed 12-12-1994) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.43 BOARD OF ETHICS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties, responsibilities as set forth in this subchapter to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics shall consist of five members. The initial members
shall be selected and elected by the Board of Directors of the Springfield-
Washington County Chamber of Commerce within 15 days of the effective date of
this subchapter. The members shall serve for a term of three years, except that
with respect to the members initially appointed, one member shall be appointed
for a term of one year, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years,
and two members shall be appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be for a term of three years. Each member of the Board of
Ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year prior to
the date of the appointment and shall reside in the city throughout the term in
office. The members of the Board of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their
known and consistent reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local
government affairs. The names of the members of the Commission shall be
submitted annually to the City Clerk no later than January 15 of each year, and
the list of names and addresses of the Board members along with the date of the
expiration of their term shall be maintained at City Hall. No member of the
Board of Ethics shall hold any elected or appointed office, whether paid or
unpaid, or any position of employment with the city or any city agency. The
members may be reappointed for any number of consecutive terms.
   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by a majority vote of
the Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors for misconduct, inability or willful
neglect of duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed from
office under this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a
hearing before the Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors.
   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the
Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors. If a vacancy is not filled by the
Chamber of Commerce within 60 days, the remaining members of the Board of
Ethics shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder
of the unexpired term.
   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation but
may be reimbursed by the Chamber of Commerce for all necessary and reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter, elect a Chairperson from among the
membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.
   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary, upon the
call of the Chairperson or at the written request of the majority of members.
   (H)   (1)   The presence of three or more members shall constitute a quorum,
and the affirmative vote of three or more members shall be necessary for any
official action to be taken.
      (2)   Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a conflict of interest
with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board shall disclose the
nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on the
matter and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.
   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics and
filed with the City Clerk, and the vote of each member on any issue decided by
the Board shall be recorded in the minutes and filed with the City Clerk.
   (J)   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate complaints,
hold hearings and make findings of fact and determinations with regard to
alleged violations and the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings
requesting persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and answers to
questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to direct testimony to be
taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Board who has the
power to administer oath;
      (3)   To administer oaths and to issue requests for the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating to
an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board. If the complainant
fails to appear as requested by the Board, the complaint shall be dismissed as
unfounded, absent other evidence to the contrary;
      (4)   To refer any information concerning violations of this subchapter
to the executive authority of the city, the city legislative body, the
governing body of any city agency, the County Attorney and other appropriate
person or body, as necessary;
      (5)   To render advisory opinions to city officers and agencies and
employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this subchapter;
      (6)   To enforce the provisions of this subchapter with regard to all
officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to its
terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this
subchapter;
      (7)   To control and maintain statements of financial interests that are
required to be filed by this subchapter and to ensure that the statements are
available for public inspection in accordance with requirements of this
subchapter and the State Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 through 61.884;
      (8)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or legislative body of
the city; and
      (9)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions as
necessary to implement the provisions of this subchapter, provided that the
rules, regulations and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this
subchapter or any state or federal law.
   (K)   As reimbursement for administering the Board of Ethics, the city shall
reimburse the County Chamber on an annual basis (presently $250). All other
expenses associated with the Board of Ethics will be borne by the Chamber of
Commerce unless approved by the City Council.
   (L)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the establishment by the
Springfield-Washington County Chamber of Commerce of a joint City/County Ethics
Commission with expanded membership as long as the format has prior approval of
the City Council and county fiscal court.
(Ord. 94-011, passed 12-12-1994; Ord. 2011-003, passed 4-12-2011)
JOB CLASSIFICATIONS
§ 32.55 CLASSIFICATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts the job classifications and position descriptions
attached to the ordinance codified in and made a part of this section. For
publication purposes, job descriptions and pay scales may be obtained at City
Hall during normal business hours. Some descriptions may be adopted for future
purposes but positions left vacant at this time. Additionally, the city
reserves the right to hire seasonal and part-time employees that may not be
described hereto:
   (A)   City Administrative Officer;
   (B)   City Clerk;
   (C)   Assistant City Clerk;
   (D)   City Treasurer;
   (E)   Financial Officer;
   (F)   City Project Coordinator;
   (G)   City Project and Grant Coordinator;
   (H)   Administrative Secretary;
   (I)   Main Street Director;
   (J)   Chief of Police;
   (K)   Assistant Chief of Police;
   (L)   Police Captain;
   (M)   Police Sergeant;
   (N)   Police Detective;
   (O)   Patrol Officer;
   (P)   Dispatch Captain Supervisor;
   (Q)   Telecommunicator (Dispatcher);
   (R)   Parks and Recreation Director;
   (S)   Park Maintenance Foreman;
   (T)   Director of Public Works;
   (U)   Equipment Operator;
   (V)   Laborer I;
   (W)   Laborer II;
   (X)   Theater Artistic Managing Director;
   (Y)   Administrative Police Clerk; and
   (Z)   Police Lieutenant.
(Prior Code, § 230.1) (Ord. 2021-001, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 2024-001, passed
2-13-2024)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any violation of any of the provisions of §§
32.01 through
32.07 by any person, firm, association, corporation or labor union or
organization shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not less than
$10, nor more than $100, and each day that said violation is in existence shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Ethics, upon finding, pursuant to an adjudicatory
proceeding, that there has been clear and convincing proof of a violation of
this code may:
         (a)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the
violation;
         (b)   Issue an order requiring the violator to file any report,
statement or other information as required by this code;
         (c)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for potential
violations of the law and provide a copy of the reprimand to any appropriate
authority; and
         (d)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty to
the city of up to $500.
      (2)   The Board of Ethics may also refer to the County Attorney or State
Attorney for prosecution evidence of criminal violations of this code.
      (3)   Any person found by the Board of Ethics to have committed a
violation of this code may appeal the action to the county circuit court. The
appeal shall be initiated within 30 days after the date of the final action of
the Board by filing a petition with the court against the Board of Ethics. The
Board shall transmit to the clerk of the court all evidence considered by the
Board at its public hearing. The court shall hear the appeal upon the record as
certified by the Board of Ethics.
(Prior Code, § 430.2) (Ord. 94-011, passed 12-12-1994)
CHAPTER 33: LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Establishment of Department
   
33.02   Appointment
   
33.03   Qualification
   
33.04   Oath of office
   
33.05   Duties of Chief and police officers
   
33.06   Powers of Chief and police officers
   
33.07   Compensation
Fire Department
   
33.20   Taking equipment outside city; authorization
   
33.21   Return of fire apparatus
   
33.22   Serving outside district
Blackouts
   
33.35   Purpose and authorization
   
33.36   Appointment of special police
   
33.37   Exercise of authority
   
33.38   Necessary action
 
   
33.99   Penalty
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Police Department, to be known as the
City Police Department.
   (B)   This Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
police officers, or assistants, as may be appointed by the Mayor with approval
of the City Council from time to time as it may deem proper for the good
government of the city.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 33.02 APPOINTMENT.
   The Chief of Police and other members of the Police Department shall be
appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 33.03 QUALIFICATION.
   (A)   The following is required to be eligible for appointment as a member
of the police force:
      (1)   Must be at least 21 years of age;
      (2)   Must have a minimum educational attainment of a high school degree
or its equivalent as determined by the State Law Enforcement Council;
      (3)   Shall, within one year of the date of employment, complete a basic
training course certified or recognized by the State Law Enforcement Council;
      (4)   Shall successfully complete each year an in-service training course
of 40 hours duration appropriate to their rank and responsibilities;
      (5)   Must be able to read and write the English language intelligibly;
and
      (6)   Must be sober and of good moral character.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony shall be eligible for
appointment. The applicant must:
      (1)   Meet the requirements of KRS 440.710 certification;
      (2)   Meet the Peace Officers Professional Standards (POPS) as prescribed
by KRS 15.310 through 15.370; and
      (3)   Meet any other federal or state requirements existing at the time
the application is completed and returned for consideration.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 33.04 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the Chief of Police and
each member of the Police Department shall take the oath of office as required
by the Constitution and laws of the state to faithfully perform the duties of
their office; and must swear that he or she possesses the required
qualifications.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 33.05 DUTIES OF CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be in command of the Police Department.
   (B)   He or she shall attend all sessions of the City Council, execute its
orders and serve notices as directed by the Mayor or City Council.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or any member of the police force shall cause
proceedings against any person carrying on business or doing any act without a
license for which a license is required.
   (D)   It shall be the duties of the members of the Police Department to see
that all laws and ordinances of the City Council are complied with; to arrest
forthwith all persons actively engaged in riots, unlawful assemblies, breaches
of the peace or any other misdemeanor or felony, or any violation of any
ordinance of this city, or law of the state; to procure and execute warrants of
arrest for all persons who he or she may have reasonable grounds to believe
guilty of any offense, to take them before a judge, jury or other official, to
be dealt with according to the law. It shall be their duty to use diligent
efforts to detect all offenses against the laws of the state or ordinances of
the city, to see that all disorders and disturbances of the peace are quelled
and that good order be maintained in the city.
   (E)   Coordinate with other law enforcement agencies, city, county, state
and federal and any other law enforcement agencies whenever appropriate.
Whenever necessary, memorandums of understanding should be signed and entered
into.
   (F)   The members of the Police Department shall patrol the city during the
day and night as the City Council may direct.
   (G)   Members of the Police Department, at all times when on duty, shall
wear their uniforms and shall keep same in good order and at all times present
a neat appearance. At all times, they shall wear a metal badge, on which shall
be printed or engraved, suitable words showing their official position.
   (H)   It shall be the duty of all members of the police force to carry out
all rules and regulations which may be made or enacted by the City Council,
relative to the hours and time which they may serve; and any and all other
rules and regulations with reference to the Department, that the City Council
may prescribe. These rules and regulations may be changed from time to time as
the City Council, in its judgment, may deem best. It shall be the duty of the
members of the Police Department to see to it that some member of the Police
Department is on duty at all times.
   (I)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that the streets
and alleys of the city are kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from
all paper, debris and other objectionable material and to identify any nuisance
in the city which may require abatement.
   (J)   Perform such lawful duties as directed by the Major. These could
include memorandum of understandings with entities located within close
proximity of the city.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 33.06 POWERS OF CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police and every member of the police force may, whether
directed to them or not, execute warrants of arrest processes, subpoenas and
attachments for witnesses. They may arrest as prescribed by law for offenses
against ordinances or municipal regulations of the city or the state and shall
have the same power of arrest for offenses against the state as the Sheriff.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 33.07 COMPENSATION.
   The Chief of Police and other members of the police force shall be paid for
their services. The City Council shall fix the salaries for which they are
appointed.
(Ord. 2006-010, passed 12-11-2006)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.20 TAKING EQUIPMENT OUTSIDE CITY; AUTHORIZATION.
   The City Fire Department, when authorized by the Mayor or any member of the
City Council, is directed to take outside the city limits any of its equipment
owned by the city and designated for the extinguishment of fires and may
operate and conduct such apparatus or machinery to any point outside the city
limits in a radius of two and one-half miles around the city and aid and assist
in extinguishing any fires within this area; provided, that the apparatus can
be used at such point as a fire may occur in that area.
(Prior Code, § 310.1)
§ 33.21 RETURN OF FIRE APPARATUS.
   As soon as the fire is extinguished, the Department will forthwith return
the fire apparatus to the city, and neither the city nor its officers, agents,
servants or employees shall be liable in any manner at any point in the
designated area outside of the corporate limit of the city or municipality; and
the use of the machinery or apparatus shall be deemed to be employment and use
thereof in the exercise of a governmental function of the city or municipality.
(Prior Code, § 310.1)
§ 33.22 SERVING OUTSIDE DISTRICT.
   All municipal or fire protection district firefighters, full paid or
volunteer, attending and serving at a fire or doing fire prevention work
outside the corporate limits of the municipality of the limits of fire
protection districts as hereinabove provided shall be considered as serving in
their regular line of duty as full as if they were serving within the corporate
limits of their own municipality or fire protection district, but full paid
persons shall receive only such compensation as may be provided for by
ordinance or resolution for such cases, and all such firefighters shall be
entitled to all the benefits of any pension fund, firefighters’ fund and
pension fund in the same manner as if the firefighting or fire prevention work
had been within the corporate limits of the municipality or fire protection
district.
(Prior Code, § 310.1)
BLACKOUTS
§ 33.35 PURPOSE AND AUTHORIZATION.
   In order to protect life and property in the city from enemy action, the
Mayor is authorized and directed to carry out blackouts and air raid protection
measures in the city at such time and for such periods as are ordered by the
Army or Navy and or Civilian Defense authorities when acting with the sanction
or approval of the Army or Navy and to promulgate such orders, rules and
regulations as may be necessary to ensure the success of the blackouts and air
raid protection measures and to protect life and property during the periods.
The orders, rules and regulations shall include traffic movements of emergency
and other vehicles, evacuation of residents, congregation of persons on public
streets, sidewalks, in public places or buildings, but this enumeration shall
not be taken as a limitation on the power to promulgate orders, rules
regulations governing any other subject, persons or property which must be
regulated in order to ensure the proper carrying out of any duly authorized
blackout or air raid protection measures.
(Prior Code, § 330.1)
§ 33.36 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL POLICE.
   The Mayor may appoint, for specified time, as many special police, without
pay, from among the residents of the city as may be deemed advisable for
service in connection with any blackout or air raid protection measures. During
the term of service of such special police, they shall possess all the powers
and privileges and perform all the duties of privates in the standing police
force of the city. The special police must wear the identifying emblem or
uniform as may be prescribed by the Mayor, and it shall be unlawful for any
special police officer to attempt to carry out any order, rule or regulation
promulgated under the authority conferred by this subchapter when he or she is
not wearing the identifying emblem or uniform.
(Prior Code, § 330.1) Penalty, see §
33.99
§ 33.37 EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city,
nor any individual subject to regulations lawfully included herein or
promulgated pursuant to authority herein conferred shall be liable for any
damage sustained to person or property during, or as a result of, an authorized
blackout or air raid protection measures.
(Prior Code, § 330.1)
§ 33.38 NECESSARY ACTION.
   When deemed necessary in order to protect life or property during a blackout
or air raid the police, or the special police authorized herein, are authorized
and directed to enter upon any premises with the city and extinguish lights or
take other necessary action to make effective any order, rule, regulation
promulgated under the authority conferred by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 330.1)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
33.35 through
33.38 or any order, rule or regulation made, issued and proclaimed by the Mayor
pursuant thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $100 or imprisonment for
not more than six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 330.1)
CHAPTER 34: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
34.01   Department of Highways
   
34.02   Water and Sewer Commission
   
34.03   Springfield and Washington County Airport Board
   
34.04   Planning Commission
   
34.05   Springfield-Washington County Economic Development Authority
§ 34.01 DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Department shall
assume the maintenance of the vehicular traveled portion of the roads, streets,
viaducts and bridges to which this section applies and which are enumerated in
division (H) below and those storm sewers and appurtenances constructed by it.
The city shall maintain the sidewalks, sanitary sewers and appurtenances and
those storm sewers and appurtenances not constructed by the Department.
   (B)   The city will not pass any ordinances or resolutions concerning those
roads, streets, viaducts and bridges to which this section applies without
first having submitted to the Department a copy of the ordinance or resolution
at least five days prior to the time the ordinance is to be voted on, and this
shall include ordinances and resolutions relating to changes in the city
limits.
   (C)   The city shall pass any necessary parking or other ordinance or
resolution so as to ensure the maximum use of the roads, streets, viaducts and
bridges for vehicle travel consistent with the standards of safety as
formulated by the Department.
   (D)   The city will permit the Department to install and maintain traffic
control devices, such as, but not limited to, vehicle detectors, signs, islands
and pavement markings within the city so as to regulate the flow of traffic to
and from the roads of the city to and on the roads constructed, reconstructed
and maintained by the Department.
   (E)   The city will pay all costs of the purchase of power for the operation
of traffic signals and street lights, except street lights and sign lights on
interstate routes, and for sweeping, removal of debris and the like.
   (F)   The city will provide the maintenance for the traffic control devices
installed by the Department, including repairs of damages caused by traffic
accidents, except any maintenance requirements that are beyond the normal
repair capabilities of the city.
   (G)   If the city is unable to perform the maintenance required of it by
this section, the necessary maintenance shall be performed by the Department,
and the city will reimburse the Department for all the expenses incurred by the
Department in performing the maintenance.
   (H)   The roads, streets, viaducts and bridges to which the provisions of
this section apply are as follows:
      (1)   KY 53, from its junction with Main Street along Walnut Street in
the city to the north city limits;
      (2)   KY 152, from its junction with U.S. 150 in the city to the east
city limits;
      (3)   U.S. 150, from the junction of Main and Cross Streets in the city
along Main Street to the east city limits;
      (4)   KY 55, from the junction of Main and Cross Streets in the city
along Cross Street or Lebanon Hill Street to the south city limits;
      (5)   A one- to 34-foot RCDG span on KY 55, 426 feet south of the
junction of Cross and Main Streets;
      (6)   U.S. 150, from its junction with Main and Cross Streets in the city
along Main Street, to the northwest city limits;
      (7)   One- to 20-foot by six feet by 67 feet, R.C. Box Culvert, 45
degrees Skew, on U.S. 150, 384 feet east of northwest city limits over Road Run
Creek; and
      (8)   KY 528, from its junction with Main Street along Lincoln Park Road
to the north city limits.
(Prior Code, § 240.3)
§ 34.02 WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION.
   (A)   All of the contracts, obligations and actions of the Municipal Sewer
System Commission and all of the contracts, obligations and actions of the
Municipal Water Works Commission are hereby ratified, confirmed and approved.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall in any way affect the outstanding bonds
previously issued and all of the obligations of the water revenue bonds and the
outstanding bonds previously issued and all obligations of the sewer revenue
bonds.
   (C)   (1)   From and after November 1, 1951, there is hereby created the
City Water and Sewer Commission, whose duty it shall be, subject to the
limitations contained in this section, to exclusively supervise, manage,
control and operate for and on behalf of the city the joint water and sewer
systems of the city. The Commission shall have the direct supervision of the
joint water and sewer systems in the maintenance, operation, control expansions
and extensions thereof as fully and completely as if said Commission
represented private owners. The Commission shall hire and discharge all
employees, fix their compensation, fix and define their duties and fix their
hours and places of employment.
      (2)   The City Water and Sewer Commission shall be composed of three
voting members and the Mayor, who shall be a non-voting ex officio member.
      (3)   The term of office of the City Water and Sower Commissioners shall
be three years; however, initial appointments shall be for a term of three, two
and one years in order to provide for replacement of one Commissioner every
year. Any Commissioner shall be eligible for reappointment upon the expiration
of his or her term. Upon the occurrence of a vacancy upon said Commission by
expiration of term of a Commissioner, or otherwise, the remaining Commissioner
or Commissioners shall immediately notify the Mayor in writing, and the Mayor
shall, with approval of the City Council fill such vacancy. In the event the
vacancy is caused by the death or resignation of members, then the person or
persons appointed to succeed said member or members shall be appointed to fill
out the unexpired term of said member or members. If during his or her term, a
Commissioner other than an ex officio Commissioner is absent from more than
three meetings in a row, that member shall be considered to have resigned and
the position will be considered vacant. In the event of the death or
resignation of the entire Commission, the Mayor, with the approval of the City
Council, shall appoint a new Commission and shall designate the Commissioners
each is to succeed. Should the Mayor fail or refuse to make said appointment
within 60 days, the City Council may fill said vacancy or vacancies.
      (4)   The Commission shall annually elect from its members, other than
the Mayor, a Chairperson and a Treasurer, provided the same member shall not
hold both positions or offices.
      (5)   Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, and the affirmative vote of the majority of the
members present shall be necessary for the adoption of any motion, resolution
or order, or the approval of any consideration.
      (6)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations from time to
time as are necessary for the proper conduct and carrying on its affairs and
also such rules and regulations as are necessary for the proper management and
control of the affairs of the joint water and sewer systems and the
appurtenances thereto.
      (7)   The Commission shall hold regularly scheduled meetings open to the
public, at least monthly, at the City Water and Sewer Commission office as may
be necessary for it to conduct the business affairs of the joint water and
sewer systems. The Commission shall file a copy of its annual financial audit
with the City Administrator or Clerk, and said audit shall be made available to
general public at City Hall.
      (8)   Each member of the Commission shall receive a salary of $500 per
month. The Chairperson will receive $600 per month.
      (9)   The member or members of the Commission may be removed for cause by
the City Council of the city after a public hearing.
      (10)   The Commission shall have no power to borrow money or to enter
into any contracts involving the expenditure of funds derived from the
operation of the joint water and sewer systems, other than operating expenses
of the joint water and sewer system, and the maintenance, expansion and
improvement of same together with the expenses of the operation of the
Commission, unless fast-approved by the City Council.
      (11)   The Commission shall not have the right to lower or raise the
rates for water and sewer services, but the Commission shall make their
recommendations in writing to the City Council, and such rates so recommended
shall not become effective until the same have been approved by an ordinance
duly passed and published as by law required by the City Council. No change or
alteration in any of said rates shall be made by the City Council except upon
the recommendation in writing by the Commission.
      (12)   The first fiscal year of the Commission shall be considered from
the date of this section to January 1, 1953, and after said date, the fiscal
year shall be from July l, to June 30, of each succeeding year. Within 120 days
after the close of the fiscal year, the Commission shall cause an audit to be
made of the records and accounts of said Commission by a certified public
accountant, and a report thereof shall be filed with the City Council, and the
expense of making said annual audit shall be charged to the operation account
of the joint water and sewer system.
      (13)   The funds derived from the joint operation of the water and sewer
systems shall be managed, handled and controlled by the Commission so as to
comply in all particulars with the provisions of any ordinance in so far as
said ordinance is applicable, which purports to authorize the issuance of any
water or sewer revenue bonds.
      (14)   The Commission shall have the power to supervise, manage and
control all of the physical properties, including real estate, which is used in
connection with the water and sewer systems, and may rent or lease, or sub-rent
or sub-lease any of the physical properties, including real estate which is
used in connection with the water and sewer systems, upon such terms and
conditions as the Commission may desire.
   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall elect a secretary, who need not be a member
of the Commission. The secretary shall keep and preserve the records of all of
the meetings and the accounts of the Commission and shall be custodian of all
of the funds under the control of the Commission, which shall be deposited in a
bank, and be withdrawn on a check signed by the secretary and counter-signed by
the treasurer. The secretary, treasurer or any other person or persons handling
funds shall be required to execute a bond in an amount to be fixed by the
Commission for the faithful discharge of the duties of said office, and for the
accounting for all funds of the Commission, and shall receive such salary as
may be fixed by the Commission. The secretary may be removed at the pleasure of
the Commission.
      (2)   A petty cash fund of not exceeding $50 may be furnished the
secretary and kept on hand and replenished from time to time out of which to
pay items of expense, but any item of expense in excess of $10 shall be paid by
check as heretofore directed.
   (E)   The City Council enacts this section for the assurance and protection
of the citizens of said city, and for the purpose of assuring the holder or
holders of any water revenue bonds, and holder or holders of the sewer revenue
bonds, and holder or holders of any water and sewer revenue bonds of an
efficient and faithful operation of the joint water and sewer systems of said
city.
(Ord. 2022-003, passed 6-23-2022)
§ 34.03 SPRINGFIELD AND WASHINGTON COUNTY AIRPORT BOARD.
   (A)   It is hereby agreed between the city and the county to form an airport
board to be known as “Springfield and Washington County Airport Board.” The
Board shall possess all the rights, powers, duties and obligations prescribed
by law, and more specifically KRS Chapter 183, relating to such an Airport
Board. It shall have full power and authority to manage and control the
airport, make such rules and regulations concerning the use of same and charges
to be made therefor as it deems necessary.
   (B)   (1)   The members of the Airport Board shall be appointed as indicated
below.
         (a)   The Mayor of the City of Lebanon shall appoint one member.
         (b)   The Judge Executive of Marion County shall appoint two members.
         (c)   The Judge Executive of Washington County shall appoint one
member.
         (d)   The Mayor of the City of Springfield shall appoint two members.
      (2)   Each member shall serve without compensation. Members shall be
appointed for a term of three years.
   (C)   The terms of office of the members appointed by the Council are to
commence at the same time the terms of office of the members appointed by the
respective County Judge Executive. Terms of Marion County and Washington County
appointments shall be staggered.
   (D)   The secretary-treasurer of the Board shall submit a certified audit
report in writing to the City Council concerning its operations and activities
if an audit is required under state law for that particular year.
   (E)   Upon appointment of all members to the Board, the members thereof
shall meet and organize in accordance with the provisions of KRS Chapter 183
and more specifically KRS 183.132.
(Prior Code, § 150.3) (Ord. 2006-011, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 34.04 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   This Commission shall be known as the City Planning Commission. Upon
the appointment and subsequent approval of members, election of officers and
adoption of its bylaws, its existence shall begin subject to the provisions of
KRS Chapter 100. The Commission may engage in planning operations within its
jurisdiction which shall be coterminous with its political boundary, except
where otherwise provided by KRS 100.131.
   (B)   (1)   The City Planning Commission shall consist of six members. The
Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint (two-thirds or more
of the total) members to be known as citizen members. The oath of office shall
be administered to all members of the Commission before entering upon their
duties. The oath shall be administered as provided by law.
      (2)   The term of office of citizen members shall be four years, except
that the original terms shall be staggered so that a proportionate number serve
one, two, three and four years respectively. Re-appointments are appointments
to fill vacancies shall continue the staggered pattern.
      (3)   All vacancies, whether by resignation, dismissal or expiration of
term of office, shall be filled within 60 days by the appropriate appointing
authority or as otherwise provided for in KRS 100.147. A citizen member may be
removed by the appropriate appointing authority for inefficiency, neglect of
duty, malfeasance or conflict of interest. The removed member shall have the
right of appeal in the manner prescribed by KRS 100.157.
      (4)   (Note: This section is to be used only when it is desired that
public elected and/or appointed officials serve on the Commission.) Two members
may be appointed to serve and shall be known as ex officio members by virtue of
an office they hold either through election or appointment. The term of office
of all ex officio members who are elected public officials appointed to the
Planning Commission shall be the same as their official tenure in office. The
term of office of all ex officio members who are appointed public officials
appointed to the Planning Commission shall be for four years or at the pleasure
of the appropriate appointing official.
      (5)   Citizen-members and ex-officio members receive $100 per month. The
chairperson shall receive $150 per month.
   (C)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and any other officers which
it deems necessary from among its citizen-members. The term of office shall be
one year with eligibility for re-election. The Commission may employ a staff as
it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with professional planners
and other parties for the services as it may require.
   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall conduct each year at least six regular
meetings for the transaction of its business. The bylaws adopted by the
Commission shall reflect the schedule of regular meetings; the manner in which
notice shall be given; date; time; place; and the subject or subjects to be
discussed, as well as the method of calling and conducting special meetings. A
simple majority of the total membership shall constitute a quorum.
      (2)   After a quorum has been established, a simple majority of that
quorum can transact any official business except in those instances where there
is to be an adoption or amendment of the Commission’s bylaws or elements of the
comprehensive plan or regulations, then a vote of the simple majority of the
total membership shall be necessary.
   (E)   (1)   The Commission shall adopt and approve its bylaws before it may
properly transact any business.
      (2)   The bylaws set forth the procedures, rules and regulations
necessary for the Commission to conduct its business.
      (3)   The bylaws shall describe the method for administration of funds
and provide for an annual audit thereof.
   (F)   The Commission shall have general powers necessary to carry out its
function in accordance with this section and KRS Chapter 100. The Commission
may be assigned any powers, duties and functions related to urban renewal or
public housing by the legislative body or the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 150.6)
§ 34.05 SPRINGFIELD-WASHINGTON COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority of KRS 154.50 through 154.301 et seq., there
is hereby created and established a nonprofit industrial development authority
to be composed of six members.
   (B)   It shall be known as the Springfield-Washington County Economic
Development Authority, hereinafter referred to as the “Authority.”
   (C)   (1)   The purpose of the Authority shall be: to aid in the
acquisition, retention and development of land for industrial and commercial
purposes; to aid in the development and promotion of industrial sites, parks
and subdivisions for accommodating industrial and commercial needs; and to
alleviate poverty through the development, growth and retention of new and
existing industries and businesses. In addition, the Authority shall market and
promote the city and the county to potential and existing businesses, and to
furnish advice and assistance to existing and new businesses wishing to alter,
expand or locate within the city and county.
      (2)   The Authority shall have the purpose, duties and powers provided in
KRS 154.50 through 154.301 and KRS 154.50 through 154.346; provided, however,
that the Authority shall not incur indebtedness in excess of the approved
operating budget and loans that are secured by the Authority’s assets without
prior approval of the City Council and the county fiscal court.
         (a)   There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Development
Fund which shall be used for the purposes of financing and exercising the
powers provided for in this section. The Fund shall consist of such sums of
money as may be hereafter appropriated by the city, the county or other
government sources and private contributors; and all of rentals, interest,
income, dividends, earnings and monies available from the sale, lease,
conveyance or other disposition of any property acquired pursuant to the powers
exercised by the Authority under the terms of this section; and such other sums
as may be provided by ordinance or state statute or the laws of the United
States of America.
         (b)   The Authority shall function on a fiscal year basis of July 1 to
June 30. However, the first year of operation shall be considered to start upon
receipt of the contributed funds and shall continue through the next following
June 30.
         (c)   The Authority shall cause all accounts, records and books
concerning the management, operation and disbursement of said Fund and of
properties acquired thereby to be accounted for in the manner provided by KRS
154.50 through 154.336. In addition thereto, the appointing authorities shall
require an annual audit, the expense of which shall be borne by the Authority.
         (d)   The Authority shall prepare an operating budget for each fiscal
year and shall submit the budget to the City Council and county fiscal court
for approval not less than three months prior to the commencement of the fiscal
year.
   (D)   (1)   The Authority shall consist of six members. Three members shall
be appointed by the Mayor, and three members shall be appointed by the County
Judge/Executive. The Mayor and County Judge/Executive shall be ex officio, non-
voting members of the Authority for coordination between governments.
      (2)   Members of the Authority shall serve for a term of four years each
and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Initial appointment
shall be so that two members are appointed for two years, two members for three
years and two members for four years. Upon expiration of these staggered terms,
successors shall be appointed for a term of four years.
      (3)   An Economic Development Authority member may be replaced by the
appointing authority upon a showing to the appointing authority of misconduct
as an Authority member or upon a conviction of a felony.
      (4)   Any vacancy on the Authority, however occasioned, shall be filled
by the original appointing authority.
      (5)   Should any Authority member become a candidate for public office,
his or her position on the Authority shall be deemed vacant.
      (6)   The Authority, through its Chairperson, who shall be elected by the
Authority members, shall act in a supervisory capacity to the Authority
Director.
   (E)   The officers of the Authority shall be the Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and secretary-treasurer.
   (F)   The officers shall be elected and installed by the Authority at the
annual meeting, and the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall serve a one-year
term. In the event of a vacancy occurring during the period for which an
officer has been elected, the Board shall fill such vacancy at the next regular
meeting or at a special meeting. No member shall be eligible to hold the same
office more than a four-year consecutive term.
   (G)   An officer of the Authority may be removed for inefficiency,
malfeasance, misfeasance or conflict of interest at any time by a majority vote
of the membership of the Authority.
   (H)   (1)   Members of the Authority shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in
the conduct of the affairs of the Authority, providing funds are available.
      (2)   The Authority may fix a salary for the secretary-treasurer, and the
secretary-treasurer shall execute any official bond to be set and approved by
the Authority, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the Authority.
   (I)   The Authority may employee necessary counsel, agent and employees to
carry out its work and functions and prescribe such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary.
   (J)   (1)   The title to all property acquired by the Authority shall vest
in the Authority. All property acquired for the development of industrial
sites, parks and subdivisions shall be exempt for taxation to the same extent
as other property cost used for public purposes. All revenues collected by the
Authority shall also be exempt from taxation.
      (2)   The acquisition of any lands for the purpose of developing
industrial sites, parks and subdivisions is hereby declared to be a public and
governmental function exercised for a public purpose, and a matter of public
necessity, and such lands and other property, easements and privileges acquired
in the manner and for the purposes enumerated in KRS 150.301 and 154.50 through
154.50-301 shall be and are hereby declared to be acquired and used for public
and governmental purposes and as a matter of public necessity.
   (K)   The Authority may be dissolved by a majority vote of the City Council
and of the county fiscal court, provided that upon such complete termination,
all funds, property and other assets held by the joint industrial development
authority shall be returned to the city and county in the same proportion as
contributions of funds, property and other assets were made by the city and
county. This section shall not apply and no dissolution shall be made until
such time as all legal obligations of the joint industrial development
authority shall be satisfied and all existing commitments fulfilled.
(Prior Code, § 150.8) (Ord. 97-009, passed 7-28-1997)
CHAPTER 35: CITY POLICIES
Section
Grievance Procedure
   
35.01   Policy
   
35.02   Administration
   
35.03   Amendment
   
35.04   Procedure; steps
Public Records
   
35.15   Definitions
   
35.16   Initial request with immediate inspection
   
35.17   Referral to proper custodian
   
35.18   Public records not immediately available
   
35.19   Refusal of unreasonable requests
   
35.20   Time limitation; denial of inspection
   
35.21   Concealing or destroying records prohibited
   
35.22   Access to records relating to particular individual
   
35.23   Format of copies
   
35.24   Fees for copies
   
35.25   Misstatement of purpose prohibited
   
35.26   Online access to public records in electronic form
   
35.27   Public records protected from disclosure
   
35.28   Notification of the Attorney General
Statutory reference:
   State open records provisions, see KRS 61.870 to 61.884
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
§ 35.01 POLICY.
   The following procedures shall be the grievance procedures for anyone who
believes he or she has been discriminated against by the city based on
handicapped status with respect to federally funded programs.
(Prior Code, § 230.03)
§ 35.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The administration of these procedures and related federal and state
regulations shall be the responsibility of the executive authority of the city.
(Prior Code, § 230.03)
§ 35.03 AMENDMENT.
   These procedures may be amended by ordinance to comply with court directives
or additional federal and state regulations.
(Prior Code, § 230.03)
§ 35.04 PROCEDURE; STEPS.
   (A)   Any person, employee or citizen who believes that he or she has been
subjected to discrimination, as prohibited by the federal revenue sharing
program regulations and § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. §§
701 et seq., may personally or by a representative, file a complaint with the
office of the Mayor.
   (B)   A person who has not personally been subjected to discrimination may
also file a complaint.
   (C)   When any person, citizen, applicant or employee who believes he or she
has been adversely affected by an act or decision by the city, and that such
act or decision was based on handicapped status, shall have the right to
process a complaint or grievance with the following procedure.
      (1)   Step One. An-aggrieved person must submit a written statement to
the Mayor setting forth the nature of the discrimination alleged and facts upon
which the allegation is based.
      (2)   Step Two. The Mayor shall contact the complainant no later than 15
days after receiving the written statement to establish an informal meeting
with the objective of resolving the matter informally. However, in no case
shall the informal meeting be conducted sooner than five days nor more than 45
days after receiving the written statement. There shall be prepared a written
documentary of the discussions at the informal meeting, which shall be
preserved in the records of the city.
      (3)   Step Three. Within 15 days of the informal meeting, if no decision
has been made by the Mayor or the decision of the Mayor does not satisfy the
complainant, he or she may request a hearing with the City Council by
submitting a written request to the City Clerk.
      (4)   Step Four. In thus discussing the grievance, the complainant may
designate any person of his or her choice to appear with him or her and
participate in the discussion. The City Council shall require the Mayor to
participate in the discussion of the grievance when it is brought before the
City Council. The Council shall issue a written decision on the matter within
15 days, and the decision shall be the final procedure for the complainant at
the local level.
   (D)   There shall be prepared a written documentary of the discussion at the
hearing, which shall be preserved in the records of the city.
(Prior Code, § 230.03)
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 35.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOOKING PHOTOGRAPH AND PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD OF INMATE. A photograph or image
of an individual generated by law enforcement for identification purposes when
the individual is booked into a detention facility as defined in KRS 520.010 or
photograph and image of an inmate taken pursuant to KRS 196.099.
(KRS 61.870(9))
   CITY. The city government of this city.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The direct or indirect use of any part of a public
record or records in any form for sale, resale, solicitation, rent, or lease of
a service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary, or fee. COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not include:
      (1)   Publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or
periodical;
      (2)   Use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news
or other informational programs; or
      (3)   Use of a public record in the preparation for prosecution or
defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to the action, or
the attorneys representing the parties.
(KRS 61.870(4))
   CUSTODIAN.
      (1)   The official custodian or any authorized person having personal
custody and control of public records.
(KRS 61.870(6))
      (2)   The CUSTODIAN having personal custody of most of the public records
of this city is the City Clerk.
   MECHANICAL PROCESSING. Any operation or other procedure which is transacted
on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to, a copier, computer,
recorder or tape processor, or other automated device.
(KRS 61.870(8))
   MEDIA. The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include, but is not limited to, paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes, and cards.
(KRS 61.870(7))
   OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.
      (1)   The chief administrative officer or any other officer or employee
of a public agency who is responsible for the maintenance, care, and keeping of
public records, regardless of whether the records are in his or her actual
personal custody and control.
(KRS 61.870(5))
      (2)   The OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN of this city shall be the Mayor.
   PERSON. A human being who makes a request for inspection of public records.
   PRESCRIBED FEE or FEE. The fair payment required by the city for making
copies of public records and for mailing public records, which shall not exceed
the actual cost thereof and shall not include the cost of required staff time.
   PUBLIC AGENCY.
      (1)   Every state or local government officer;
      (2)   Every state or local government department, division, bureau,
board, commission, and authority;
      (3)   Every state or local legislative board, commission, committee, and
officer;
      (4)   Every county and city governing body, council, school district
board, special district board, and municipal corporation;
      (5)   Every state or local court or judicial agency;
      (6)   Every state or local government agency, including the policy-making
board of an institution of education, created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution, or other legislative act;
      (7)   Any body created by state or local authority in any branch of
government;
      (8)   Any body which, within any fiscal year, derives at least 25% of its
funds expended by it in the Commonwealth of Kentucky from state or local
authority funds. However, any funds derived from a state or local authority in
compensation for goods or services that are provided by a contract obtained
through a competitive procurement process shall not be included in the
determination of whether a body is a public agency under this division (8);
      (9)   Any entity where the majority of its governing body is appointed by
a public agency as defined in this definition; by a member or employee of the
public agency; or by any combination thereof;
      (10)   Any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc committee,
advisory committee, council, or agency, except for a committee of a hospital
medical staff, established, created, and controlled by a public agency as
defined in this definition; and
      (11)   Any interagency body of two or more public agencies where each
public agency is defined in this definition.
(KRS 61.870(1))
   PUBLIC RECORD.
      (1)   All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs,
diskettes, recordings, software, or other documentation regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned, used, in the possession of
or retained by the public agency.
      (2)   PUBLIC RECORD shall not include any records owned or maintained by
or for a body discussed in division (8) of the definition of PUBLIC AGENCY,
above that are not related to functions, activities, programs, or operations
funded by state or local authority.
(KRS 61.870(2))
   REQUEST. An oral or a written application by any person to inspect the
public records of the agency.
   RESIDENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
      (1)   An individual residing in the commonwealth;
      (2)   A domestic business entity with a location in the commonwealth;
      (3)   A foreign business entity registered with the Secretary of State;
      (4)   An individual that is employed and works at a location or locations
within the commonwealth;
      (5)   An individual or business entity that owns real property within the
commonwealth;
      (6)   Any individual or business entity that has been authorized to act
on behalf of an individual or business entity defined in divisions (1) to (5)
of this definition; or
      (7)   A news-gathering organization as defined in KRS 189.635(9)(b)1.a.
to e.
(KRS 61.870(10))
   SOFTWARE. The program code which makes a computer system function, but does
not include that portion of the program code which contains public records
exempted from inspection as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific addresses of
files, passwords, access codes, user identifications, or any other mechanism
for controlling the security or restricting access to public records in the
public agency’s computer system. SOFTWARE consists of the operating system,
application programs, procedures, routines, and subroutines such as translators
and utility programs, but does not include that material which is prohibited
from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between a public agency and
an outside entity which supplied the material to the agency.
(KRS 61.870(3))
§ 35.16 INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of this city
shall make a request for inspection at the office of the City Clerk during
regular office hours, except during legal holidays. The official custodian, or
the custodian acting under the authority of the official custodian, may require
a request to inspect public records to be in writing, signed by the applicant
and with the applicant’s name printed legibly on the application. A written
request to inspect public records may be presented by hand delivery, mail, or
via facsimile, if one is available.
   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person’s request is in compliance
with this subchapter and the Open Records Law, and the requested public records
are immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection. A person may inspect public records at the designated office of the
city during the regular office hours, or in appropriate cases, by receiving
copies of the records through the mail.
   (C)   If the public records are to be inspected at the offices of the city,
suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of the City Clerk or
in another office of the city as determined by the official custodian or
custodian for the inspection. No person shall remove original copies of public
records from the offices of the city without the written permission of the
official custodian of the record. When public records are inspected at the city
offices, the person inspecting the records shall have the right to make
abstracts and memoranda of the public records and to obtain copies of all
written public records. When copies are requested, the custodian may require
advance payment of the prescribed fee.
   (D)   Upon proper request, the city shall mail copies of the public records
to a person whose residence or principal place of business is located outside
of the county after the person precisely describes the public records which are
readily available and after the person pays in advance the prescribed fee.
Statutory reference:
   Right to inspection, limitations, see KRS 61.872(1)-(3)
§ 35.17 REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.
   If the City Clerk does not have custody or control of the public record or
records requested, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant and shall furnish
the name and location of the official custodian of the agency’s public records.
(KRS 61.872(4))
§ 35.18 PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.
   If the public record is in active use, in storage, or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately notify the applicant and
shall designate a place, time, and date for inspection or mailing of the public
records, not to exceed three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of the
cause is given for further delay and the place, time, and earliest date on
which the public record will be available for inspection or duplication.
(KRS 61.872(5))
§ 35.19 REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.
   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof. However, refusal under this section must be sustained by
clear and convincing evidence.
(KRS 61.872(6))
§ 35.20 TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.
   Each public agency, upon any request for records made under this chapter,
shall determine within five days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) after the receipt of any request whether to comply with the request
and shall notify in writing the person making the request within the five-day
period of his, her, or its decision. Any agency response denying, in whole or
in part, inspection of any record shall include a statement of the specific
exception authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief explanation of
how the exception applies to the record withheld. The response shall be issued
by the official custodian or under his or her authority and shall constitute
final agency action.
(KRS 61.880(1))
§ 35.21 CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.
   No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any record with
the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.
§ 35.22 ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.
   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or her or
in which he or she is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of §
35.27.
(KRS 61.884)
§ 35.23 FORMAT OF COPIES.
   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make abstracts
of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies of all public
records not exempted by the terms of §
35.27. When copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request
and advance payment of the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate.
If the applicant desires copies of public records other than written records,
the custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the
applicant to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that
the duplication will not damage or alter the original records.
(KRS 61.874(1))
   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public records
used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy format
where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not
required to convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not
less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in at least one color on white
paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format. If the public agency maintains
electronic public records in a format other than ASCII, and the format conforms
to the requestor’s requirements, the public record may be provided in this
alternate electronic format for standard fees as specified by the public
agency. Any request for a public record in a form other than the forms
described in this section shall be considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(2))
§ 35.24 FEES FOR COPIES.
   (A)   Noncommercial purposes. The public agency may prescribe a reasonable
fee for making copies of nonexempt public records requested for use for
noncommercial purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction,
including the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by
the public agency, but not including the cost of staff required. If a public
agency is asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor
the format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency
may at its discretion provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.
(KRS 61.874(3))
   (B)   Commercial purposes.
      (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.
      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are
requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the
requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may
require the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency. The contract
shall permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.
      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) of this section may be
based on one or both of the following:
         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing, and
staff required to produce a copy of the public record or records; and/or
         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation, purchase, or other
acquisition of the public records.
(KRS 61.874(4))
Cross-reference:
   Fees for online access to public records, see §
35.25
§ 35.25 MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a public
record for a:
   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a
certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to §
35.24(B)(2);
   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of
the public record for a different commercial purpose; or
   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use
of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical, radio
or television station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed the
use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for
that commercial use.
(KRS 61.874(5)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.26 ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.
   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be provided and
made available at the discretion of the public agency. If a party wishes to
access public records by electronic means and the public agency agrees to
provide online access, a public agency may require that the party enter into a
contract, license, or other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for
these agreements.
   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:
      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost
of computer time access charges; and
   (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable
fee based on the factors set forth in §
35.24(B).
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 35.27 PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application of this
chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to inspection only
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except that no court shall
authorize the inspection by any party of any materials pertaining to civil
litigation beyond that which is provided by the Rules of Civil Procedure
governing pretrial discovery:
      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal nature where
the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy;
      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and compiled and
maintained for scientific research. This exemption shall not, however, apply to
records the disclosure or publication of which is directed by other statute;
      (3)   (a)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency, or required by
an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial
advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records;
         (b)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency, or required by an
agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:
            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of a loan or grant;
            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of assessments, incentives, inducements, and tax credits as described in KRS
Chapter 154;
            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of commercial enterprise,
including mineral exploration records, unpatented, secret commercially valuable
plans, appliances, formulae, or processes, which are used for the making,
preparing, compounding, treating, or processing of articles or materials which
are trade commodities obtained from a person; or
            4. For the grant or review of a license to do business.
         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a) and (A)(3)(b)
of this section shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of
which is directed by another statute.
      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a business
or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the business’
or industry’s interest in locating in, relocating within, or expanding within
the commonwealth. This exemption shall not include those records pertaining to
applications to agencies for permits or licenses necessary to do business or to
expand business operations within the state, except as provided in division (A)
(3) of this section;
      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in conjunction with
the regulation or supervision of financial institutions, including, but not
limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unions, which
disclose the agency’s internal examining or audit criteria and related
analytical methods;
      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has been
acquired. The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision;
      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to
administer a licensing examination, examination for employment, or academic
examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again;
      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved in
administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting and
investigating statutory or regulatory violations if the disclosure of the
information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants not
otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication. Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action; however, records or information compiled
and maintained by county attorneys or the commonwealth’s attorneys pertaining
to criminal investigations or criminal litigation shall be exempted from the
provisions of this subchapter and shall remain exempted after enforcement
action, including litigation, is completed or a decision is made to take no
action. The exemptions provided by this division (A)(8) shall not be used by
the custodian of the records to delay or impede the exercise of rights granted
by this subchapter;
      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes, or correspondence with private
individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give notice of
final action of a public agency;
      (10)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda in which
opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended;
      (11)   All public records or information, the disclosure of which is
prohibited by federal law or regulation or state law;
      (12)   Public records or information, the disclosure of which is
prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of the
General Assembly, including any information acquired by the Department of
Revenue in tax administration that is prohibited from divulgence or disclosure
under KRS 131.190;
      (13)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would have a
reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating, or responding to a
terrorist act and limited to:
            1. Criticality lists resulting from consequence assessments;
            2.   Vulnerability assessments;
            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
            4.   Counterterrorism measures and plans;
            5. Security and response needs assessments;
            6.   Infrastructure records that expose a vulnerability referred to
in this division (A)(13) through the disclosure of the location, configuration,
or security of critical systems, including public utility critical systems.
These critical systems shall include, but not be limited to, information
technology, communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water,
wastewater, sewage and gas systems;
            7.   The following records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division (A)(13): detailed drawings,
schematics, maps, or specifications of structural elements, floor plans, and
operating, utility or security systems of any building or facility owned,
occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency; and
            8.   Records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability
referred to in this division (A)(13) and that describe the exact physical
location of hazardous chemical, radiological, or biological materials.
         (b)   As used in this division (A)(13), TERRORIST ACT means a criminal
act intended to:
            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all or part of the
civilian population;
            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division (A)(13)(a)6. of this
section; or
            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or facility owned,
occupied, leased, or maintained by a public agency.
         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a request to inspect
a public record for a reason identified in this division (A)(13), that public
agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request, referred to
in §
35.19 of this chapter, to the executive director of the Kentucky Office of
Homeland Security and the Attorney General.
         (d)   Nothing in this division (A)(13) shall affect the obligations of
a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of public records
under state environmental, health, and safety programs.
         (e)   The exemption established in this division (A)(13) shall not
apply when a member of the Kentucky General Assembly seeks to inspect a public
record identified in this division (A)(13) under the Open Records Law.
      (14)   Public or private records, including books, papers, maps,
photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software, or other
documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having historic,
literary, artistic, or commemorative value accepted by the archivist of a
public university, museum, or government depository from a donor or depositor
other than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to the extent that
nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or depositor of such
records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which
is mandated by another statute or by federal law;
      (15)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chapter 45A or 56. This
exemption shall not apply after:
         (a)   A contract is awarded; or
         (b)   The procurement process is canceled without award of a contract
and there is a
determination that the contract will not be resolicited.
      (16)   Client and case files maintained by the Department of Public
Advocacy or any person or entity contracting with the Department of Public
Advocacy for the provision of legal representation under KRS Chapter 31;
      (17)   Except as provided in KRS 61.168, photographs or videos that
depict the death, killing, rape, or sexual assault of a person. However, such
photographs or videos shall be made available by the public agency to the
requesting party for viewing on the premises of the public agency, or a
mutually agreed upon location, at the request of:
         (a)   1.   Any victim depicted in the photographs or videos, his or
her immediate family, or legal representative;
            2.   Any involved insurance company or its representative; or
            3.   The legal representative of any involved party.
         (b)   Any state agency or political subdivision investigating official
misconduct; or
         (c)   A legal representative for a person under investigation for,
charged with, pled guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the
underlying incident. The person under investigation for, charged with, pled
guilty to, or found guilty of a crime related to the underlying incident or
their immediate family shall not be permitted to have access to the photographs
or videos.
      (18)   Records confidentially maintained by a law enforcement agency in
accordance with a wellness program, including an early intervention system, as
described in KRS 15.409; and
      (19)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function.
(KRS 61.878(1))
   (B)   (1)   No exemption in this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.
(KRS 61.878(2))
      (2)   In addition, if any public record contains material which is not
excepted under this section, the public agency shall separate the excepted and
make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject to the
possible applicability of §
35.19.
(KRS 61.878(4))
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or limit the
exchange of public records or the sharing of information between public
agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is
necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.
(KRS 61.878(5))
   (D)   (1)   No exemption in this section shall be construed to deny,
abridge, or impede the right of a public agency employee, including university
employees, an applicant for employment, or an eligible on a register to inspect
and to copy any record, including preliminary and other supporting
documentation, that relates to him or her. These records shall include, but not
be limited to, work plans, job performance, demotions, evaluations, promotions,
compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers, layoffs, disciplinary
actions, examination scores, and preliminary and other supporting
documentation.
      (2)   A public agency employee, including university employees,
applicant, or eligible shall not have the right to inspect or to copy any
examination or any documents relating to ongoing criminal or administrative
investigations by an agency.
(KRS 61.878(3))
   (E)   When material is made available pursuant to a request under division
(A)(17) of this section, the city shall not be required to make a copy of the
recording except as provided in KRS 61.169, and the requesting parties shall
not be limited in the number of times they may view the material.
(KRS 61.878(6))
§ 35.28 NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the city in Circuit Court regarding the enforcement of the Open
Records Law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
   
50.01   Water and sewer service required in habitable dwellings
   
50.02   Water and sewer service charges and rates
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE REQUIRED IN HABITABLE DWELLINGS.
   No person or persons, firms or firms, partnerships or corporations shall
permit, whether rented or otherwise, any dwelling, apartment, room or rooms to
be occupied, rented or leased unless said dwelling, apartment, room or rooms is
serviced by water and sewerage at all times during said occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 820.1) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES AND RATES.
   There is hereby established a revised schedule of rates and charges for the
use of any services rendered by the combined and consolidated municipal
waterworks and sewer system of said city as follows.
   (A)   Monthly water rates.
      (1)   Within corporate limits of city.
 
Gallons per Month Water Rates
First 500         $12.84 minimum bill
Next 9,500        $4.82 per 1,000 gallons
Next 990,000      $3.98 per 1,000 gallons
Next 1,000,000    $4.38 per 1,000 gallons
Over 2,000,000    $4.82 per 1,000 gallons
 
      (2)   Outside corporate limits of city.
 
Gallons per Month Water Rates
First 500         $15.22 minimum bill
Next 4,500        $11.24 per 1,000 gallons
Next 5,000        $6.96 per 1,000 gallons
Over 10,000       $5.17 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   Sewer service charges.
      (1)   Sewer service charges shall be charges levied on all users who
discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the public sewage
system.
      (2)   Sewer service charges shall be comprised of a system of user
charges, excessive strength surcharges and a system of charges for debt
service.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         CHARGES FOR DEBT SERVICE. Charges levied on users of the sewage
treatment system to support the annual debt service obligations of the system.
         EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGES. Charges levied on users of the sewage
treatment system whose contribution has either a monthly average biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) content in excess of 250 mg/l, a monthly average suspended
solids (SS) content in excess of 250 mg/l or a monthly average ammonia (NH3)
content in excess of 25 mg/l.
         USER CHARGES. Charges levied on users of the sewage system to offset
the cost of operations and maintenance of the system.
   (C)   Sewer rates.
      (1)   (a)   The following schedule of rates shall apply to each user of
the sewage treatment system. This schedule includes the rate for user charges
as established herein, based on the volume of metered water consumption except
where an annually calibrated sewer meter has been installed.
Gallons per Month Sewer Rate
Gallons per Month Sewer Rate
First 1,500       $25.97 per 1,000 gallons
Next 8,500        $10.81 per 1,000 gallons
Next 15,000       $9.88 per 1,000 gallons
Next 75,000       $8.89 per 1,000 gallons
Next 900,000      $6.94 per 1,000 gallons
Next 1,000,000    $7.89 per 1,000 gallons
Over 2,000,000    $8.85 per 1,000 gallons
 
         (b)   The above rates and charges shall be increased annually by an
amount not to exceed a maximum of 6% at the Commission’s discretion for the
next five years, ending in 2029. At that time, the maximum annual increase will
be 3% at the Commission’s discretion.
      (2)   The following surcharge rates shall apply to each user of the
sewage treatment system that contributes excessive strength sewage.
 
Surcharge Rates
BOD (in excess of 250 mg/l)  $0.17 per pound
NH3-N (in excess of 25 mg/l) $0.75 per pound
O&G (in excess of 100 mg/l)  $0.25 per pound
TSS (in excess of 250 mg/l)  $0.17 per pound
 
   (D)   Method of billing.
      (1)   Sewer service charges shall be billed monthly on the basis of each
user’s monthly water consumption and strength of discharge.
      (2)   Excessive strength surcharges shall be billed according to the
following formula, with the total applied to the monthly bill for sewer
charges.
 
[A(D-250)+B(E-250)+C(F-25)] x 8.34/1,000 x G = surcharge ($/month)
 
      (3)   The components for the formula in division (D)(2) above are:
         (a)   Surcharge rate for BOD, in $/pound;
         (b)   Surcharge rate for SS, in $/pound;
         (c)   Surcharge rate for NH3-N, in $/pound;
         (d)   User’s monthly average BOD concentration, in mg/l;
         (e)   User’s monthly average SS concentration, in mg/l;
         (f)   User’s monthly average NH3 concentration, in mg/l; and
         (g)   User’s monthly wastewater discharge to sewage treatment system,
in 1,000 gallons.
      (4)   No reduction in sewer charges, fees or taxes shall be permitted in
the event that certain wastes discharged to the sewage treatment system contain
less than: 250 mg/l, BOD; 250 mg/l, SS; or 25 mg/l, NH3.
      (5)   Each user shall be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with
a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the total charge which is
attributable to operations and maintenance of the sewage system.
      (6)   Sewer charges to any customer who is initially rendered service for
less than one month shall be prorated on the basis of the foregoing charges for
the fractional part of the month for which service was rendered.
   (E)   Rate review.
      (1)   The city shall review not less often than every two years the
sewage contributions of users, the total cost of operation and maintenance of
the sewage works and user charges. User charges shall be revised as necessary,
to accomplish the following:
         (a)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operations and
maintenance costs among users of the treatment system; and
         (b)   Generate sufficient revenues to offset costs associated with the
proper operation and maintenance of the sewage system.
      (2)   Excessive strength surcharges shall be reviewed at the time of and
in conjunction with the review of user charges. Surcharge rates shall be
revised where necessary to reflect current treatment costs.
   (F)   Amendments. This section shall be amended as necessary to comply with
federal regulations.
(Prior Code, § 610.5) (Ord. 90-008, passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 94-002, passed 3-14-
1994; Ord. 99-001, passed 2-9-1999; Ord. 00-008, passed 12-12-2000; Ord. 2004-
004, passed 8-18-2004; Ord. 2014-004, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 2016-004, passed
7-12-2016; Ord. 2018-005, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2019-007, passed 11-12-2019;
Ord. 2024-017, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any persons or persons, firm or firms, partnerships or corporations
who permits any dwelling, apartment, room or rooms to be occupied when same is
not serviced by water and sewerage, as provided in §
50.01, for a period of ten days, shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than
$25, and each day shall be considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 820.1)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water Shortage
   
51.01   Purpose
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Water use classes
   
51.04   Water shortage advisory
   
51.05   Water shortage alert
   
51.06   Water shortage emergency
   
51.07   Water shortage rates
   
51.08   Regulations
 
   
51.99   Penalty
WATER SHORTAGE
§ 51.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the declaration of official
phases of water supply shortage situations and the implementation of voluntary
and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the service area of the
City Water and Sewer Commission in the event a shortage is declared. Nothing in
this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with common law riparian or
statutory water rights.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTOMER. Any person using water for any purpose from the city’s water
distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the
case of bulk sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery.
   OTHER SOURCES OF WATER. Water that has not been introduced by the city into
its water distribution system.
   RAW WATER SUPPLIES. All water potentially available to persons in the
service area of the City Water and Sewer Commission.
   TREATED WATER. Water that has been introduced by the city into its water
distribution system, including water offered for sale. Uses of TREATED WATER
are classified in §
51.03.
   WASTE OF WATER. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch or other surface
drain; and
      (2)   Failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective
plumbing.
   WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PHASES.
      (1)   ADVISORY. Conditions exist which indicate the potential for serious
water supply shortages.
      (2)   ALERT. Raw water supplies are consistently below seasonal averages
and, if they continue to decline, may not be adequate to meet normal needs.
      (3)   EMERGENCY. Water supplies are below the level necessary to meet
normal needs and that serious shortages exist in the area.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.03 WATER USE CLASSES.
   (A)   Essential water uses (Class 1). The following uses of water, listed by
site or user type, are essential:
      (1)   Domestic: Water necessary to sustain human life and the lives of
domestic pets, and to maintain minimum standards of hygiene and sanitation;
      (2)   Health care facilities: Patient care and rehabilitation;
      (3)   Water hauling: Sales for domestic use where not reasonably
available elsewhere; and
      (4)   Public use:
         (a)   Firefighting; and
         (b)   Health and public protection purposes, as specifically approved
by health officials and the municipal governing body.
   (B)   Socially or economically important uses of water (Class 2). The
following uses of water, listed by site or user type, are socially or
economically important:
      (1)   Domestic: personal, in-house water use including kitchen, bathroom
and laundry;
      (2)   Water hauling: non-domestic, when other sources are not reasonably
available elsewhere;
      (3)   Commercial and civic use:
         (a)   Commercial car and truck washes;
         (b)   Laundromats;
         (c)   Restaurants, clubs and eating places; and
         (d)   Schools, churches, motels/hotels and similar commercial
establishments.
      (4)   Outdoor noncommercial watering:
         (a)   Minimal watering of vegetable gardens; and
         (b)   Minimal watering of trees where necessary for their survival.
      (5)   Outdoor commercial or public watering (using conservation methods
and when other sources of water are not available or feasible to use):
         (a)   Agricultural irrigation for the production of food and fiber or
the maintenance of livestock;
         (b)   Watering by arboretums and public gardens of national, state,
regional or community significance where necessary to preserve specimens;
         (c)   Watering by commercial nurseries where necessary to maintain
stock;
         (d)   Watering where necessary to establish or maintain vegetation or
landscape plantings required pursuant to law or regulation; and
         (e)   Watering of woody plants where necessary to preserve them,
minimal watering of golf course greens.
       (6)   Recreational: operation of municipal swimming pools and
residential pools that serve more than 25 dwelling units; and
      (7)   Air conditioning:
         (a)   Refilling for startup at the beginning of the cooling season;
         (b)   Makeup of water during the cooling season; and
         (c)   Refilling specifically approved by health officials and the
municipal governing body, where the system has been drained for health
protection or repair services.
   (C)   Non-essential (Class 3). Any waste of water, as defined herein, is
non-essential. The following uses of water, listed by site or user type, are
also non-essential:
      (1)   Public use:
         (a)   Use of fire hydrants (excluding Class I and Class II uses),
including use of sprinkler caps, testing fire apparatus and Fire Department
drills; and
         (b)   Flushing of sewers and hydrants except as needed to ensure
public health and safety as approved by health officials and the municipal
governing body.
      (2)   Commercial and civic use:
         (a)   Serving water in restaurants, clubs or eating places, except by
customer request;
         (b)   Failure to repair a controllable leak; and
         (c)   Increasing water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and
lakes, except as necessary to support fish and wildlife.
      (3)   Ornamental purposes: fountains, reflecting pools and artificial
waterfalls;
      (4)   Outdoor noncommercial watering:
         (a)   Use of water for dirt control or compaction;
         (b)   Watering of annual or non-woody plants other than vegetable
gardens;
         (c)   Watering of lawns, parks, golf course fairways, playing fields
and other recreational areas;
         (d)   Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis
courts or other hard-surface areas;
         (e)   Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection; and
         (f)   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any
gutter or street.
       (5)   Outdoor commercial or public watering:
         (a)   Expanding nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural
land in production or planting of landscaping except when required by a site
design review process;
         (b)   Use of water for dirt control compaction;
         (c)   Watering of lawns, parks, golf course fairways, playing fields
and other recreational areas;
         (d)   Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis
courts or other hard-surface areas;
         (e)   Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection; and
         (f)   Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any
gutter or street.
      (6)   Recreational uses other than those specified as Class II;
      (7)   Non-commercial washing of motor and other vehicles; and
      (8)   Air-conditioning (see also Class II purposes): refilling cooling
towers after draining.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.04 WATER SHORTAGE ADVISORY.
   (A)   Whenever the governing body of the City Water and Sewer Commission
finds that a potential shortage of raw water supplies is indicated, it shall be
empowered to declare by resolution that a water shortage advisory exists, and
that the Water System Manager shall, on a daily basis, monitor the supply and
demands upon that supply. In addition, the Mayor is authorized to call upon all
water customers to employ voluntary water conservation measures to limit non-
essential (Class 3) water use and eliminate the waste of water.
   (B)   Said resolution shall be published in the official city newspaper and
may be publicized through the general news media or any other appropriate
method for making such resolution public.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.05 WATER SHORTAGE ALERT.
   (A)   Whenever the governing body of the City Water and Sewer Commission
finds raw water supplies to be consistently below seasonal averages, and if
they continue to decline and may not be adequate to meet normal needs, it shall
be empowered to declare by resolution that a water shortage alert exists.
   (B)   The Commission shall continue to encourage voluntary water
conservation measures defined under the advisory declaration and, further,
shall impose a ban on all non-essential (Class 3) water uses for the duration
of the shortage until it is declared to have ended by resolution of the
governing body. Declaration of these resolutions shall follow the guidelines in
§
51.04(B).
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.06 WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the governing body of the City Water and Sewer Commission finds
that raw water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and
that serious shortages exist, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution
that a water shortage emergency exists. Essential uses (Class 1) shall be
identified specifically as targets for voluntary conservation initiatives.
Also, all socially or economically important uses (Class 2) shall be
restricted, and nonessential uses (Class 3) shall be banned. These restrictions
shall be considered ongoing until the emergency is ended by resolution of the
governing body. Declaration of these resolutions shall follow the guidelines in
§
51.04(B).
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.07 WATER SHORTAGE RATES.
   (A)   Upon the declaration of a water shortage as provided in §§
51.04 through
51.06, the City Council shall have the power to adopt shortage water rates, by
ordinance, designed to conserve water supplies.
   (B)   Such rates may provide for, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Higher charges per unit for increasing usage (increasing block
rates);
      (2)   Uniform charges for water usage per unit of use (uniform unit
rate);
      (3)   Extra charges for use in excess of a specified level (excess demand
surcharge); or
      (4)   Discounts for conserving water beyond specified levels.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.08 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   During the effective period of any water supply shortage, as provided
for in §§
51.04 through
51.06, the Water System Manager is empowered to promulgate such regulations as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, any water
supply shortage resolution or water shortage rate ordinance.
   (B)   Such regulations shall be subject to the approval of the governing
body of the City Water and Sewer Commission at its next regular or emergency
meeting.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.08, who fails to carry out the duties and responsibilities imposed therein,
or who impedes or interferes with any action undertaken or ordered pursuant to
§§
51.01 through
51.08 shall be subject to the following penalties.
      (1)   If the Water System Manager or other officials charged with
implementation and enforcement of §§
51.01 through
51.08, or any other water supply shortage resolution, learns of any violation
of any water use restriction imposed pursuant to §§
51.01 through
51.08, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property where
the violation occurred and mailed to the customer of record and to any other
person known to the City Water and Sewer Commission who is responsible for the
violation or its correction. Said notice shall describe the violation and order
that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or within such specified time
as the City Water and Sewer Commission determines is reasonable under the
circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the City Water and Sewer
Commission may terminate water service to the customer subject to the following
procedures.
         (a)   The City Water and Sewer Commission shall give the customer
notice by mail that, due to the violations, water services will be disconnected
within a specified time and that the customer will have the opportunity to
appeal the termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the City
Council or a city official designated as a hearing officer by the City Council.
         (b)   If such hearing is requested by the customer charged with the
violation, he or she shall be given an opportunity to be heard before
termination is ordered; and
         (c)   The City Council or hearing officer shall make findings of fact
and order whether service should continue or be terminated.
      (2)   A fee of $50 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water
service terminated pursuant to division (B)(1) above. In the event of
subsequent violations, the reconnection fee shall be $200 for the second
violation and $300 for each additional violation.
      (3)   Any customer may also be charged with violation of §§
51.01 through
51.08 and prosecuted in district court. Any person so charged and found guilty
in district court of violating the provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.08 shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for an initial violation
shall be a mandatory fine of $100, which may not be adjusted by the district
court. In addition, such customer may be required by the court to serve a
definite term of confinement in the County Jail which shall be fixed by the
court and which shall not exceed 30 days. The penalty for a second violation
shall be a mandatory fine of $300, which may not be adjusted by the district
court. In addition, such customer shall serve a definite term of confinement in
the County Jail, which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed
30 days. Penalties for additional violations shall be the same as the second
violation.
(Ord. 2012-004, passed 8-14-2012)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose and policy
   
52.002   Definitions
   
52.003   Abbreviations
Use of Public Sewers
   
52.015   Mandatory sewer connections
   
52.016   Previously developed areas and undeveloped areas within 201 Planning
Area
   
52.017   Unlawful discharge to storm sewers or natural outlets
   
52.018   Compliance with local, state and federal laws
   
52.019   Discharge of unpolluted waters into sewer
Private Wastewater Disposal
   
52.030   Public sewers not available
   
52.031   Requirements for installation
Building Sewers and Connections
   
52.045   Permits
   
52.046   Prohibited connections
   
52.047   Design and installation
   
52.048   Inspection
   
52.049   Grease traps
Pollutant Discharge Limits
   
52.060   General conditions
   
52.061   Prohibited discharges
   
52.062   Restricted discharges
   
52.063   Dilution of wastewater discharge
   
52.064   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
52.065   Special industrial pretreatment requirements
   
52.066   Protection from accidental and slug discharges
   
52.067   State requirements
   
52.068   City’s right to revision
   
52.069   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
Pretreatment Program Administration
   
52.080   Wastewater discharges
   
52.081   Wastewater contribution permits
   
52.082   Permit modifications
   
52.083   Permit conditions
   
52.084   Alternative discharge limits
   
52.085   Permit duration
   
52.086   Permit transfer
   
52.087   Compliance data reporting
   
52.088   Periodic compliance reports
   
52.089   Permit violations
   
52.090   Monitoring
   
52.091   Inspection and sampling
   
52.092   Pretreatment
   
52.093   Annual publication
   
52.094   Significant noncompliance
   
52.095   Confidential information
   
52.096   Signatory requirements
Fees and Charges
   
52.110   Purpose
   
52.111   Fees and charges
Inspectors; Powers and Authority
   
52.125   Right to enter premises
   
52.126   Right to obtain information regarding discharge
   
52.127   Access to easements
   
52.128   Safety
Enforcement
   
52.140   General
   
52.141   Notice of violation
   
52.142   Administrative orders
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city
and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Clean Water Act of 1977, 29 U.S.C. §§ 701 et seq. and the
general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system inadequately treated into
receiving waters so as to cause violations of the city’s KPDES permit or the
atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   To promote the reuse, recycling and reclamation of wastewaters and
sludges from the treatment system;
      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operations,
maintenance and replacement of the municipal wastewater system;
      (5)   To protect municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage,
sludge and/or effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting
the general public; and
      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its KPDES permit
conditions, sludge permit conditions, including use and disposal requirements,
and any other federal or state environmental laws to which the municipal
wastewater system is subject.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contribution to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements
for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (D)   (1)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the city’s municipal
wastewater system.
      (2)   Except as provided herein, the Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or
her designee, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
      (3)   Any powers granted to or imposed upon the Pretreatment Coordinator
may be delegated by the Pretreatment Coordinator to other city personnel. By
discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, all users located
outside the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions
established in this chapter, as well as any permits, enforcement actions or
orders issued hereunder.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   AGENCY. Any governmental or quasi-governmental entity.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Secretary of the State Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Cabinet or an authorized representative thereof.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE.
      (1)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of a user may be:
         (a)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice
president, if the user is a corporation;
         (b)   A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively; or
         (c)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above if the representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
      (2)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE of the city may be any person
designated by the city to act on its behalf.
   BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR). A report submitted by categorical
industrial users within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
standard which indicates the compliance status of the user with the applicable
categorical standard (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)).
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration in milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from inside the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
   BUILDING SEWER PERMIT. As set forth in §§
52.045 through
52.049.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards which have been promulgated by EPA.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial
users.
   CITY. The City of Springfield, its City Council or Water and Sewer
Commission and all areas included in the 201 Planning Area and/or their
designee.
   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). Also known as the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, enacted by Pub. Law No. 92-500, October 18, 1972, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq., as amended by Pub. Law No. 95-217, December 28, 1977; Pub. Law No. 97-
117, December 29, 1981; Pub. Law No. 97-440, January 8, 1983; and Pub. Law No.
100-04, February 4, 1987.
   COMBINED SEWER. Any conduit designed to carry both sanitary sewage and
stormwater or surface water.
   COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA (CWF). Procedure for calculating alternative
discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated wastestream is
combined with other non-regulated wastestreams prior to treatment (40 C.F.R. §
403.7).
   COMMISSION. The City Water and Sewer Commission.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and fecal
coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the POTW’s
NPDES/KPDES permit where the POTW is designed to treat the pollutants and, in
fact, does treat such pollutants so as to ensure compliance with the POTW’s
NPDES/KPDES permit.
   CONCENTRATION-BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a
pollutant in a wastestream, usually expressed in mg/l.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The city, acting through the Pretreatment Coordinator
and/or designee.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharge from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DAILY MAXIMUM. The maximum allowable value for any single sampling
observation in a given day.
   DILUTE WASTESTREAM. Boiler blowdown, sanitary wastewater, non-contact
cooling water and certain process wastestreams that have been excluded from
regulation in categorical pretreatment standards because they contain none or
only trace amounts of the regulated pollutant.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   DISCHARGER. Any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a public
sewer.
   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. The water-carried wastes produced from non-commercial
or non-industrial activities and which result from normal human living
processes.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT. The liquid overflow of any facility designed to treat convey or
retain wastewater.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
   EQUIPMENT. All movable, non-fixed items necessary to the wastewater
treatment process.
   FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples
proportional to the flow of the wastestream at the time of sampling.
   FLOW WEIGHTED AVERAGING FORMULA (FWA). A procedure used to calculate
alternative limits for a categorical pretreatment standard where regulated and
non-regulated wastestreams combine after treatment, but prior to the monitoring
point, as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 403.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis
with no regard to the flow of the wastestream and without consideration of
time.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than compatible pollutants, as
defined herein.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU). A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a “discharge of pollutants” under regulations issued pursuant to §
402 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial or commercial processes as
distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
   INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed so as to separate and retain
deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal wastes which permits
normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the sewer or drainage system
by gravity. INTERCEPTOR, as defined herein, is commonly referred to as a
GREASE, OIL OR SAND TRAP.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources:
      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge, processes, use or disposal; and/or
      (2)   Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES/
KPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation
or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or
more stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1345; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
(including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.; the
Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 through 2692; and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, 16 U.S.C. § 1431.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation waste, infectious agents, human blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes,
potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE. The maximum allowable value for the average of all
observations obtained during one month.
   MULTI-UNIT SEWER CUSTOMER. A location served where there are two or more
residential units or apartments, two or more businesses in the same building or
complex or where there is any combination of business and residence in the same
building or complex.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b)
and (c), which applies to a specific category of industrial users. This term
includes the prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. §
403.5.
   NATIONAL (OR KENTUCKY) POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES/KPDES
PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1332) or a
permit issued by the state under this authority and referred to as KPDES.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse,
pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards which will be
applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, shall
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
   90-DAY COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report submitted by a categorical industrial
user, within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical standards that documents and certifies the compliance status of the
user (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d)).
   PASSTHROUGH. A discharge of pollutant which cannot be treated adequately by
the POTW, and therefore exits into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges
from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
NPDES/KPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) (40 C.F.R. § 403.3).
   PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT. A report on compliance status submitted by
significant industrial users to the control authority at least semi-annually
(40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)).
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estates, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units and calculated as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions,
in grams, per liter of solution.
   pH VIOLATION. For users that utilize a continuous pH monitoring system to
determine compliance with the pH limitations established under this chapter, a
violation of the pH limitations will be deemed to have occurred when a
continuous individual excursion from the range of pH limitations exceeds 15
minutes, provided that the total time during which the pH value was outside the
required range of pH limitations does not exceed seven hours and 26 minutes in
any calendar month. For users that do not utilize a continuous pH monitoring
system to determine compliance with the pH limitations established under this
chapter, a violation of the pH limitations will be deemed to have occurred
where a grab sample of the final effluent stream indicates that the pH of the
wastewater sample was outside the pH limitation range established under this
chapter.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, medical waste, munitions, chemical, biological
material, radioactive material, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged
into water.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment
to wastewater.
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into a POTW. The reduction
or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or
process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. City personnel designated by the city to implement
and enforce the city’s approved pretreatment program or his or her designee.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards and local limits.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production of or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste
product.
   PRODUCTION-BASED STANDARD. A discharge limitation expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant mass discharge rate per unit of production and is applied
directly to an industrial user’s manufacturing process.
   PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority
of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city.
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users
of the city’s POTW.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility. In general, the PUBLIC SEWER shall include the main sewer in the
street and the service branch to the curb or property line, or a main sewer on
private property and the service branch to the extent of ownership by public
authority. Nothing in this definition shall expand the city’s current policy of
maintenance of service branches.
   REGULATED WASTESTREAM. An industrial process wastestream regulated by a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings industrial plants and institutions.
   SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. Domestic or sanitary waste shall
mean the liquid or water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings
and institutions as distinct from industrial sewage. The terms SEWAGE and
WASTEWATER are used interchangeably.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
   SEWERAGE. Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping,
treating and disposing of wastewater.
   SEWER SYSTEM OR WORKS. All facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage and sludge, namely the sewerage system and
POTW.
   SEWER USER CHARGES. A system of charges levied on users of a POTW for the
cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the works.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).
      (1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
      (2)   Any non-categorical user that:
         (a)   Discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater
(“process wastewater” excludes sanitary non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewaters);
         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS and the like) capacity
of the treatment plant; or
         (c)   Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the control or
approval authority, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant (inhibition,
passthrough of pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment of POTW
workers).
   SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature, including,
but not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge or any
discharge of water or wastewater in which the concentration of any given
constituent or quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than
15 minutes, more than five times, the average 24-hour concentration or flow
rate during normal operation which adversely affects the POTW.
   SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant (including biochemical oxygen demand) released in a
discharge at a flow rate or concentration which will cause interference with
the operation of the treatment works or which exceeds limits set forth in the
industry’s discharge permit and which include accidental spills.
   SPILL PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN. A plan prepared by an industrial user to
minimize the likelihood of a spill and to expedite control and cleanup
activities should a spill occur.
   SPLIT SAMPLE. A portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to
another agency to verify or compare laboratory results.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). As set forth in Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, published by the Executive Office of the
President and the Office of Management and Budget.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
recent editions of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation, and as
set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, surface water or unpolluted water from any source.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Commission of the
city or his or her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic sewer user and
debt service charges, for those users whose contributions contain biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD5), chemical oxygen demand (COD), total suspended solids
(TSS), oil and grease or ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) in concentrations which
exceed limits specified herein for the pollutants. Where authorized by the
control authority, payment of a SURCHARGE will authorize the discharge of the
referenced pollutants so long as the discharge does not cause passthrough or
interference.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TSS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that
is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
   TIME PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE. Combination of individual samples with
fixed volumes taken at specific time intervals.
   TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN. Written plan submitted by industrial users as
an alternative to TTO monitoring, which specifies the toxic organic compounds
used, the method of disposal used and procedures for assuring that toxic
organics do not routinely spill or leak into wastewater discharged to the POTW.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of EPA under the provisions of
the Clean Water Act, § 307(a), or any amendments thereto.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the treatment
works effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   UNREGULATED WASTESTREAM. A wastestream that is not regulated by National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into the
POTW.
   WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT. A permit issued to industrial users which
authorizes discharges to the public sewer as set forth in §§
52.140 through
52.142.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, WATER POLLUTION CONTROL
PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage or water either
continuously or intermittently.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meaning.
ADMI   American Dye Manufacturers Institute
ASTM   American Society for Testing and Materials
BMP    Best management practices
BOD    Biochemical oxygen demand
BPJ    Best professional judgment
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations
CIU    Categorical industrial user
COD    Chemical oxygen demand
CWA    Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.)
CWF    Combined wastestream formula
EPA    Environmental Protection Agency
FR     Federal Register
FWA    Flow weighted average
GC     Gas chromatography
GC/MS  Gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
gpd    Gallons per day
IU     Industrial user
KPDES  Kentucky Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
L      Liter
mg     Milligrams
mg/l   Milligrams per liter
NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M    Operations and maintenance
POTW   Publicly owned treatment works
QA     Quality assurance
QC     Quality control
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
S.U.   Standard units
SIC    Standard Industrial Classification
SIU    Significant industrial user
SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
TSS    Total suspended solids
TTO    Total toxic organics
U.S.C. United States Code
WCP    Wastewater contribution permit
 
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.015 MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is (are)
hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 400 feet of
the property line.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
wastewater where public sanitary sewer service is available, as defined in
division (A) above, except as provided for in §§
52.030 and
52.031.
   (C)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer system within 60 days in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material or salvaged and
removed.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.016 PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED AREAS AND UNDEVELOPED AREAS WITHIN 201 PLANNING
AREA.
   (A)   Properties located inside the 201 Planning Area are not required to be
annexed into the city in order to receive sewer service.
   (B)   Moreover, the Chairperson of the City Water and Sewer Commission and
the Commission’s Engineer shall review plans submitted by the applicant to
determine potential impacts to the city’s existing collection system as well as
the most appropriate appurtenances needed to convey the discharge to the city’s
system before granting approval to accept the discharge. In addition, plans for
sewer lines and other appurtenances necessary to convey the discharge to the
point of connection to city service shall be made in accordance with §§
52.045 through
52.049 and other appropriate written specifications, and approved by the
Chairperson and Commission Engineer prior to construction. Installations shall
be inspected in accordance with §§
52.045 through
52.049.
   (C)   All construction and maintenance costs associated with conveying the
discharge to the point of connection with city service shall be borne by the
property owner.
   (D)   Properties located outside the city limits which receive sewer service
shall enter into an inter-jurisdictional agreement with the city before the
service is connected. All properties considered for annexation shall have
approved sewer lines in place or an enforceable commitment from the property
owner to install such sewer lines on a schedule acceptable to the chairperson.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.017 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWERS OR NATURAL OUTLETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited any pollutant in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment or management has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No provision of this chapter shall be construed to relieve the owner
of a discharge to any natural outlet of the responsibility for complying with
applicable state and federal regulations governing the discharge.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.018 COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   The discharge of any wastewater into the public sewer system by any person
is unlawful, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any
more stringent state or federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, the Clean Water Act of 1977,
being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. and subsequent amendments and 40 C.F.R. part
403.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.019 DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATERS INTO SEWER.
   (A)   (1)   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged, through
any leak, defect or connection, any unpolluted waters, such as stormwater,
groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer, building
sewer, building drain or building plumbing.
      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her representative shall
have the right, at any time, to inspect the inside or outside of buildings or
smoke test for connections, leaks or defects to building sewers and require
disconnection or repair of any such pipes carrying such water to the building
sewer.
      (3)   No sanitary drain sump or sump pump discharge by manual switchover
of discharge connection shall have a dual use for removal of such water.
   (B)   The owners of any building sewers having the connections, leaks or
defects shall bear all costs incidental to removal of the sources.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
§ 52.030 PUBLIC SEWERS NOT AVAILABLE.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
52.015 through
52.019, the building sewer shall be connected, until the public sewer is
available, to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the
provisions of the County Health Department and all applicable local and state
regulations.
   (B)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (C)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by applicable
local or state regulations.
   (D)   Holders of NPDES/KPDES permits may be excepted. Industries with
current NPDES/KPDES permits may discharge at permitted discharge points
provided they are in compliance of the issuing authority.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.031 REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all local or state regulations.
   (B)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of local and state
authorities.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 52.045 PERMITS.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits required for
residential and for service to commercial and industrial establishments. In
either case, the owner(s) or his, her or their agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the City Water and Sewer Commission. Applicants for
service to commercial and industrial establishments shall be required to
furnish information about all waste-producing activities, wastewater
characteristics and constituents. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Pretreatment Coordinator. Details regarding commercial and
industrial permits include, but are not limited to, those required by this
chapter. Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the Commission at the time
the application is filed.
   (B)   Users shall promptly notify the Pretreatment Coordinator in advance of
any introduction of wastewater constituents, a slug and/or accidental discharge
or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the POTW. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
deny or place conditions on the new introduction, change in discharge or slug/
accidental discharge based on the information submitted in the notification or
additional information as may be requested.
   (C)   No person(s) shall uncover, plug or make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining permission from the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (D)   A permit and inspection fee for residential, commercial and industrial
buildings shall be assessed by the Commission at the time the application is
filed.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.046 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement wall
seepage or floor seepage, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public, sanitary sewer. Any such
connections which already exist on the effective date of this chapter shall be
completely and permanently disconnected within 60 days of the effective date of
this chapter. The owner(s) of any building sewers having the connections, leaks
or defects shall bear all costs incidental to removal of the sources. Pipes,
sumps and pumps for the sources of groundwater and surface water shall be
separate from wastewater facilities. Removal of the sources of water without
presence of separate facilities shall be evidence of drainage to public
sanitary sewer. Connections shall be subject to inspection by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to verify compliance. Inspections may be performed periodically at
the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator or at the time of connection/
reconnection.
   (B)   Floor, basement or crawl space drains which are lower than ground
surfaces surrounding the building shall not be connected to the building
sanitary sewer. No sanitary inlet which is lower than six inches above the top
of the lowest of the two adjacent public sanitary sewer manholes shall be
connected by direct drainage to the building sanitary sewer.
   (C)   Building sanitary sewer connections in structures not meeting the
criteria of this section win be permitted only if the property owner has:
      (1)   Installed an individual pumping facility at the structure to
receive the building sewage (the pumping facility shall include a discharge
pipe with a high point which meets the criteria above); or
      (2)   Installed a minimum of two sewer backflow stops or flaps at least
12 inches apart of such nature and design to provide gravity flow to the
sanitary sewer system and to prevent sewage backflow into the property
improvement.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.047 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. The sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such
single connection aforementioned.
   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter. Permit and inspection fees for new buildings
using existing building sewers shall be the same as for new building sewers. If
additional sewer customers are added to the old building sewers, additional
sewer tap fees shall be charged accordingly even though no new sewer tap is
actually made into the city system.
   (C)   Extension of customer service lines from any point on the customer’s
side of the tap for delivery of waste from any location other than that of the
customer in whose name the tap is registered shall not be permitted.
   (D)   The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM A-74, latest
revision, PVC (polyvinylchloride) sewer pipe, ASTM C-700, latest revision, or
ductile iron pipe, AWWA specification C-151 cement lined, and shall meet all
requirements of the State Plumbing Code. Joints shall be as set out
hereinafter. Any part of the building sewer that is located within five feet of
a water service pipe shall be constructed with cast iron soil pipe or ductile
iron pipe, unless the building sewer is at least one foot deeper in the ground
than the water service line. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe may be
required by the city where the building sewer is exposed to damage or stoppage
by tree roots. Cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe shall be used in filled
or unstable ground, in areas where the cover over the building sewer is less
than three feet, or, in areas where the sewer is subject to vehicular or other
external loads.
   (E)   The size, slope, alignment materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
local and State Building and Plumbing Codes and other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. Manholes may be required at all commercial and
industrial connections to the city’s municipal sewer system. The owner of the
facility shall be responsible for all costs associated with installation of the
manhole(s). Specifications for manholes may be obtained by contacting the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (F)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Fees for connection shall
be as established by the Commission.
   (G)   The owner shall ensure that all excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Commission.
   (H)   In all buildings in which any sanitary facility drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the same building sewer.
Drain pipe and sump for collection of the sanitary drainage shall be above
basement floor or in separately watertight or drained sump or channel and must
be inspected and approved by the Pretreatment Coordinator prior to connection
to the system.
   (I)   The building sewer shall be connected into the public sewer at the
easement or property line, and the owner must install at a point prior to the
tap a six-inch clean-out tee with a cleanout at ground level and an approved
backwater valve in order to prevent a sewer backup into property owner’s
dwelling. Where no property located service branch is available, an authorized
agent of the city shall cut a neat hole into the main line of the public sewer
and a suitable wye or tee saddle installed to receive the building sewer. The
invert of the building sewer at the point of connection with a saddle shall be
in the upper quadrant of the main line of the public sewer. A neat workmanlike
connection, not extending past the inner surface of the public sewer, shall be
made and the saddle made secure and watertight by encasement in epoxy cement
specially prepared for this purpose. A wye and H bend fitting shall be
installed at the property line between the public sewer and the building sewer.
This fitting shall serve the purpose of a cleanout and for applying the smoke
test during inspection of the line. After testing, a cast iron or ductile iron
riser will be inserted in this fitting and brought flush with the ground
surface. A stopper or plug, outfitted with a type joint applicable to the pipe
used, shall seal this riser against the intrusion of groundwater or surface
water.
   (J)   All building sanitary sewer lines will be installed so as to meet or
exceed the most current revision of the State Plumbing Code.
   (K)   All persons working on city sewers with a cleaning rod must use an
approved type rod in cleaning sewer connections to city sewers.
   (L)   All sewer main extensions must conform to the following manhole lid
and ring specifications.
      (1)   Heavy traffic weight rings and lids shall be used at all manholes
installed.
      (2)   Manhole lids shall have a maximum of two pickholes, preferably one,
and no other holes in the lid.
      (3)   The maximum size of the pickhole is one inch by one-half inch.
      (4)   Pickholes shall not extend all the way through the lid.
      (5)   Total clearance between the lid and manhole ring shall be one-
quarter inch, i.e., if the inside diameter of the ring is 23 inches, the
outside diameter of the lid should be 22 and three-quarters inches.
      (6)   The bottom of the lid must not extend below the ring lip; that is,
the lid must be of uniform thickness throughout. Otherwise, there must be a
one-inch clearance between the extension and ring; extension depth shall not
exceed two inches.
      (7)   Compatible riser rings must be available to bring manhole to final
grade required.
      (8)   Each manhole ring and lid must be installed complete with a “dish”
type seal to prevent inflow of surface water.
   (M)   This section shall not affect sewers installed or approved in
accordance with the provisions of the prior version of the city’s sewer use
ordinance, which was originally adopted on January 1, 1993.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.048 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator when the building sewer is ready for connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her representative. The connections shall be
made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing.
   (B)   All building sewers shall be smoke-tested through the wye branch at
the public sewer connection, with public sewer tightly plugged off, after
connections at both ends are made and after all pipe is properly bedded and
backfilled at least to top of pipe and if backfill is completed, within two
weeks after completion of backfill. At time of test, any openings into the
building drain inside the building shall be water trapped or plugged. Any
leakage of smoke from building sewer or building drain and plumbing shall be
located at test and repaired to stand repetition of smoke test without leakage.
Tests shall be performed at the expense of the property owner in the presence
of the Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee. When smoke testing is
completed, the temporary flow line plug shall be removed and a permanent water
tight plug shall be placed in branch of test wye-branch and carefully
backfilled by hand and tamped to at least six inches above the top of the
branch.
   (C)   All new sewer line extensions shall be air tested and all manholes
vacuum tested. The entire system will be flooded and video inspected. Any lines
found holding water will have to be removed and re-installed. All tests will be
at the expense of the developer and must be done under the supervision of the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her representative. In addition to these
tests, the developer will, upon completion of the extension, submit a copy of
the as-built plans signed by the engineer. The developer will provide a one-
year warranty on the extension effective from the date of acceptance of the
extension into the City Water and Sewer Commission’s system. Extensions will
not be accepted into the SWSC system until 80% of the development has been put
into service and the extension has passed an inspection conducted by the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her representative.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.049 GREASE TRAPS.
   (A)   All new or extensively remodeled public facilities in the manufacture,
processing, preparation or service of food and food products shall install a
grease trap approved by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   All wastewater drain piping from food processing equipment, sinks,
dishwashers and floor drains located in food preparation and processing areas
shall be separated from other wastewater piping and shall discharge to the
grease trap prior to entering the sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   (1)   The minimum liquid capacity of the grease trap shall be based on
the total design daily waste flow for the facility served. The minimum capacity
shall be as follows.
 
Grease Trap Capacity Design Daily Waste Flow
150 gallons          1 to 4,000 GPD
300 gallons          4,001-8,000 GPD
500 gallons          > 8,000 GPD
 
      (2)   The design daily waste flow shall be determined based on the
guidelines provided in the state regulations for on-site disposal systems (902
KAR 10:081 and 10:085).
   (D)   Grease traps shall be installed as close as practicable to the source
of the wastewater and located outside of the facility unless approval is
granted by the Public Works Director.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITS
§ 52.060 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentration or quantities which
will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment,
will maintain and protect water quality in the receiving stream and will not
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may set additional limitations or limitations more
stringent than those established in the provisions oft this subchapter if, in
his or her opinion, more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives: In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of a
discharge, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall give consideration to such
factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in
the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment
process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant and other
pertinent factors.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.061 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with performance
of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW
whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
   (B)   A user shall not contribute the following substances to the POTW:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall the wastewater exhibit a
closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods
specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower, than 6.0 or higher than
10.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and personnel of the POTW;
      (3)   Any slug load of pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD and the like), released at a flow rate and/or concentration, either
individually or by interaction with other pollutants, that will cause
interference with the normal operation of the POTW;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities (i.e., wood, glass, ashes,
unshredded garbage, cinders, paper products such as cups, dishes, napkins and
milk containers and the like);
      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW that will
result in a treatment plant influent temperature which exceeds 40°C (104°F);
      (6)   Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
      (7)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scum, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the
POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act;
any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.),
the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act
(15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 through 2692) or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used;
      (8)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES/KPDES
permit and/or sludge disposal system permit;
      (9)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator; or
      (10)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the Pretreatment Coordinator in compliance
with applicable state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.062 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   The following are restricted discharges:
      (1)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter (25 mg/l)
of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil
origin;
      (2)   Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat or grease, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures 32°F
through 150°F (0°C through 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, motels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage
originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of
consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity
which, either singly or, by interaction with other pollutants, injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, causes the city to violate the terms of its KPDES permit, prevents
the use of acceptable sludge disposal methods or exceed a limitation set forth
in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard;
      (5)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, condensate, de-ionized water, non-contact cooling
water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by
the Pretreatment Coordinator;
      (6)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes;
      (7)   Any wastewater with objectionable color which cannot be removed to
an acceptable level within the operation of the wastewater treatment process
unless otherwise specifically noted in the wastewater contribution permit
(WCP);
      (8)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Pretreatment Coordinator in a wastewater contribution permit;
      (9)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances which will cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater
system;
      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed to the
extent required by the city’s NPDES/KPDES permit;
      (11)   (a)   Any waste(s) or wastewater(s) classified as a hazardous
waste by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), being 42 U.S.C. §§
6901 et seq. without a 60-day prior notification of the discharge to the
Pretreatment Coordinator. This notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number, type of discharge, volume/mass
of discharge and time of occurrence(s); and
         (b)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may prohibit or place conditions on
the discharge(s) at any time.
      (12)   (a)   Any water or wastes which have characteristics based on a
24-hour composite sample, grab or a shorter period composite sample, if more
representative, that exceed the following normal maximum domestic wastewater
parameter concentrations.
 
Parameter              Maximum Allowable Concentration Without Surcharges
BOD                    250 mg/l
COD                    900 mg/l
NH3-N                  25 mg/l
Oil and grease (total) 100 mg/l
Phosphorus, total      36 mg/l
TSS                    250 mg/l
 
         (b)   Any person discharging wastewater exceeding the maximum
allowable concentration as noted above, will be subject to a surcharge fee for
each pound loading over and above the set limit. Any other amenable
constituents requiring the additional of specific chemicals for proper
treatment will also be subject to surcharge as noted on the wastewater
contribution permit.
         (c)   The city reserves the right, through the Water and Sewer
Commission, to establish discharge limitations and requirements which are more
stringent than those required above for compatible pollutants if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this section and §
52.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in this section and in §
52.062. The Pretreatment Coordinator may, at any time, include allocated mass
loading and/or concentration discharge limits for the compatible pollutants
listed in this section in a user’s wastewater contribution permit. Such limits
shall be deemed to be pretreatment standards. Exceedance of such a limit or
limits shall be considered a violation of this chapter and the wastewater
contribution permit and shall be subject to enforcement actions in accordance
with §§
52.140 through
52.142 and
52.999, and the city’s enforcement response plan.
   (B)   The following discharge limitations are established for
characteristics of any wastewaters to be discharged into the city’s WWTP
subject to any alternative limitations and/or compliance schedule as
established in the industrial user permit. All significant industrial users
must comply with these limitations where they are more stringent than
applicable state and/or federal regulations.
Parameter Maximum Daily Concentration (mg/l)
Parameter            Maximum Daily Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic              0.59
Cadmium              0.03
Chromium, Hexavalent 0.44
Chromium, total      1.71
Copper               0.60
Cyanide, amenable    0.11
Lead                 0.16
Mercury              0.0013
Nickel               1.14
Selenium             0.11
Silver               0.36
Zinc                 1.50
 
   (C)   The city reserves the right, through the City Water and Sewer
Commission, to establish limitations and requirements which are more stringent
than those required above or by state or federal regulations if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 151.001 or the general
and specific prohibitions in §§
52.061 and 52.052.
   (D)   (1)   The city has received authority through the U.S. EPA and state
statutes to enforce the requirements of 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N and
40 C.F.R. part 403.
      (2)   All users shall comply with the requirements of those regulations.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022; Ord. 2025-003, passed 3-11-2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.063 DILUTION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any pollutant specific limitation
developed by the city or state.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.064 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Pretreatment Coordinator, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that the
interceptor shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Pretreatment Coordinator and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal. The city may require reporting of
the information for its review. Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials not performed by the owner’s personnel must be performed by a
currently licensed waste disposal firm. Interceptors shall also comply with
applicable regulations of the County Health Department.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.065 SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the requirements imposed on publicly owned wastewater
treatment works by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. and later amendments, all pretreatment
standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for new and
existing industrial dischargers to public sewer systems are hereby made a part
of this chapter. Any industrial waste discharge which violates these EPA
pretreatment standards shall be in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, the industry shall be solely responsible for
the continued maintenance in satisfactory and effective operation of the
facilities and at their expense.
   (C)   Any person who transports septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool
contents, liquid industrial waste or other batch liquid waste and wishes to
discharge such waste to the public sewer system shall first have a valid
special waste hauler’s permit. Applications for permits shall be obtained from
the Pretreatment Coordinator. All applicants for a special waste hauler’s
permit shall complete the application form, pay the appropriate fee and receive
a copy of the Commission’s regulations governing discharge to sewers of liquid
wastes from trucks. All persons receiving the permits shall agree, by
acceptance of the permit, to abide by all applicable provisions of this chapter
and any other special provisions that may be established by the city as
necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage system.
In addition, any person holding a valid permit and wishing to discharge to the
wastewater treatment plant must submit to the operator a sample of each load
prior to discharge. A fee and payment schedule shall be established in the
permit to cover cost of the required analysis. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require proof of origin of the hauled waste and analysis of the sample prior to
discharge.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be illegal to discharge any batch liquid waste into any
manhole or other part of the public sewer system or any building sewer or other
facility that discharges to the public sewer system, except at designated
points of discharge specified by the Commission for such purpose.
      (2)   Any liquid waste hauler illegally discharging to the public sewer
system or discharging wastewater not authorized in the permit shall be subject
to immediate revocation of discharge privileges and further subject to the
penalties and enforcement actions prescribed in §
52.999, including fines and imprisonment.
   (E)   Waste haulers who have been granted permission to discharge to the
public sewer system shall pay fees for the discharge in accordance with a fee
schedule established by the Pretreatment Coordinator and approved by the
Commission.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall relieve waste haulers of the
responsibility for compliance with County Health Department, state or federal
regulations.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.066 PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL AND SLUG DISCHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   Each significant user shall provide protection from accidental
and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this chapter which adversely affects the POTW. Facilities to prevent accidental
and/or slug discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained
at the owner or user’s own cost and expense. Once every two years, the
Pretreatment Coordinator will determine whether each industrial user needs to
develop or update a plan to control slug discharges. If the Superintendent
determines that a slug control plan or revision is necessary, the plan shall
contain the following:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;
         (c)   Procedures for notifying POTW; and
         (d)   Prevention procedures for spills.
      (2)   In the case of all possible or actual accidental and/or slug
discharges, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and
notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions.
   (B)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this subchapter, the enforcement response
plan or other applicable law.
   (C)   (1)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a dangerous discharge.
      (2)   Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer
such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.067 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.068 CITY’S RIGHT TO REVISION.
   The city reserves the right, at the recommendation of the Pretreatment
Coordinator to establish by majority vote of its Council, more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.069 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for
a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent
than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
§ 52.080 WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW any wastewater, except
as authorized by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any agency, non-domestic user and/or industry outside the
jurisdiction of the city that desires to contribute wastewater to the POTW must
execute (through an authorized representative) an inter-jurisdictional
agreement, whereby the agency and/or industry agrees to be regulated by all
provisions of this chapter and state and federal regulations.
      (2)   A wastewater contribution permit may then be issued by the
Pretreatment Coordinator in accordance with §
52.081.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.081 WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS.
   (A)   All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
   (B)   Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the Commission, an application in the form prescribed by
the Commission, and accompanied by a permit fee. New users shall apply at least
90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. Existing permit
holders shall apply no later than 60 days prior to expiration of permit. In
support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and location if different from the address;
      (2)   Applicable SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, United States Bureau of the Budget 1987, as amended;
      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by an
analytical laboratory acceptable to the Commission. Sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to §
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;
      (4)   Time and duration of contribution;
      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any;
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location
and elevation;
      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged;
      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by the city, state or federal pretreatment
standards and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional pretreatment
is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; and
      (9)   If additional pretreatment will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standards. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
         (a)   The schedule must be acceptable to the city; and
         (b)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards.
   (C)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on the date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress and the reason for delay and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established.
      (1)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and the
rate of production;
      (2)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      (3)   Number of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or
actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
      (4)   Any other information as may be deemed by the Commission to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application; and
      (5)   A copy of the industry’s written environmental control program,
comparable document or policy.
   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information.
      (2)   After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee may issue a wastewater
contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.082 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised to required compliance with the standards
within the time frame prescribed by the standards.
   (B)   Where a user, subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution
permit as required, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit
within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater
contribution permit shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator within 90 days
after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standard the information required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.083 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the Commission.
   (B)   Permits may contain the following:
      (1)   The unit surcharges or schedule of other charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
      (2)   Limits on the average and/or maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
      (3)   Limits on average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
location; frequency of sampling; number, type and standards for tests; and
reporting schedule;
      (6)   Compliance schedules;
      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a minimum of three
years, all plant records relating to pretreatment and/or wastewater discharge
as specified by the Commission, and affording Commission access thereto as
required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(o)(2);
      (9)   Requirements for notification of the Commission or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;
      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
      (11)   The permit may require the user to reimburse the Commission for
all expenses related to monitoring, sampling and testing performed at the
direction of the Pretreatment Coordinator and deemed necessary by the
Commission to verify that the user is in compliance with the permit; and
      (12)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.084 ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMITS.
   (A)   Where an effluent from a categorical industrial process is mixed prior
to treatment with wastewater other than that generated by the regulated
process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived for the discharge
permit by the Pretreatment Coordinator. These alternative limits shall be
applied to the mixed effluent and shall be calculated using the combined
wastestream formula and/or flow-weighted average formula, as defined in §
52.002.
   (B)   (1)   Where the effluent limits in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard
are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutants per unit of production
(production-based standard), the Pretreatment Coordinator may convert the
limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day or of effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent permit limitations applicable to the permittee.
      (2)   The permittee shall be subject to all permit limits calculated in
this manner under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c) and must fully comply with these
alternative limits.
   (C)   All categorical users subject to production-based standards must
report production rates annually so that alternative permit limits can be
calculated if necessary. The categorical user must notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator 30 days in advance of any major change in production levels that
will affect the limits for the discharge permit.
   (D)   (1)   Where the city’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may
apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the
federal pretreatment standards.
      (2)   The city may modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal
pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 are
fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.085 PERMIT DURATION.
   (A)   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be
stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance
a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. The
terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the
Commission during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements, as
identified in §§
52.060 through
52.069, are modified or other just cause exists.
   (B)   The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in their permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.086 PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation without a 30-day prior notification to the Pretreatment
Coordinator and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may deny the transfer of the permit if it
is deemed necessary.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.087 COMPLIANCE DATA REPORTING.
   (A)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of a new user,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements
shall submit, to the Pretreatment Coordinator, a report indicating the nature
and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average
and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user’s facility which are
limited by pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional pretreatment and time schedule is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This
statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.088 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   (1)   All significant industrial users shall submit to the
Pretreatment Coordinator, every six months, unless required more frequently by
the permit (or on dates specified in the wastewater contribution permit), a
report indicating, at a minimum, the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards or the discharge
permit and information and compliance status with regard to best management
practices. In addition, the Pretreatment Coordinator may require the submittal
on the report of a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period
exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of the Pretreatment
Coordinator and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow
rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like, the Pretreatment Coordinator may
agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
      (2)   In lieu of the significant industrial user, the Commission may
perform the sampling required by the user’s wastewater contribution permit. In
such cases, the significant industrial user shall not be required to sample or
report to the Commission the analytical results from the sampling conducted by
the Commission.
   (B)   (1)   All analyses shall be performed by a laboratory acceptable to
the Commission. Analytical procedures shall be in accordance with procedures
established by the U.S. EPA Administrator pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and
contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto and 40 C.F.R. part 261
or with any other test procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator.
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
U.S. EPA Administrator.
      (2)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based
on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
   (C)   Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication
Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for
Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by the U.S. EPA Administrator.
   (D)   A baseline monitoring report (BMR) must be submitted to the
Pretreatment Coordinator by all categorical industrial users at least 90 days
prior to initiation of discharge to the sanitary sewer. Submittal of the permit
application required by the Commission shall also satisfy this requirement. The
BMR or permit application must contain, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Production data, including a process description, SIC code number,
raw materials used, chemicals, used, final product, pretreatment industrial
category (if applicable) and a schematic which indicates points of discharge to
the sewer system;
      (2)   Identifying information, to include name, address of facility,
owner(s), contact person and any other permits held by the facility;
      (3)   Wastewater characteristics, including total plant flow, types of
discharges, average and maximum flows from each process;
      (4)   Nature/concentration of pollutants, including analytical results
for all pollutants regulated by this chapter and/or any applicable federal
pretreatment standard and sample type and location. All analyses must conform
with 40 C.F.R. part 136, and amendments thereto; and
      (5)   Information concerning any pretreatment equipment used to treat the
facility’s discharge.
   (E)   New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in
divisions (C) and (D) above, but at no time shall a new source commence
discharge(s) to the public sewer of substances that do not meet provisions of
this chapter. All new sources must be in compliance with all provisions of this
chapter and state and federal pretreatment regulations, prior to commencement
of discharge to the public sewer.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.089 PERMIT VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   All significant industrial users must notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator within 24 hours of first becoming aware of a permit violation. This
notification shall include the date of violation, the parameter violated and
the amount in exceedance.
   (B)   The user shall immediately repeat the sampling and analysis of the
parameter(s) in question and submit the results to the Pretreatment Coordinator
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Exception to this
regulation is only if the Commission performs the sampling within the same time
period for the same parameter(s) in question.
   (C)   Compliance with the terms of a wastewater contribution permit shall be
deemed in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.090 MONITORING.
   (A)   (1)   The Commission shall require significant industrial users to
provide and operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal
drainage system. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the
user’s premises, but the Commission may, when such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in a public right-of-way. The Pretreatment Coordinator shall,
review and approve the location, plans and specifications for the monitoring
facilities and may require them to be constructed to provide for the separate
monitoring and sampling of industrial waste and sanitary sewage flows.
      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility shall be designed and maintained in a manner such that the safety
of Commission and industrial personnel shall be foremost. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.
      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Commissions
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
approval of the location, plans and specifications.
   (B)   All sampling analyses done in accordance with approved federal EPA
procedures by the industrial user during a reporting period, as required by the
user’s wastewater contribution permit or by the Commission, shall be submitted
to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   The industrial user must receive the approval of the Pretreatment
Coordinator before changing the sampling point and/or monitoring facilities to
be used in all required sampling.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.091 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator shall inspect the facilities of any user
to ascertain whether the purposes of this chapter are being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Pretreatment Coordinator or
his or her representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, copying records, records
examination or in the performance of any of their duties.
   (B)   (1)   The Commission, approval authority and EPA shall have the right
to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
      (2)   Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into his, her or their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with his, her or their
security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from the Commission, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.092 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   All significant industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater
treatment as required to comply with this chapter and achieve compliance with
any applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. The
Commission may require the development of a compliance schedule for
installation of pretreatment technology and/or equipment by any industrial user
that cannot meet discharge limits required by this chapter. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level required by this chapter shall be
provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing
the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for review and shall be acceptable to the Commission
before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying
the facility as necessary to produce an effluent that complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Commission prior to the
user’s initiation of the changes.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.093 ANNUAL PUBLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The Commission shall annually publish in a newspaper of local
circulation a list of significant users which were in significant noncompliance
with any pretreatment requirements or standards.
      (2)   The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
   (B)   (1)   All records relating to the city’s pretreatment program shall be
made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request.
      (2)   All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(o)(2).
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.094 SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   A user is defined as being in significant noncompliance when it commits one
or more of the following conditions:
   (A)   Causes imminent endangerment to human health or the environment or
results in the exercise of emergency authority;
   (B)   Involves failure to report noncompliance accurately;
   (C)   Results in a chronic violation defined here as 66% or more of all
measurements taken during a six-month period that exceed (by any magnitude) the
daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
   (D)   Results in a technical review criteria (TRC) violation defined here as
33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a
six-month period that equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or
the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats and O&G and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). For pH
violations, see the definition in §
52.002;
   (E)   Any violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement (including
daily maximum limits, long-term average limits and/or narrative standards) that
the Pretreatment Coordinator determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or passthrough or has-endangered the health
of the POTW personnel or the public;
   (F)   Any discharge, causing imminent endangerment to human health/welfare
or to the environment or resulting in the Pretreatment Coordinator’s use of his
or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (G)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, failure to comply with
schedule milestones for starting or completing construction or attaining final
compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date;
   (H)   Failure to provide required reports within 30 days of the due date; or
   (I)   Any violation or group of violations, including violations of best
management practices, which the Pretreatment Coordinator determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.095 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests in writing and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Commission that the release of the information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available to all
governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES/KPDES permit,
sludge disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, upon request.
Such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be
recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public
without restriction.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.096 SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All applications, reports or information submitted to the city shall
be signed and certified in accordance with the following requirements.
   (B)   Written designation of the signatory official must be received by the
Commission prior to acceptance of any application or other required document.
      (1)   All permit applications shall be signed:
         (a)   For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of at least
the level of vice-president; and
         (b)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general partner
or the proprietor, respectively.
      (2)   All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports shall
be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized representative of
that person. A person is a duly authorized representative only if:
         (a)   The authorization is made in writing by a person described
above; and
         (b)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager,
superintendent or position of equivalent responsibility.
      (3)   Any person signing a document under this section shall make the
following written certification.
 
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person(s) who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information
submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing
violations.”
 
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
FEES AND CHARGES
§ 52.110 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter provides for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW
for the implementation of the program established herein.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.111 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The city may adopt charges and fees which may include:
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
city’s pretreatment program;
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
      (4)   Fees for permit applications;
      (5)   Fees for filing appeals;
      (6)   Fees for consistent removal by the POTW of excessive strength
conventional pollutants;
      (7)   A tap-on fee for sewer taps to include the cost of permits and
inspections; and
      (8)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY
§ 52.125 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator and other duly authorized employees and
representatives of the Commission and authorized representatives of applicable
federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to
discharges to the public sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.126 RIGHT TO OBTAIN INFORMATION REGARDING DISCHARGE.
   Duly authorized employees of the Commission and representatives of the state
and EPA are authorized to obtain information including, but not limited to,
copying of records concerning character, strength and quantity of industrial
wastes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
wastewater collection system.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.127 ACCESS TO EASEMENTS.
   Duly authorized employees and representatives of the Commission bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Commission holds an easement for the purpose of,
but not limited to, construction, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portions of the wastewater facilities
lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any on the
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.128 SAFETY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
52.127, all duly authorized employees of the Commission shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the property owner. The
Commission shall secure the property owner against loss or damage to its
property by Commission employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the property owner and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the property owner to maintain safe conditions as
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.140 GENERAL.
   (A)   The Commission, through the Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her
designee, to ensure compliance with this chapter, and as permitted through 40
C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, and 401 KAR 5:055, may take the following
enforcement steps against users in noncompliance with this chapter. The
remedies available to the POTW include injunctive relief, civil and criminal
penalties, immediate discontinuance of discharges and/or water service and the
publishing of the list of significant violators annually. The enforcement
authority shall be vested in the Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her
designee.
   (B)   (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension
is necessary, in the opinion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent. or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES/KPDES permit. Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution.
      (2)   In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the Commission shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or water service to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any
individuals. The Commission shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit
and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Commission within 15
days of the date of occurrence.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.141 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any user found to be violating any provisions of this chapter,
wastewater permit or any order issued hereunder shall be served by the
Commission with written notice stating the nature of the violation(s). Within
ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of potential liability for
any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   If the violations persist or the explanations and/or plans are not
adequate, the Commission’s response shall be more formal and commitments (or
schedules as appropriate) for compliance will be established in an enforceable
document. The enforcement response selected will be related to the seriousness
of the violation. Enforcement responses will be escalated if compliance is not
achieved expeditiously after the initial action. Identification of significant
noncompliance, as defined in §§
52.080 through
52.096, will require a formal enforcement action.
   (C)   The full scale of enforcement actions will be as detailed in the
enforcement response plan.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.142 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
   (A)   (1)   Any user who, after receiving a notice of violation, shall
continue to discharge in violation of this chapter or other pretreatment
standards or requirements or is determined to be a chronic or persistent
violator or who is determined to be a significant violator, shall be ordered to
appear before the Commission.
      (2)   At the appearance, a compliance schedule will be given to the
nonconforming user and an administrative fine assessed. The fine shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis which shall consider the type and severity
of violations, duration of violation, number of violations, severity of impact
on the POTW, impact on human health, users economic benefit from violation,
history of violations, good faith of the user and shall be a non-arbitrary but
appropriate amount.
   (B)   The administrative order may take any of the following three forms.
      (1)   Consent orders.
         (a)   The Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee is hereby
empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user
responsible for the noncompliance.
         (b)   The orders will include specific action to be taken by the
industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order.
         (c)   Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as orders
issued pursuant to §
52.999.
      (2)   Compliance orders.
         (a)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee finds
that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the ordinance or a
permit or order issued hereunder, he or she may issue an order to the
industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been
installed and are properly operated.
         (b)   Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be
reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including
the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and
best management practices.
      (3)   Cease and desist orders. When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds
that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or
any permit or order issued hereunder, the Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an
order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to:
         (a)   Comply forthwith; or
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
   (C)   (1)   The Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee may issue to
any user who causes or contributes to violations of this chapter, a wastewater
permit or an order issued hereunder, an order to appear and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
Pretreatment Coordinator regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is
to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show
cause, before the Pretreatment Coordinator, why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of the
industrial user. Whether or not a duly notified industrial user or its
representative appears, immediate enforcement action may be pursued.
      (2)   The Commission may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence
or designate a representative to:
         (a)   Issue, in the name of the Commission, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
         (b)   Take the evidence; and/or
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Commission
for action thereon.
      (3)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony may be
taken under oath and recorded by a stenographer. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
      (4)   After the Commission has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service will be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be
issued.
   (C)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to reissue a permit to any
industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter
or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user who is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter or permits or orders
issued hereunder shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per
violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation. The assessments may be added to the
user’s next scheduled sewer service charge, and the Pretreatment Coordinator
shall have such other collection remedies as needed to collect other service
charges. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against
the user’s property. Users desiring to dispute such penalties must file a
written request for the Chairperson of the Commission to reconsider the penalty
within ten business days of being notified of the penalty. Where the
Chairperson believes an appeal has merit, he or she shall convene a hearing on
the matter within 15 days of receiving the appeal from the user. The
Chairperson’s final decision shall be binding.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to reissue a permit to any
industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter
or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless the user first files
with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a
value determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
   (C)   (1)   Written notice.
         (a)   Any user found to be violating any provision of this chapter or
a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder shall be served by the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee with written notice stating the
nature of the violation. The offender shall permanently remedy all violations
upon receipt of this notice.
         (b)   As contained in §§
52.140 through
52.142, the notice may be of several forms. Also as contained in divisions (A)
and (B) above, penalties of various forms may be levied against users for
violations of this chapter. The penalties, if levied, shall range from
publication of violators in the local newspaper to administrative penalties of
up to $1,000 per day per violation or criminal prosecution as outlined herein.
      (2)   Revocation of permit.
         (a)   Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter or a
wastewater permit order issued hereunder may be subject to termination of its
authority to discharge sewage into the municipal sewer system. The termination
may be immediate if necessary for the protection of the POTW. The user may also
have water service terminated.
         (b)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter
or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having his or her
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this chapter:
            1.   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;
            2.   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
            3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
            4.   Violation of conditions of the permit destruction of POTW.
         (c)   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the POTW. Any person(s) violating this provision
shall be subject to criminal prosecution for “disorderly conduct.” It shall be
noted that the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. does not
require proof of specific intent to obtain conviction.
      (3)   Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the Commission’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any
order of the Commission, the Commission may commence an action for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate court of this jurisdiction in
addition to pursuing any criminal remedies that may be available.
      (4)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder the
Pretreatment Coordinator, through counsel may petition the court for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be
appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user.
      (5)   Liability. Any user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, discharge permit or other order issued hereunder shall become liable
to the City Water and Sewer Commission for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the Commission by reason of the violation. This civil liability
is as provided by state and federal regulations.
      (6)   Civil penalties.
         (a)   Any user who has significantly violated or continues to violate
this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder shall be liable to the
Commission for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 per violation per day
plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per day for as long as the violation
continues. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs,
court reporter fees and other expenses associated with the enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
         (b)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may petition the court to impose,
assess and recover the sums. In determining amount of liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited
to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
      (7)   Criminal prosecution.
         (a)   Any user, who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than 12 months. Each day in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
         (b)   Any user who knowingly and/or negligently makes any false
statements, representation or certification of any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not
more than 12 months, or by both. Each day in which the violation shall continue
shall be deemed as a separate offense.
         (c)   In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be guilty of
a Class D felony and shall be punished by a fine in an amount not less than
$1,000 and not greater than $10,000, or double his or her gain from commission
of the offense, whichever, is greater or imprisonment not less than one year
nor more than five years or both. Each day in which the violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
         (d)   The Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee shall have
the authority to pursue criminal charges on behalf of the City Water and Sewer
Commission in any court of competent jurisdiction in the state.
(Ord. 2022-011, passed 12-19-2022)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   One-way streets
   
70.02   Speed limits
   
70.03   Authority of Police Chief to impose special traffic regulations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The City Council may designate one-way streets or alleys and authorize
the installation of signs giving notice thereof, and no such designation shall
be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   (B)   Upon streets and parts of streets and in alleys designated as one-way,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 620.9)
§ 70.02 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street not
under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Highways, within the city, at
a speed in excess of 25 mph; provided, that if the Mayor and City Council, by
ordinance, sets other limits as provided by statute, then such limits shall
govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. The
Director of Public Works shall post appropriate signs showing such speed limit.
   (B)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limits does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow
or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or highway
within the city under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Highways or
of the county, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street or
highway.
(Ord. 94-007, passed 9-12-1994) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF TO IMPOSE SPECIAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary
traffic regulations, including imposition of regulations of traffic movement,
implementation of traffic control signals and limitations on parking or
standing of vehicles in emergency situations or during special events where the
Chief of Police shall deem the general public’s safety and welfare to be served
thereby. Such temporary regulations shall remain in effect only during the
period of emergency or special events, and the Chief of Police shall submit a
written report to the Mayor for his or her consideration at the next regular
meeting or special meeting of the Mayor and City Council following such
emergency or special event for their consideration. In no event shall emergency
or special event regulations remain in effect for more than 90 days without the
adoption of the appropriate ordinance.
(Ord. 94-009, passed 10-10-1994)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this title for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   All persons violating §
70.01 shall be fined $10 per violation.
   (C)   Fines for speeding in violation of §
70.02 shall be in accordance with KRS 189.394.
(Prior Code, § 620.9) (Ord. 94-007, passed 9-12-1994)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Trucks on public streets and highways
   
71.03   Double parking
   
71.04   No parking zones
   
71.05   Stopping, standing or parking vehicles
   
71.06   Parking at curb
   
71.07   Alleys
   
71.08   Time limit
   
71.09   Parking on private property
   
71.10   Handicapped parking
   
71.11   Abandoned vehicles
   
71.12   Towing of motor vehicles
   
71.13   Violations; notice; exceptions
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. Includes every individual who shall operate a motor vehicle as the
owner thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon any street, whether occupied
or not, upon a street, road or passway, otherwise, than temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or
merchandise, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signals.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association
or other organization.
   VEHICLE. Any device in or upon a highway or street.
(Prior Code, § 540.4)
§ 71.02 TRUCKS ON PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   It shall be unlawful to park any truck, semi-trailer truck or semi-trailer
exceeding 78 inches in width on any public street, road or passway, except
state or federal roads where such parking is specifically permitted by any
other state law or ordinance, serving any residential (R-1 Zoning District)
area within the city at any time, except while such truck, semi-trailer truck
or semi-trailer is being loaded or unloaded and such loading or unloading
operation is actually taking place or while such cab of such truck, semi-
trailer truck or semi-trailer is occupied by the driver thereof.
(Prior Code, § 520.5) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 DOUBLE PARKING.
   It shall be a violation of the traffic regulations of the city to double
park on any of the streets within the city.
(Prior Code, § 540.10) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 NO PARKING ZONES.
   No person shall park at any time any motor vehicle in any area which has
been marked off by yellow lines or yellow paint, said area being a restricted
area.
(Prior Code, § 540.8) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING VEHICLES.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle whether occupied or not,
except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
   (A)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
bur of a street;
   (B)   On a sidewalk or parkway;
   (C)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk or an intersection;
   (F)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (G)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
such entrance (when properly sign posted);
   (H)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking; or
   (I)   At any place where the curb has been painted in yellow.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06 PARKING AT CURB.
   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the
curb or the edge of the roadway except on one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the
curb and with the two right wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the
regularly established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been
marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07 ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08 TIME LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a longer consecutive period of
time than that designated as a limited parking area and so marked by proper
signs.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to park a vehicle or
leave a vehicle unattended in a designated handicapped parking area, unless
either the driver or a passenger in the vehicle is a handicapped person.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HANDICAPPED PERSON. Any person whose vehicle possesses handicapped
license plates or a valid handicapped parking placard issued by an institution
or agency of competent authority.
   (C)   A handicapped parking placard must be visibly displayed in the front
windshield portion of the vehicle while the vehicle is parked in a handicapped
parking area.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11 ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   Any automobile or other vehicle parked in any one place on any public street
or way in the city for a consecutive period of seven days or more shall be
considered abandoned and may be disposed of as provided by state statutes.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 71.12 TOWING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   The Police Department and all members thereof are hereby authorized to
remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing
service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such
parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a
public or private drive, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may
obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. Cars so towed away for illegal
parking shall be restored to the owner or operator of such car upon payment of
the cost of the removal and storage of such vehicle.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005)
§ 71.13 VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Prima facie proof. The fact that an automobile which is illegally
parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie
proof that such person was in control of the vehicle at the time of parking.
   (B)   Removing of parking violation notice. No person other than the owner
or driver of the vehicle to which a parking violation notice has been attached
may remove the same from said vehicle.
   (C)   Exceptions. On the occasion of special public events creating unusual
traffic conditions, the Chief of Police, after investigation and upon his or
her determination that the public, safety and convenience would be served, may
temporarily authorize the parking of vehicles in places and at times otherwise
prohibited under the provisions of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall, by
posting signs or otherwise, appropriately give notice of the times and
locations at which the parking of vehicles is so temporarily permitted.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
71.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $25 plus costs for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 520.5)
   (C)   Anyone found guilty of violating §
71.03 shall be fined $5 per violation.
(Prior Code, § 540.10)
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
71.04 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $10 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 540.8)
   (E)   Any person accused of a violation of any provision prohibiting parking
of a vehicle as set forth in §§
71.05 through
71.13 may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for such alleged
parking violation by paying to the city a sum as provided by ordinance.
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
72.01   Operating bicycles on sidewalks prohibited
Skateboards
   
72.15   Skate-free district
Golf Carts
   
72.30   Definitions
   
72.31   Use of public roads
   
72.32   Operation
   
72.33   Insurance
   
72.34   Compliance with state statutes
   
72.35   State-maintained highways
   
72.36   Exceptions
   
72.37   Forms
 
   
72.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 72.01 OPERATING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the sidewalks of the
city any bicycle or motor driven bike of any kind or to park same upon the
sidewalks of the city, at any time.
(Prior Code, § 520.1) Penalty, see §
72.99
SKATEBOARDS
§ 72.15 SKATE-FREE DISTRICT.
   (A)   There is hereby established the following boundaries to create a
skate-free district in the city: beginning at the intersection of West Main
Street and Armory Hill/Doctor Streets to the intersection of East Main Street
and Walnut Street, from the intersection of Armory Hill and Depot Street North
to the intersection of Doctor Street and West High Street, from the
intersection of Doctor Street and West High Street to the intersection of
Walnut Street and East High Street; from the intersection of Walnut Street and
East High Street to the intersection of Ballard Street and Depot Street and
from the intersection of Depot Street and Ballard Street to the intersection of
Depot Street and Armory Hill. All streets included in this square area are to
be skate-free.
   (B)   These boundaries be delineated with signage signifying that the
district is skate-free, including the city ordinance number and fine amount
indicated.
   (C)   Any person who fails to comply with this schedule shall have the
skateboard seized from possession by a peace officer. That person’s guardian,
if a minor, shall be required to come to the police department to retain
possession thereof.
(Ord. 2007-007, passed 9-11-2007) Penalty, see §
72.99
GOLF CARTS
§ 72.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. Any self-propelled vehicle that:
      (1)   Is designed for the transportation of players or maintaining
equipment on a golf course, while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising
the play of golf or maintaining the condition of the grounds on a golf course;
      (2)   Has a minimum of four wheels;
      (3)   Is designed to operate at a speed of not more than 25 mph;
      (4)   Is designed to carry not more than six persons, including the
driver;
      (5)   Has a maximum gross vehicle weight of 2,500 pounds;
      (6)   Has a maximum rated payload capacity of 1,200 pounds; and
      (7)   Meets the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed
vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 571.500.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A city, county, charter county government, urban county
government, consolidated local government, unified local government or a
special district.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.31 USE OF PUBLIC ROADS.
   The City Council may authorize and regulate the operation of a golf cart on
any public roadway under its jurisdiction by specifying each roadway that is
open for golf cart use.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.32 OPERATION.
   (A)   This subchapter shall require that a golf cart operated on a
designated public roadway:
      (1)   Be inspected by a certified inspector designated by the County
Sheriff and certified through the Department of Vehicle Regulation to ensure
that the golf cart complies with the requirements of this section. The
inspection fee under this division (A)(1) shall not exceed $5 with an
additional fee not to exceed $10 per trip charged if it becomes necessary for
the certified inspector to travel to the site of the golf cart rather than
having the golf cart brought to the Sheriff’s inspection area.
      (2)   Golf carts which bear an official permit issued by the city shall
be numbered and affixed to the lower left side (driver’s side) of the
windshield of the vehicle. The city shall provide an application form for the
special permit and charge a yearly fee of $25 for each permit issued annually
beginning October 1, 2008. Subsequent renewals of the permit shall be due on or
before January 15 of each year. There shall be no proration of the fee for any
permit issued after January 15 and all permits issued after January 15 shall
expire on January 15 of the following year. Insurance and proof of inspection
by a certified inspector shall be presented prior to issuance of an official
permit.
   (B)   A person may operate a golf cart on a designated public roadway if:
      (1)   The posted speed limit of the roadway is 35 mph or less;
      (2)   The operator of the golf cart does not cross a roadway at an
intersection where the roadway being crossed has a posted speed limit of more
than 35 mph;
      (3)   The operator has a valid operator’s license in his or her
possession;
      (4)   The golf cart is being operated between sunrise and sunset; and
      (5)   The golf cart displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem in compliance
with KRS 189.820.
   (C)   The number of occupants in the golf cart may not exceed the design
occupant load as specified by the manufacturer.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.33 INSURANCE.
   A golf cart operating on a public roadway shall be insured in compliance
with KRS 304.39-080 by the owner or operator, and the proof of insurance shall
be inside the golf cart at all times of operation on a public roadway.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.34 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTES.
   (A)   Any person operating a golf cart on a public roadway shall be subject
to the traffic regulations of KRS Chapter 189.
   (B)   A golf cart operating on a designated public roadway is not considered
to be a motor vehicle and is exempt from:
      (1)   Title requirement of KRS 186.020;
      (2)   Vehicle registration requirements of KRS 186.050; and
      (3)   Emissions compliance certificates pursuant to KRS 224.20-720.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.35 STATE-MAINTAINED HIGHWAYS.
   The Transportation Cabinet may prohibit the operation of a golf cart on a
public roadway that crosses a state-maintained highway under its jurisdiction
if it determines that such prohibition is necessary in the interest of public
safety.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.36 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to a golf cart that is not
used on a public roadway except to cross a roadway while following a golf cart
path on a golf course.
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.37 FORMS.
 
Golf Cart Inspection Report
For Operation in the City of Springfield, KY
 
Golf Cart Owner                                             Phone                                             
Address                                                                                                               
 
Inspection must be completed by an official of the County Sheriff’s Office or his or her designee per state statute and the city code of ordinances, and certified through the Dept. of Vehicle Regulations.
 
Cart is designed per manufacturer for the following number of passengers:                          
Cart has four wheels: Yes/no
Is the cart designed to operate at a speed of not more than 25 mph? Yes/no
Does the cart have maximum gross vehicle weight of 2,500 lbs and a maximum rated payload capacity of 1,200 pounds? Yes/no
 
Does the cart meet the federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicle as set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 571.500 as listed below, including, but not limited to:
Headlamps? Yes/no
Front and rear turn signals lamps? Yes/no
Tail lamps? Yes/no
Stop lamps? Yes/no
Reflex reflectors: One red on each side as far to the rear as practicable and one red on the rear? Yes/no
Exterior mirror mounted on driver’s side of the vehicle and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger’s side of the vehicle or an interior mirror? Yes/no
Parking brake? Yes/no
Windshield? Yes/no
VIN? Yes/no
A type 1 or 2 seat belt assembly? Yes/no
 
Golf cart has a slow moving vehicle sign posted per KRS 189.820? Yes/no
 
*Is cart insured per KRS 304.39-080? Yes/no
 
                          Inspecting official                          date
 
Inspection fee of $5 paid on                          and received by                          
Inspection fee of $10 paid on                          and received by                          
Note that the $5 fee is for carts inspected at the Sheriff/Police Department. Those inspected at another location shall pay a fee of up to an additional $10.
 
Golf cart owner must take a copy of this inspection to City Hall, 127 W. Main Street, Springfield, Kentucky 40069 to apply for a permit, which must be renewed on an annual basis on or before January 15 for each calendar
year. Cost of permit is $25 annually.
 
Each person receiving a permit must certify: I have received a copy of the city’s regulations on golf carts and agree to abide by all regulations as stated. I further understand that these regulations apply to the city
limits only and not beyond the corporate city limits.
 
                                                                                     
Signature Date
 
*Proof of insurance must be inside the golf cart at all times.
 
 
City of Springfield
127 West Main Street
Springfield, KY 40069
Phone: 859-336-5440
Fax: 859-336-5455
www.springfieldky.org
 
GOLF CART- RESIDENTIAL REGISTRATION
 
CART INFORMATION
 
Vin/Serial #                             Cart year:                          
(include all letters and numbers)   Color:                          
Make*                             Design Occupant Load:                          
   Type: GAS/ELECTRIC (circle one)
 
OWNER INFORMATION
 
Name:                                                   Are you 16 years of age or older? YES/NO (circle one)
   Do you have a valid Driver’s License? If so
 
 
PHYSICAL ADDRESS OF OWNER & CART   License #                          . State            
 
Street Address:                             Liability Insurance:                          
   *Proof of insurance must be provided at the time of registration
 
City:                            Mailing address (if different)
State:                             Address:                          
Zip:                             City:                          
Phone#:                            State:                          
Alt. Phone #:                             Zip Code                          
Email:                         
 
The number of occupants in the golf cart may not exceed the design occupant load per manufacturer’s specifications.
Please read carefully:
I have received a copy of the city governing the operation of golf carts. I understand and will abide by said ordinance and the state laws pertaining to golf carts. I have been advised to
obtain liability insurance for the cart. I understand that, as the registered cart owner, I accept both legal and civil responsibility for any actions committed during the operation and
use of the cart and understand that I will be charged for any violation of said ordinance and be held personally responsible for any accidents or injuries. I certify that the information
contained herein is correct to the best of my knowledge.
 
                                                                                              
Owner’s signature (required     Date
 
For office use only:
Amount paid:                          
Receipt #:                          
Authorization:                          
Walk in/mail in
 
(Ord. 2008-008, passed 9-23-2008)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person who violated §
72.01 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $10.
   (C)   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of §
72.15 is subject to a fine of up to $250 for each violation.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
72.30 through
72.37 shall, upon conviction of a first offense, be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100. Any person convicted of a subsequent violation of §§
72.30 through
72.37 within two years of a prior conviction shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $250.
(Prior Code, § 520.1) (Ord. 2007-007, passed 9-11-2007; Ord. 2008-008, passed
9-23-2008)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
 
Street                               Speed Limit Penalty
Alley perpendicular to both U.S. 150 5 mph       In accordance with KRS 189.394
(Main Street) and West High Street
Corporate Drive                      35 mph      In accordance with KRS 189.394
Domus Court                          15 mph      In accordance with KRS 189.394
Melavin Circle                       15 mph      In accordance with KRS 189.394
 
(Ord. 94-007, passed 9-12-1994; Ord. 2003-004, passed 7-8-2003; Ord. 2003-012,
passed 11-11-2003)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking restrictions and prohibitions
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Parking is restricted or prohibited on the following streets.
 
Street            Location             Restriction          Penalty
                  From the west city
                  limits to the        Must be parked
                  intersection of Main parallel with said   A fine of not less
Main Street       Street with the      streets, and         than $1 nor more
                  Danville Highway,    sidewalks, and not   than $10 for each
                  near the grade       diagonally           offense
                  schools and high
                  schools
                  From its             Must be parallel     A fine of not less
Main Cross Street intersection with    with the streets and than $1 nor more
                  Main Street and the  sidewalks and not    than $10 for each
                  south city limits    diagonally           offense
                  East side of said
                  street from its
                  intersection with                         A fine of not less
Main Cross Street Main Street to the   No parking           than $1 nor more
                  south side of the                         than $10 for each
                  Louisville and                            offense
                  Nashville Railroad
                  Company
 
(Prior Code, § 540.1)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle at any time
upon the following streets or alleys.
 
Location                                Penalty
The street or alley beginning at the
residence of O.L. McClure on Walnut     A fine of not less than $1 nor more
Street and ending at the Public Library than $10 for each offense.
on Main Cross Street
Beginning at the law office of C.M.
McChord on Main Cross Street and ending A fine of not less than $1 nor more
at the residence of Miss Nora Smith on  than $10 for each offense.
Doctor Street
 
(Prior Code, § 540.3)
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the
following streets.
 
Location                              Penalty
Part of North Doctor Street from Main
Street to the alley immediately north A fine of not less than $1 nor more than
of Main Street and running parallel   $10 for each offense
therewith
Part of North Walnut street from Main
Street to the alley immediately north A fine of not less than $1 nor more than
of Main Street and running parallel   $10 for each offense
therewith
 
      (2)   (a)   On any special occasion or during religious service, when in
his or her judgment the Mayor deems it advisable to do so, upon a cause deemed
by him or her sufficient, he or she may issue his or her proclamation
suspending the provisions of this division (C) upon any day or portion of a
day.
         (b)   Whenever a religious service or any special occasion, the Chief
of Police or any member of the Police Department may suspend the provisions of
this division (C) upon any day or portion of a day.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to report:
         (a)   The state registration license number of every vehicle parked in
violation of this division (C);
         (b)   The place and time and any other knowledge which may be
necessary for a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such
violation; and
         (c)   The police officer shall place upon each vehicle violating this
division (C) a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has
been or is parked in violation, instructing such owner or operator to report to
any police officer in regard to such violation, and each owner or operator may,
within 24 hours (Sundays and holidays excepted) of the time when such notice
was placed upon such vehicle, pay to any police officer as a penalty for and in
full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $1. Failure of such owner or
operator to make such payment within 24 hours (Sundays and holidays excepted)
shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 540.4)
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle at any time
upon the following streets.
 
Location                           Penalty
On Doctor Street beginning at Main A fine of not less than $1 nor more than
Street and extending North to High $10 for each offense
Street
 
(Prior Code, § 540.6)
   (E)   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall park or cause to be
parked at any time, any motor driven vehicle on the following streets.
 
Location                              Penalty
Main Cross Street and/or Lincoln Park
Road beginning at Virginia Avenue and A fine of not less than $5 nor more than
extending Northward to the north city $25
limits
 
(Prior Code, § 540.7)
   (F)   There shall be no on-street parking of any vehicle, nor on-street
loading or unloading of commercial vehicles on the following streets.
 
Location      Penalty
The east side
of South
Doctor Street A $25 fine for each occurrence, and any vehicle parked in
in the city   violation shall be removed by towing and stored at the owner’s
from Main     expense
Street to the
railroad
crossing
 
(Prior Code, § 540.11)
   (G)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to park on Main Street or on Cross Main
Street in any zone designated “No Parking.”
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to park in excess of two hours on Main Street
from Haydon Alley, east to MaClane Street or on Cross Main Street from High
Street to Depot Street.
(Prior Code, § 540.12)
   (H)   The following parking prohibitions apply in the city.
 
Location                   Restriction               Penalty
                                                     A fine of $25 for each
                                                     occurrence, and any
The south side of Melavin  No on-street parking of   vehicle parked in
Circle                     any vehicle               violation shall be removed
                                                     by towing and storing at
                                                     the owners expense
The southeast side of East
High Street beginning at
the intersection of        No stopping, standing or
Melavin Circle and         parking except to pick up A fine of $10 to $20
continuing to the          or discharge passengers
intersection of Mackville
Road
U.S. 150, either side,
from the intersection of   No stopping, standing or
KY 555 and extending to    parking except to pick up A fine of $10 to $20
the western city limits of or discharge passengers
U.S. 150
 
(Prior Code, § 540.13)
(Ord. 2005-007, passed 10-11-2005)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   PUBLIC HOUSING
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
      
94.   PARADES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Hogs
   
90.02   Fowl
   
90.03   Control of pets
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 HOGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise or feed a hog or hogs
within the city at any time or yearly season.
(Prior Code, § 840.1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 FOWL.
   No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall raise, house or feed
within the city limits any ducks, geese, turkeys or guinea fowls for broiler or
fryers, or for laying purposes, or for any other purpose.
(Prior Code, § 840.2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CONTROL OF PETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner within the city to permit a dog
to create a nuisance which harms or threatens the general public or neighboring
property owners.
   (B)   A dog shall be considered to be creating a nuisance if it causes any
of the following:
      (1)   Unpleasant odor from waste droppings;
      (2)   Disturbance of the property of others by disturbing garbage
containers, digging in yards or destroying property in any manner and so forth;
      (3)   Creating disturbances by noise;
      (4)   Chasing, threatening or barking at neighboring property owners or
passersby; and
      (5)   Roaming off the owner’s premises without being under the immediate
control of its owner. For the purpose of this section, IMMEDIATE CONTROL shall
be defined as the animal being physically held by the owner’s hands on a leash
that has a minimum tensile strength sufficient to restrain said animal, said
leash not exceeding three feet in length.
   (C)   Any dog found within the city which is not under the immediate control
or supervision of its owner and is not properly licensed in accordance with the
requirements of state law shall be picked up and destroyed after one week
unless its owner reclaims the dog by paying all cost of licensing and confining
the animal.
(Ord. 90-009, passed 8-13-1990) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
90.01 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $10, and each day that this
chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 840.1)
   (C)   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates §
90.02 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $25, and each day shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 840.2)
   (D)   A dog owner that fails to maintain control of a dog thereby permitting
it to create a nuisance in violation of §
90.03 shall be subject to a fine of $25. In addition, the dog creating the
nuisance shall be picked up by the city and destroyed after one week unless the
owner reclaims the dog by paying the above fine and a $10 fee for the cost of
confining the animal.
(Ord. 90-009, passed 8-13-1990)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
   
91.01   Statutory authority
   
91.02   Definitions
   
91.03   Nuisances described and prohibited
   
91.04   Enforcement
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is a nuisance code within the meaning of the Local Government
Nuisance Code Enforcement Act (KRS 82.700 through 82.725).
(Ord. 2014-003, passed 6-10-2014)
§ 91.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANYBODY. Any human being, or any organization or combination thereof, in the
form of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture,
unincorporated association or otherwise.
   BANNER SIGN. Any commercial sign composed of any pliable plastic or cloth,
without a rigid supporting frame.
   BUILDING. Any relatively permanent enclosure consisting of no less than
three connected walls covered by a roof.
   CITY. The City of Springfield, Kentucky.
   COMMERCIAL SIGN. Any sign which includes any information, message or
identification which is, in any way, related to the promotion of any business
or commerce.
   CONTROL. To exercise restraint or direction over.
   DELIVER. Any manner of delivery that conforms to the federal and state
constitutional requirements for procedural due process.
   EVERYBODY. Every human being, and every organization or combination thereof,
in the form of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint
venture, unincorporated association or otherwise.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Non-domesticated animals, including, but not limited to:
snakes and spiders (whose bite or venom is poisonous or deadly to humans);
apes, chimpanzees, gibbons, gorillas, orangutans and baboons; bears; cheetahs;
crocodilians and alligators; constrictor snakes; coyotes, elephants; gamecocks
and other fighting birds; hyenas; jaguars; leopards; lions; lynxes; ostriches;
pumas, also known as mountain lions; panthers; wolves; raccoons; skunks;
tigers; and other animals which are similar in nature.
   FINANCIALLY RESPONSIBLE OWNER. An owner of a registered vicious dog who has
filed with the City Police Department a certificate of insurance from an
insurance company authorized to conduct business in the state, that the owner
of the registered dog is insured thereby against liability for all injuries and
damages caused by the registered dog, with single occurrence limits of no less
than $100,000, which will continue until the city is notified of the
termination or expiration thereof.
   FOWL. Any hen, rooster, duck, turkey, pheasant or other bird of same or
similar nature.
   GRAFFITI. Any display of words, letters, numbers, design or symbols
scrawled, by hand or otherwise, in any ink, paint, chalk, dye or any other
medium on any building or structure, with or without the consent or authority
of the owner thereof, and which is within view from any public property or
right-of-way.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is:
      (1)   Wrecked or otherwise in a state of disrepair or disassembly;
      (2)   Mechanically inoperable; or
      (3)   Legally inoperable on public streets and highways.
   LEASHED ANIMAL. An animal that is secured and controlled by the owner or
custodian thereof by means of a leash.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes, but is not limited to, horses, cattle, sheep, hogs and
other useful animals kept or raised on a farm or ranch. An exception to this is
pot belly, micro or miniature pigs that are kept as pets.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. As defined in KRS 224.1-010.
   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. A clean, covered, rigid metal or plastic
container with a capacity of no less than 30 gallons and no more than 96
gallons. All uses which generate more than a volume of two cubic yards (i.e.,
approximately equivalent to 500 pounds or one-fourth ton or 400 gallons) of
solid waste per week shall be required to provide bulk containers for storage
as approved by County Solid Waste. The containers shall be waterproof and
leakproof, and shall be covered at all times except when depositing waste
therein or removing the contents thereof, and shall meet all requirements of
this chapter.
   NOBODY. No human being or any organization or combination thereof, in the
form of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association
or otherwise.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any material in an area which is not enclosed
within a building.
   OUTSIDE. An area of a lot or parcel of real estate that is not enclosed
within a building.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. As defined in KRS 227.550(12).
   REGISTERED VICIOUS DOG. A vicious dog for which registration certificate has
been issued by the City Police Department after there has been delivered to the
City Police Department a registration application for that dog, on a form
designed by the city, which shall be signed by the owner(s) of the dog which is
the subject thereof, under the penalties of perjury, and which shall include:
      (1)   The name, address, age and Social Security number and telephone
number of each possessor and owner of the vicious dog that is the subject
thereof;
       (2)   The address of the property where the vicious dog that is the
subject thereof is harbored;
      (3)   A complete identification of the vicious dog that is the subject of
the registration, including, without limitation, genus and species, name,
gender, color, breed and any distinguishing physical characteristics thereof,
along with two color photographs of the vicious dog; and
      (4)   Documentary evidence of:
         (a)   All vaccinations required by law; and
         (b)   The removal of reproductive organs by spaying, neutering or
otherwise.
      (5)   A certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to
conduct business in the state, that the owner of the registered vicious dog is
insured thereby against liability for all injuries and damages caused by the
registered vicious dog, with single occurrence limits of no less than $100,000,
which will continue until the city is notified of the termination or expiration
thereof.
    RESTRAINED VICIOUS DOG. A vicious dog which is always either:
      (1)   Securely confined and restricted to private property in which
either the owner or custodian thereof has some legal ownership or occupancy
interest, by either:
         (a)   A building inhabited by either the owner or custodian of the
vicious dog;
         (b)   A visible fence which conforms to all of the other requirements
of any other city ordinances, and which is constructed of materials of
sufficient height and strength to prevent the vicious dog from penetrating or
going over or under the fence, and in which each entrance and exit is
controlled by a gate that automatically closes, latches and locks; or
         (c)   A vicious dog cage.
       (2)   Muzzled to prevent biting and leashed to an adult with a chain of
no more than five feet in length and a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds.
    UNLEASHED ANIMAL. Any animal that is not secured and controlled by the
owner or custodian thereof by means of a leash not exceeding three feet in
length.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog that:
         (a)   Without provocation, bites or attacks any human being or a
domestic animal on either public or private property;
         (b)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to unprovoked
attacks on human beings or domestic animals; or cause injury to or otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; and/or
         (c)   Has been trained to or has engaged in any dog fighting
exhibition.
      (2)   A dog is not a VICIOUS DOG within this meaning of this definition
by merely barking at a human being or a domestic animal, without some other
behavior indicative of an impending attack by the barking dog on the human
being or domestic animal.
      (3)   Also excluded from this definition of a VICIOUS DOG are those dogs
that are actively involved in the course and scope of service to any military
or police department of any city, county, state or federal government.
   VICIOUS DOG CAGE. An openwork enclosure, from which a vicious dog cannot
escape, with the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   A minimum floor area of 50 square feet;
      (2)   Continuous secure walls on every side of the floor area, which are
at least seven feet in height above the ground, and secured to other walls at
both ends;
      (3)   A top which is securely connected to each wall on every side;
      (4)   A floor securely attached to each wall on every side, unless the
walls are continuously imbedded no less than two feet into the ground;
      (5)   Each means of ingress and egress is controlled by a door or gate
that automatically closes, latches and locks; and
      (6)   Signage on the outside of each wall identifying by words and other
graphics at least three inches in height that the dog enclosed therein is a
vicious dog that is dangerous.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal that is not a domesticated companion animal, or any
crossbreeds of these animals with domestic animals or any descendant of any
crossbreed. Such animals include, but are not limited to, any venomous snake,
python or constrictor snakes, porcupines, monkeys, raccoons, skunks, leopards,
lions, tigers, lynx, bobcats, badgers, fox, coyote, wolves, wolverines,
squirrels, bears, deer, chipmunks, moose, elk, opossum, beavers, ground hogs,
moles, gophers, prairie dogs, bats, sugar gliders (Petaurus breviceps),
kangaroos, wallabies and feral cats. An animal that has traditionally, through
long association with humans, lived in a state of dependence upon humans or has
been traditionally kept as a household pet, including dogs, domesticated cats,
rabbits, mice, hamsters, gerbils, domesticated rats, guinea pigs, ferrets,
parakeets, parrots, cockatiels, cockatoos, canaries, love birds, finches and
tropical fish, will not be considered WILD ANIMALS for purposes of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2014-003, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2019-
005, passed 9-24-2019; Ord. 2020-002, passed 8-11-2020)
§ 91.03 NUISANCES DESCRIBED AND PROHIBITED.
   The following actions, omissions, behavior, conditions and occurrences are
hereby declared to be public nuisances within the city and established as
violations of this chapter; and nobody shall, by either act or omission,
conspire, cause, permit, encourage, aid, assist, allow or engage in any of
them:
   (A)   The development of a public nuisance, health hazard or source of filth
on any land in the city through:
      (1)   The accumulation of either:
         (a)   Junked or wrecked automobiles, vehicles, machines, other similar
scrap or salvage materials;
         (b)   One or more mobile or manufactured homes as defined in KRS
227.550 that are junked, wrecked or non-operative and which are not inhabited;
or
         (c)   Rubbish.
      (2)   The growing and maintenance of trees with less than 14 feet
clearance over streets or less than eight feet over sidewalks, or the growing
and maintenance of shrubbery in excess of three feet in height within the
radius of 20 feet from the point where the curb line of any street intersects
the curb line of another street. No shrub shall be planted between the curb
line and the property line of any street within a radius of 20 feet from the
point where the curb line of any street intersects with the curb line of
another street. The excessive growth of weeds or grass, which shall be no more
than 12 inches above the surface of the ground on any lot or parcel of real
estate in the city.
   (B)   Any structure becoming unfit and unsafe for human habitation,
occupancy or use;
   (C)   The existence of conditions with respect to a building, house, wall or
structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of the structure, the occupants of neighboring structures or anybody
in the city;
   (D)   The outside location of any inoperable motor vehicle or any
disassembled motor vehicle parts on any lot or parcel of real estate in any
residential area in the city;
   (E)   (1)   Except as provided in Chapter 156, the parking of more than one
tractor or farm implement, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer, designated
for hauling equipment:
         (a)   In the front yard of any lot or parcel of real estate; or
         (b)   On a public street.
      (2)   No part of any such vehicle, tractor, farm implement, recreational
vehicle, boat or trailer, designated hauling equipment, is allowed within three
feet of any point in the nearest boundary line.
   (F)   Any municipal solid waste anywhere in the city outside of a building
unless it is enclosed within a covered municipal solid waste container;
   (G)   (1)   The location of any municipal solid waste container anywhere on
any lot or parcel of real estate in the city other than:
         (a)   Inside a building; or
         (b)   On the outside of and behind a building during any period of
time other than that period that begins at 6:00 p.m. on the day before the day
that municipal solid waste is scheduled for collection from that real estate by
the city and ends at 6:00 a.m. on the day after that scheduled day.
      (2)   The only exception to division (G)(1)(b) above pertains to any and
all garbage cans used for municipal solid waste by residents of R-3 Zones as
defined in the city zoning laws, or apartment complexes or multi-family living
establishments (where more than six families dwell) under one roof. In this
event, cans must be brought back to the front door or to the side of the
dwelling unit or to an area as designated appropriate by both the property
owner and the city, within the time frame as specified in division (G)(1)(b)
above.
   (H)   The collection and removal of any municipal solid waste by mechanical
means during the period of time after 12:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m., from any
real estate that is not used for residential purposes but which abuts, is
adjacent to or across a street from any real estate that is used for
residential purposes;
   (I)   (1)   The occurrence of any unleashed animal anywhere in the city
other than on a lot or parcel of real estate:
         (a)   In which the owner or custodian of the unleashed animal has an
ownership or possessory interest; or
         (b)   Upon which the unleashed animal has been authorized by someone
who has an ownership or possessory interest in that lot or parcel of real
estate.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for dogs, both leashed and unleashed, to be on
city property of Idle Hour Park during ball playing season from April through
October. This pertains to the ballfield areas where patrons are gathered for
ball games and does not prohibit dogs on leashes from other areas of the park,
including the walking trail.
   (J)   The occurrence of any sound, odors or anything else from any animal or
animals on any lot or parcel of real estate in the city that unreasonably
interferes in any way with the occupation, use or enjoyment of any other lot or
parcel of real estate in the city by any owner, tenant, occupant, resident or
user thereof, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Unpleasant odor from waste droppings;
      (2)   Disturbance of the property of others by disturbing garbage
containers, digging in yards or destroying property in any manner and the like;
      (3)   Creating disturbances by noise; and
      (4)   Chasing, threatening or barking at neighboring property owners or
passersby.
    (K)   Any ownership, possession or control in the city by anybody of:
      (1)   Any vicious dog that isn’t always both a registered vicious dog and
a restrained vicious dog with a financially responsible owner;
      (2)   Any exotic animal;
      (3)   Any wild animal (feeding of wild animals will infer possession or
control); or
      (4)   Any fowl, excluding chickens, which will be allowed under these
conditions:
         (a)   A maximum of four chickens per household may be kept outdoors
only, as long as they are housed in a humane manner in a coup with a covering
that will not allow for chickens to fly away and so long as conditions are
sanitary and not causing odors for adjoining property owners. Said chickens
must remain at all times on the owner’s property;
         (b)   Chickens may not be kept on any parcel that is a duplex, multi-
family or apartment residences and may not be kept on property where there are
commercial or industrial uses; and
         (c)   Roosters are not allowed.
      (5)   Any livestock (except a pot-bellied, micro or miniature pig that is
kept as a pet); and
      (6)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the keeping of fowl or livestock for
a legitimate agricultural purpose on a tract of land containing at least five
acres.
   (L)   Any open burning of leaves, brush, construction materials or other
debris without specific authorization from the Chief of the City-County
Volunteer Fire Department or his or her designee;
   (M)   The storage of combustible or explosive material which creates a
safety hazard to other property or persons in the vicinity;
   (N)   The maintenance of any open, uncovered or insecurely covered cistern,
cellar, well, pit, excavation or vault situated upon private premises in any
open or unfenced lot or place;
   (O)   Any accumulation of any rubbish or rock on any public sidewalk and the
failure of those with any ownership or possessory interest in any lot or parcel
of real estate abutting thereon to remove it within a reasonable period of time
after such accumulation;
   (P)   Any more than one banner sign on the premises of each business with a
valid occupational license;
   (Q)   Any commercial sign that isn’t in a condition of good repair and in a
clean, neat and safe and functional condition in compliance with all applicable
laws, including, without limitation, all building and property maintenance
codes;
   (R)   The occurrence, existence or continuation of any graffiti;
   (S)   The outside storage or other location of any equipment in any front or
side yard where it may be seen from a public street while that equipment is in
a position or condition in which that equipment may not be used for its
intended purpose;
   (T)   Any outdoor swimming pool in which:
      (1)   The water in the pool is contaminated with dangerous disease-
causing pathogens, including bacteria; or
      (2)   It is capable of holding over 24 inches of water in depth at any
one point, and the pool area isn’t always completely surrounded by a fence that
is at least four feet in height, which precludes access to the water in the
pool without opening a gate or climbing over the fence.
   (U)   Anybody except an officer of the law to fire or discharge any gun,
pistol or firearms, including .22 rifles and BB guns, within the city limits;
   (V)   Anybody littering, tossing or throwing debris of any nature or
description onto the streets, alleys, branches, drainage ditches or other
public places of the city or sweeping or moving excessive dirt and debris from
the sidewalks onto any roadway or other city property;
   (W)   (1)   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare. Failure to comply with this division (W) shall
constitute a nuisance;
      (2)   All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, windows,
doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks, sheds
and fences shall be maintained in good condition; and
      (3)   Broken glass visible to the exterior must be replaced and repaired.
   (X)   The occurrence of any unreasonably loud sound or sounds emanating from
any person, vehicle or parcel of real estate in the city which unreasonably
interferes in any way with the enjoyment of any other person, and/or another’s
occupation, use or enjoyment of any business, lot or parcel of real estate.
This includes the creating of disturbances by noise of any kind.
(Ord. 2014-003, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 2016-001, passed 5-10-2016; Ord. 2016-
007, passed 10-11-2016; Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2019-002, passed
9-10-2019; Ord. 2019-005, passed 9-24-2019; Ord. 2020-002, passed 8-11-2020)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The responsibility for the enforcement of the nuisance code hereby
established is hereby delegated to the City Police Department.
   (B)   The city is not obligated to address or abate nuisances or damages
caused by wild animals, such as feral cats or any/all wild animal
(Ord. 2014-003, passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 2019-005, passed 9-24-2019)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations. A violation of this chapter occurs whenever anybody, by
either act or omission, conspires, causes, permits, encourages, aids, assists,
allows or engages in any of the acts, actions, behaviors, conditions and
occurrences prohibited by this chapter, and each and every separate non-
continuing occurrence thereof, and each and every day of each continuing
occurrence thereof is a separate violation of this chapter. A violation of this
chapter may be a criminal offense and/or a civil violation.
   (B)   Criminal offense. Each violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor for which everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the
maximum amount of $250 as set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(b) or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of 90 days as set forth in KRS
532.090(2), or both. For a corporation, the fine shall be fixed by KRS 534.050
(c) and not exceed $5,000 per offense.
   (C)   Civil violation.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Housing Inspector of the city or other
officer designated by the Mayor to serve or cause to be served a notice upon
the owner or occupant of any premises on which there is kept or maintained any
nuisance in violation of the provision of this chapter and to demand the
abatement of the nuisance within five days, or a reasonable time period as
determined by the Mayor, unless the nuisance constitutes an immediate danger to
the health and well-being of the community. If such danger is present, the
nuisance shall be abated within 24 hours of notice. Notice shall be served upon
persons by certified mail, or hand delivered by an officer designated by the
Mayor, but if the whereabouts of the person is unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the Housing Inspector, or officer designated by the Mayor, in
the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect and the
serving of notice may be made by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation for two consecutive issue days. A copy of the notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice, and it
shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
      (2)   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within
prescribed amount of time, the city may proceed to abate the nuisance keeping
an account of the expense of the abatement, and the expense shall be charged
and paid by the owner occupant.
      (3)   Charges for nuisance abatement shall be a lien upon the premises.
Whenever a bill for charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been
rendered, the City Clerk may file with the County Clerk a statement of lien
claims. This statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the
expenses and costs incurred, the date the nuisance was abated and a notice that
the city claims a lien for this amount. Notice of the lien claim shall be
mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address is known. However,
failure to record the lien claim or to mail the notice, or the failure of the
owner to receive the notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien
for charges as provided in division (C)(4) below.
      (4)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid nuisance abatement charges
may be sold for nonpayment, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to
pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. This foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the city.
This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available in law or equity to
the city.
      (5)   The City Attorney is authorized and may institute such proceedings,
in the name of the city, in any court having jurisdiction over the matter
against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid for 60 days after
the abatement has been completed and a bill for the abatement cost has been
presented to the property owner for payment.
(Ord. 2014-003, passed 6-10-2014)
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC HOUSING
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Housing projects
   
92.03   Housing Authority
   
92.04   Acquisition of property for public housing
   
92.05   Condemnation of public housing property
   
92.06   Impeding with progress of housing project
   
92.07   Operation, management and control of housing projects
   
92.08   Rent or lease of dwellings in housing projects
   
92.09   Funding housing projects; bonds
   
92.10   Federal housing projects
   
92.11   Repairs, closings or demolition of unfit dwellings
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONDS. Any bonds, notes, interim certificates, debentures or other
obligations.
   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. Includes the United States of America, the United States
Housing Authority and its successor agencies, and any other agency or
instrumentality of the United States of America.
   HOUSING AUTHORITY or AUTHORITY. Any housing authority created pursuant to
this chapter.
   HOUSING PROJECT. A building or buildings containing rooms to be provided as
living quarters, together with shops, stores, garages, laundries, doctors’ and
dentists’ offices and other facilities and appurtenances deemed reasonably
necessary by the City Housing Authority to the successful and economical
operation of the project. It also means any work or undertaking of a Housing
Authority or of the federal government to:
      (1)   Demolish, clear or remove a building or buildings from any slum
area, including the adaptation of such area to recreational, community or other
public purposes;
      (2)   Provide decent, safe and sanitary living accommodations for persons
who lack the amount of income that is necessary, as determined by the authority
undertaking the project, to enable them, without financial assistance, to
obtain such accommodations; such work or undertaking may include buildings,
land equipment, facilities and other real or personal property for necessary,
convenient or desirable appurtenances, streets, sewers, water service, parks,
site preparation, gardening, administrative, community, health, recreational,
welfare or other purposes; and
      (3)   Accomplish a combination of the foregoing.
   PUBLIC BODY. Any public body or political subdivision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.02 HOUSING PROJECTS.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes the intent to operate, within its limits,
low-cost housing projects for the purpose of providing adequate and sanitary
living quarters for individuals or families who qualify.
   (B)   All low-cost housing projects in the city shall be subject to the
planning, zoning, sanitary and building laws, ordinances and regulations of the
city.
   (C)   No contract or agreement with any contractor for the construction of a
low-cost housing project exceeding $2,500 shall be made without advertising for
bids. The bids shall be opened publicly, and an award made to the best bidder,
with power in the Authority to reject any or all bids.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.03 HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The city hereby creates a Housing Authority consisting of the Mayor,
ex officio and four persons appointed by him or her with the approval of the
City Council.
   (B)   (1)   Each person appointed to the City Housing Authority shall be at
least 25 years of age and a bona fide resident of the city for at least one
year preceding the appointment.
      (2)   No officer or employee of the city, whether holding a paid or
unpaid office, is eligible to hold an appointment on the Housing Authority.
      (3)   No more than two appointees on the City Housing Authority shall be
affiliated with the same political party.
      (4)   Appointees to the City Housing Authority shall be originally
appointed for terms of four years. Upon the expiration of the term of the first
appointment, their successors shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three
and four years, respectively, and upon the expiration of the terms of each of
the second group of appointees, his or her successor shall be appointed for a
term of four years.
      (5)   Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as
the original appointment.
   (C)   (1)   The persons appointed as provided in division (B) above shall
constitute a body corporate in the name of the City Housing Authority with
power to contract and be contracted with, to sue or to be sued and may
establish bylaws, rules and regulations for its own government.
      (2)   The Authority shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from
its members and a Secretary and Treasurer who need not be a member of the
Authority.
      (3)   The duties of the offices of Secretary and Treasurer may be
performed by the same person.
   (D)   (1)   Each member of the Housing Authority, except an ex officio
member, shall receive $100 per year for serving on the Authority.
      (2)   The compensation of the Chairperson of the Housing Authority shall
be $150 per year.
      (3)   The Housing Authority shall fix the compensation of the Secretary
and Treasurer.
   (E)   (1)   The Authority may employ technical experts and attorneys and any
other employees that it deems necessary.
      (2)   The Authority shall fix the compensation of employees subject to
City Council approval.
   (F)   (1)   No member or employee of the Housing Authority shall acquire any
interest, direct or indirect in any project in any property including or
planned to be included in any project, nor shall he or she have any interest,
direct or indirect, in any contract or proposed contract for materials or
services to be furnished or used in connection with any project.
      (2)   If any member or employee of the Authority owns or controls an
interest, direct or indirect, in any property included in any project, which
interest was acquired prior to his or her appointment or employment, he or she
shall disclose the same in writing to the Authority at the time of his or her
appointment, and the disclosure shall be entered on the minutes of the
Authority.
   (G)   (1)   Whenever it appears to the City Council that a member of the
Housing Authority appointed by it is incompetent or guilty of neglect of duty
or malfeasance, the City Council shall require the member to appear before it
to show cause why he or she should not be removed from office.
      (2)   At least 15 days’ written notice of the hearing shall be given to
the member whose conduct is in question and to all other members of the
Authority. At the hearing, the member may be represented by counsel and may
appear personally and present such pertinent evidence as he or she wishes or as
the Mayor requests. If after the hearing the City Council determines that a
member has been incompetent or has been guilty of neglect of duty or
malfeasance, the Mayor shall remove the member from the Authority within seven
days, and there shall be a vacancy of the office.
   (H)   (1)   The Authority shall:
         (a)   Prepare the proper plans and specifications for the construction
of low-cost housing projects;
         (b)   Select the location and determine the size, type and method of
construction;
         (c)   Make the necessary estimates of the probably cost of
construction and of the acquisition of the land and rights for the sites;
         (d)   Enter into the necessary contracts to build the necessary
buildings; and
         (e)   Cause a survey and map to be made of all lands, structures,
rights-of-way, franchises, easements or other interests in land, owned by any
person, the acquisition of which may be deemed necessary for the construction
of the low-cost housing project, and cause the map and survey to be filed in
its office.
      (2)   The members of the Authority, or its agents and employees, after
reasonable notice to the occupants, owners or owners’ agent in charge thereof,
may enter upon such lands and structures for the purpose of making surveys and
maps.
      (3)   The Authority shall not proceed to exercise or carry out any
authority or power herein given it to bind the Authority beyond the extent to
which money has been provided under the authority of this division (H).
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.04 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC HOUSING.
   (A)   The Authority may acquire by gift, devise, bequest, lease, grant or
purchase, solely from the funds provided under authority of this chapter,
lands, structures or interests in land necessary for the building of low-cost
housing projects, upon terms, prices or considerations considered reasonable by
the Authority and agreed upon between the Authority and the owner.
   (B)   Title to all property acquired by the Authority shall be taken in the
corporate name of the Authority.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.05 CONDEMNATION OF PUBLIC HOUSING PROPERTY.
   (A)   If it becomes necessary to condemn property for the purpose of
constructing any low-cost housing project, or securing rights-of-way leading
thereto, the Authority may, by resolution reciting the need, order the
condemnation of any land or improvement or interest in land, that it deems
necessary.
   (B)   Proceedings for the condemnation shall be in the circuit court of the
county and shall be conducted in the name of the Authority. The City Attorney
shall conduct the proceedings for the Authority.
   (C)   The judgment of the court shall vest title in fee simple to the
property condemned in the Authority.
   (D)   In all other respects, the form and manner of the proceedings shall be
the same as that provided in the State Eminent Domain Act, being KRS 416.540
through 416.680.
   (E)   No payment or award in any condemnation proceedings, or for the cost
or expense of the proceedings, shall be made except from funds provided under
authority of this chapter or state statute.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.06 IMPEDING WITH PROGRESS OF HOUSING PROJECT.
   All persons having buildings, structures, works, conduits, mains, pipes,
tracks or other physical obstructions in, under, over or upon the public ways,
that interfere with or impede the progress of a low-cost housing project when
in process of construction and establishment shall, upon reasonable notice from
the Authority, promptly shift or remove the obstruction, to the extent
necessary, at their own cost and expense, except as otherwise provided or
required by law.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.07 OPERATION, MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL OF HOUSING PROJECTS.
   The Authority shall operate, manage and control low-cost housing projects in
their entirety, fix the rate of rentals and establish bylaws, rules and
regulations for the use and operation of the projects not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.08 RENT OR LEASE OF DWELLINGS IN HOUSING PROJECTS.
   (A)   The Authority shall manage and operate its housing projects in an
efficient manner so as to enable it to fix the rentals for dwelling
accommodations at the lowest possible rates consistent with its providing
decent, safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations, and the Authority shall not
construct or operate any project for profit, or as a source of revenue of the
city; provided, however, that nothing contained in the State Housing Authority
Law shall be construed to prohibit an authority from making payments in lieu of
taxes to the city, or other public body, within the area in which any project
is located in such amounts as the Authority may determine to be consistent with
maintaining the low-rent character of the dwelling accommodations.
   (B)   (1)   The Authority may rent or lease the dwelling accommodations in a
housing project only to persons or families who lack the amount of income
deemed necessary by the Authority to enable them, without financial assistance,
to live in decent, safe and sanitary dwellings, without overcrowding.
      (2)   The Authority may rent or lease to a tenant dwelling accommodations
consisting only of the number of rooms that it deems necessary to provide safe
and sanitary accommodations to the proposed occupants without overcrowding.
      (3)   The dwellings in any housing project shall be available solely for
families of low income. Income limits for occupancy and rents shall be fixed by
the Authority after taking into consideration:
         (a)   The family size, composition, age, physical handicaps and other
factors which might affect the rent-paying ability of the family; and
         (b)   The economic factors which affect the financial and solvency of
the housing project.
      (4)   The Authority shall issue regulations establishing eligibility
requirements, consistent with the purposes and objectives of this division (B),
for admission to and continued occupancy in its projects.
      (5)   Nothing contained in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(4) above shall
limit the power of the Authority to vest in an obligee of the Authority the
right, in the event of a default by the Authority, to take possession of a
housing project or cause the appointment of a receiver thereof, free from all
the restrictions imposed by this division (B).
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.09 FUNDING HOUSING PROJECTS; BONDS.
   (A)   (1)   The city may provide funds for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter by the issuance of revenue bonds pursuant to a resolution of the
Housing Authority. The bonds or other obligations of the Housing Authority
shall not constitute an obligation of the city. The bonds shall be payable only
out of the properties, revenues and assets of the Housing Authority. Nothing
contained in this section shall authorize or permit the city to incur any
indebtedness of any kind or nature prohibited by the Constitution. Subject to
the restrictions set forth in this section, the City Housing Authority may
incur any indebtedness and issue any obligations and give any security therefor
which it deems necessary or advisable in connection with any project undertaken
by it. The City Housing Authority may issue its bonds to provide for the
payment of its indebtedness from time to time in such amounts, with such
maturities, upon such terms and conditions and upon such security as the
Authority deems necessary or advisable in connection with any project
undertaken or to be undertaken by it. The bonds shall be signed by the
Chairperson of the Authority or other agent designated by the Authority and by
the Mayor.
      (2)   The City Housing Authority may, in connection with the borrowing of
funds or otherwise, enter into agreements with the federal government providing
for the supervision and control of the Housing Authority or any project and
containing such other covenants, terms and conditions as the Housing Authority
deems advisable. In connection with any loan by a government, the City Housing
Authority is authorized to agree to limitations upon the exercise of any of its
powers.
      (3)   Bonds issued pursuant to this section shall have, in the hands of a
bona fide holder, all of the qualities of negotiable instruments. They shall be
exempt from taxation by the state and its political subdivisions. It shall be
plainly stated on the face of each bond that it has been issued under the
provisions of this chapter and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of
the city within the meaning of any constitutional provisions or limitations. In
case any provisions are made for the redemption or prepayment of any bonds
before maturity, such provisions shall be selected by lot from the whole number
of the issues then outstanding. The bonds may be issued without a vote of the
voters and without any other proceedings or conditions than those proceedings
and conditions specified and required by this chapter or by the Constitution.
   (B)   The rents and other revenues of the City Housing Authority shall be
applied; first to pay the interest and principal of the bonds issued under KRS
80.230 as payments fall due; next, to pay the costs of maintaining, repairing,
improving and operating its projects; next, to create such reserve for
depreciation as the Housing Authority deems necessary and proper. The excess,
if any, of the rents received during any annual period may be applied to the
prepayment of the obligations of the Housing Authority or may be placed in a
special fund for the purpose of paying the principal and interest of the
obligations as they become due.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.10 FEDERAL HOUSING PROJECTS.
   The City Housing Authority may contract with the federal government to
manage, supervise or operate any low-cost housing project erected or owned by
the federal government or by corporations or individuals approved by the
federal government.
(Prior Code, § 940.1)
§ 92.11 REPAIRS, CLOSINGS OR DEMOLITION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS.
   The procedure listed herein shall be followed in handling repairs, closings
or demolition of unfit dwellings by the Housing Authority.
   (A)   A petition must be filed by the Housing Authority or by at least five
residents of the city charging that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation.
   (B)   A designated investigator of the Housing Authority shall conduct a
preliminary investigation to affirm the charges set forth in the petition
mentioned in division (A) above.
   (C)   Upon affirmation of the petition by preliminary investigation, the
Housing Authority shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of said
property and upon parties in interest on such dwelling a complaint stating the
charges arising from the petition and investigation. Complaints or orders
issued by the Housing Authority shall be served upon persons either personally
or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such person is unknown, and
the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the
Housing Authority shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publication pursuant
to KRS Chapter 494. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order and shall be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
   (D)   The complaint shall state that:
      (1)   A hearing will be held before the Housing Authority at a stated
place not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint;
      (2)   The owners and parties in interest may file an answer to the
complaint and appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place
and time fixed in the complaint; and
      (3)   The rules or evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in hearings before the Housing Authority.
   (E)   A hearing shall be held in accordance with division (D) above to
determine the validity of each complaint.
   (F)   The Housing Authority or designated inspector may determine that a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he or she finds that conditions exist
in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or
morals of the occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of neighboring
dwellings or other residents of the city. Such conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Defects increasing the hazards of fire or other calamities;
      (2)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
      (3)   Dilapidation;
      (4)   Disrepair or structural defects; and
      (5)   Uncleanliness.
   (G)   If, after the notice and hearing, the Housing Authority determines
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, it shall
state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring
the owner:
      (1)   To repair, alter or improve the dwelling, to the intent and within
the time specified in the order, to render it fit for human habitation or, at
the option of the owner, to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation
if the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a cost
that is not more than 50% of the value of the dwelling; and
      (2)   Within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish the
dwelling if the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a cost that is not more than 50% of the value of the dwelling.
   (H)   (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the dwelling, the
Housing Authority may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed. The Housing Authority may cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard with the following words:
“This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of the
building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful.”
      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the dwelling, the Authority may cause such dwelling to be removed or
demolished.
      (3)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, shall be a lien upon the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the dwelling is removed or
demolished by the Housing Authority, it shall sell the materials of the
dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the
removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
circuit court by the Housing Authority, and shall be secured in such manner as
may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court.
   (I)   Any person affected by an order issued by the Housing Authority may,
within 30 days after the posting and service of the order, petition the circuit
court for an injunction restraining the Housing Authority from carrying out the
provisions of the order, and the court may issue a temporary injunction
restraining the order pending final disposition of the case. Hearings shall be
had by the court on such petition within 20 days, or as soon thereafter as
possible. Payment of court costs shall be in the observation of the court.
   (J)   The Housing Authority or its designated inspector is hereby authorized
to exercise such powers as are necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of divisions (A) through (I) above,
including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
      (2)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, but
such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances;
and
      (5)   To delegate any of the functions and powers under the ordinance to
such officers and agents as it designates.
(Prior Code, § 940.1) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Policy
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Unlawful practice
   
93.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
93.05   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
93.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
93.07   Exemption
   
93.08   Administration
   
93.09   Education and conciliation
   
93.10   Enforcement
   
93.11   Investigations; subpoenas; evidence
   
93.12   Enforcement by private persons
   
93.13   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
93.14   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations,
for fair housing throughout the city.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
93.04 through
93.06.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below and §
93.07, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
set forth herein shall apply to all dwelling except as exempted by division (B)
below.
   (B)   Nothing in §
93.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale, or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (B) shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided
further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest
in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses any one
time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from the application of this section only if such house is
sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker,
agent, salesperson or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
93.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by nor more than four families living independently or
each other, if the owner actually maintains or occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
93.03 and except as exempted by §§
93.03(B) and
93.07, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable to
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, familial status or handicapped status;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, familial status or handicapped status;
   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicapped
status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination; and/or
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, familial status or handicapped status that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount,
interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other
financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion or national origin
of such person, or of any person associated with him or her in connection with
such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other
financial assistance, or the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or
occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other
financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained
in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception
contained in §
93.03(B).
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization
or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicapped status.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association
or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such
religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall
anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this Act shall be
in the Chief Executive Officer of the city.
   (B)   The Chief Executive Officer may delegate any of these functions,
duties and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or
otherwise acting as to any work, business or matter under this chapter. The
Chief Executive Officer shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the
decisions of his or her hearing examiners to other heading examiners or to
other officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself or herself, as
shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.
    (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their
programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with
the Chief Executive Officer to further such purposes.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.09 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the Chief Executive Officer
shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the
housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the
provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it,
and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Chief Executive Officer. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as
the Chief Executive Officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the
Chief Executive Officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or about to commit the alleged discriminatory
housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or within 30 days
after the expiration of any period of reference under division (C) below, the
Chief Executive Officer shall investigate the complaint and give notice in
writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to resolve it. If the
Chief Executive Officer decides to resolve the complaints, he or she shall
proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing
practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made
public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this chapter
without the written consent of the persons concerned.
   (B)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file answer to the complaint
against him or her and may. with the leave of the Chief Executive Officer,
which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, amend
his or her answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   (C)   If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the Chief Executive
Officer, the Chief Executive Officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The Chief Executive Officer will assist in this filing.
   (D)   If the Chief Executive Officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30
days hereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court against the
respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or protected by
this chapter. Insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If
the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about
to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or
order such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the
Chief Executive Officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.11 INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In conducting an investigation, the Chief Executive Officer shall have
access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and
other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy
such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons
as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided,
however, that the Chief Executive Officer first complies with the provisions of
the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The Chief
Executive Officer may issue subpoenas to compel his or her access to or the
production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same
limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or
served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court for the
district in which the investigation is taking place. The Chief Executive
Officer may administer oaths.
   (B)   Upon written application to the Chief Executive Officer, a respondent
shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in
the name of the Chief Executive Officer to the same extent and subject to the
same limitations as subpoenas issued by the Chief Executive Officer. Subpoenas
issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and
address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his or her
request.
   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the Chief Executive Officer shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in United States district courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her.
   (D)   Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such
person may petition the Chief Executive Officer to revoke or modify the
subpoena. The Chief Executive Officer shall grant the petition if he or she
finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable
time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to
any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced and that compliance would be unduly
onerous or for other good reason.
   (E)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Chief
Executive Officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition
for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides was served or transacts
business.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the Chief
Executive Officer participates as a part or as amicus pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.12 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   The rights granted by §§
93.03 through
93.06 may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general
jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 108 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the
court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or §
93.10(D) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes
that the conciliation efforts of the Chief Executive Officer are likely to
result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice
complained or in the complaint made to the Chief Executive Officer and which
practice forms the basis for the action in court; provided, however, that any
sale, encumbrance or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court
order issued under the authority of this chapter, and involving a bona fide
purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant without actual notice of the existence of the
filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this chapter,
shall not be affected.
   (B)   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent
or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order or other order, and may
award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000 punitive
damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees in the case
of a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that said plaintiff in the opinion of the
court is not financially able to assume said attorneys’ fees.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
§ 93.13 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
93.03 through
93.06. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.14 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not acting under color of
law, by force or threat of force to willfully injure, intimidate or interfere
with, or attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, familial status or handicapped status, and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicapped status in any of
the activities, services, organization or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity for
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities described in division (A) above, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assemble opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat
of force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any person as provided in this chapter
shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or
both; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000, or
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be
subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
   (C)   Any employee of the Chief Executive Officer who shall make public any
information in violation of §
93.10 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year.
   (D)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence,
if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
of the Chief Executive Officer, as provided in §
93.11, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one
year, or both. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the Chief
Executive Officer, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement
of fact in any report, account, record or other document submitted to the Chief
Executive Officer pursuant to his or her subpoena or other order, or shall
willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct
entries in such reports, accounts, records or other documents, or shall
willfully mutilate, alter or by any other means falsify any documentary
evidence, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one
year, or both.
(Ord. 92-002, passed 5-11-1992)
CHAPTER 94: PARADES
Section
   
94.01   Definition
   
94.02   Regulations
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE.
      (1)   A public or military celebration of or on a special day or event
that usually includes several or many people and groups moving down a street by
marching or riding in cars or on special or specific vehicles sometimes called
floats.
      (2)   A long series of people or things (vehicles or otherwise) that come
one after the other generally down a street or avenue
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 8-12-2014)
§ 94.02 REGULATIONS.
   Parades are prohibited within the city limits of the city without completing
an application provided by the City Clerk and complying with all regulations as
set forth in the parade rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 8-12-2014) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for which everybody
convicted thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction shall be sentenced to
pay a criminal fine not to exceed the maximum amount of $250 as set forth in
KRS 534.040(2)(b) or a term of imprisonment not to exceed the maximum period of
90 days as set forth in KRS 532.090(2), or both. For a corporation, the fine
shall be fixed by KRS 534.050(c) and not exceed $5,000 per offense.
(Ord. 2014-006, passed 8-12-2014)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
114.   RESTAURANTS AND LODGING
      
115.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
117.   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
      
118.   CANNABIS BUSINESS OPERATIONS
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License application required
   
110.03   Occupational license tax payment required
   
110.04   Apportionment
   
110.05   Employers to withhold
   
110.06   Returns required
   
110.07   Extensions
   
110.08   Refunds
   
110.09   Federal audit provisions
   
110.10   Administrative provisions
   
110.11   Information to remain confidential
   
110.12   Use of occupational license tax
   
110.13   Yard sales
   
110.14   Schedule of fees
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any enterprise, activity, trade, occupation, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for gain or profit. BUSINESS shall not
include the usual activities of board trade governing the business of nonprofit
organizations, chambers of commerce, trade associations or unions, or other
associations performing services usually performed by trade associations for
nonprofit organizations or unions. BUSINESS shall not include funds,
foundations, corporations or associations organized and operated for the
exclusive and sole purpose of religious, charitable, scientific, literary,
educational, civic or fraternal purposes, where no part of the earnings,
incomes or receipts of such unit, group or association, inures to the benefit
of any private shareholder or other person.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. Each separate corporation, limited liability company,
business development corporation, partnership, limited partnership, registered
limited liability partnership, sole proprietorship, association, joint stock
company, receivership, trust, professional service organization or other legal
entity through which business is conducted.
   CITY. The City of Springfield, Kentucky.
   COMPENSATION. Wages, salaries, commissions or any other form of remuneration
paid by an employer for services performed by an employee, which are required
to be reported for federal income tax purposes and adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any retirement,
profit sharing or deferred compensation plan, which are deferred for federal
income tax purposes under a salary reduction agreement or similar arrangement,
including, but not limited to, salary reduction arrangements under I.R.C. §§
401(a), 401(k), 402(e), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 414(h) or 457; and
      (2)   Include any amounts contributed by an employee to any welfare
benefit, fringe benefit or other benefit plan made by salary reduction or other
payment method which permits employees to elect to reduce federal taxable
compensation under the Internal Revenue Code, including, but not limited to,
I.R.C. §§ 125 and 132.
    CONCLUSION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The date that the adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service to net income as reported on the business entity’s
federal income tax return become final and unappealable.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders services to another person or any business
entity for compensation, including an officer of a corporation and any officer,
employee or elected official of the United States, a state or any political
subdivision of a state, or any agency of instrumentality of any one or more of
the above. A person classified as an independent contractor under the Internal
Revenue Code shall not be considered an EMPLOYEE. In such case, all independent
contractor is classified as a sole proprietor, corporation, partnership or LLC.
   EMPLOYER. The person for whom an individual performs or-performed any
service, of whatever nature, as the employee of such person, except that:
      (1)   If the person for whom the individual performs or performed the
services does not have control of the payment of the wages for such services,
the term EMPLOYER means the person having control of the payment of such wages;
and
      (2)   In the case of a person paying wages on behalf of a nonresident
alien individual, foreign partnership or foreign corporation, not engaged in
trade or business within the United States, the term EMPLOYER means such
person.
   FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE FEDERAL AUDIT. The revenue agent’s report or
other documents reflecting the final and unappealable adjustments made by the
Internal Revenue Service.
   FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of 12 months ending on the last day of any
month other than December.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code, Title 26 of the United
States Code.
   NET PROFIT. Gross income, as defined in I.R.C. § 61, minus all the
deductions from gross income allowed by I.R.C. Chapter 1, and adjusted as
follows:
      (1)   Includes any amount claimed as a deduction for state tax or local
tax which is computed, in whole or in part, by reference to gross or net income
and which is paid or accrued to any state of the United States, local taxing
authority in a state, the District of Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, any territory or possession of the United States or any foreign country
or political subdivision thereof;
      (2)   Includes any amount claimed as a deduction that directly or
indirectly is allocable to income which is either exempt from taxation or
otherwise not taxed;
      (3)   Includes any amount claimed as a net operating loss carry-back or
carry-forward allowed under I.R.C. § 172;
      (4)   Includes any amount of income and expenses passed through
separately as required by the Internal Revenue Code to an owner of a business
entity that is a passthrough entity for federal tax purposes; and
      (5)   Excludes any amount of income that is exempt from state taxation by
the State Constitution, or the Constitution and statutory laws of the United
States.
   PERSON. Every natural person, whether a resident or nonresident of the city.
Whenever the word PERSON is used in a clause prescribing and imposing a penalty
in the nature of a fine or imprisonment, the word, as applied to a partnership
or other form of unincorporated enterprise, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, shall mean the officers and directors
thereto.
   RETURN or REPORT. Any properly completed and, if required, signed form,
statement, certification, declaration or any other document permitted or
required to be submitted or filed with the city.
   SALES REVENUE. Receipts from the sale, lease or rental of goods, services or
property.
   TAXABLE NET PROFIT.
      (1)   In the case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenue
only within the city, means net profit as defined herein.
      (2)   In the case of a business entity having payroll or sales revenue
both within and without a the city, means net profit as defined herein, and as
apportioned under §
110.04.
   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or fiscal year ending during the calendar
year, upon the basis of which net income is computed.
   TAX DISTRICT. Any city of the first to fifth class, county, urban county,
charter county, consolidated local government, school district, special taxing
district or any other statutorily created entity with the authority to levy net
profits, gross receipts or occupational license taxes.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.02 LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person and business entity engaged in any business in the city
shall be required to apply for and obtain an occupational license, also
referred to as a city license from the city on an annual basis or before the
commencement of business or in the event of a change of business status. This
form is supplied by the city. The annual scheduled fees are attached hereto as
city license schedule. Licensees are required to notify the city of any changes
in address, the cessation of business or any other changes which render the
information supplied to the city in the license application inaccurate.
   (B)   A license may be denied or not renewed if the applicant is not in
compliance with this chapter and all other ordinance of the city and all state
and federal laws, including, but not limited to, being delinquent on taxes owed
to the city.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 110.03 OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, every person or business
entity engaged in any business for profit and any person or business entity
that is required to make a filing with the Internal Revenue Service or the
State Revenue Cabinet shall be required to file and pay to the city an
occupational license tax for the privilege of engaging in such activities
within the city. The occupational license tax shall be measured by 1.5% of:
      (1)   All wages and compensation paid in the city for work done or
services performed or rendered in the city on forms supplied by the city by
every resident and nonresident who is an employee; and
      (2)   The net profits from business conducted in the city by a resident
or nonresident business entity on forms supplied by the city.
   (B)   The occupational license tax imposed in this section shall not apply
to the following persons or business entities:
      (1)   Any bank, trust company, combined bank and trust company, combined
trust, banking and title insurance company organized and doing business in the
state, any savings and loan association whether state or federally chartered,
applying only to the net profits portion but not employees withholding;
      (2)   Any compensation received by members of the Kentucky National Guard
for active duty training, unit training assemblies and annual field training;
      (3)   Any compensation received by precinct workers for election training
or work at election booths in state, county and local primary, regular or
special elections;
      (4)   Public service corporations that pay an ad valorem tax on property
valued and assessed by the State Department of Revenue pursuant to the
provisions of KRS 136.120. Licensees whose businesses are predominantly non-
public service who are also engaged in public service activity are required to
pay a license fee on their net profits derived from the non-public service
activities apportioned to the city;
      (5)   Life insurance companies incorporated under the laws of and doing
business in the state, however, individual agents are not exempt;
      (6)   Any profits, earnings or distributions of an investment fund which
would qualify under KRS 154.20-250 through 154.20-284 to the extent any
profits, earnings or distributions would not be taxable to an individual
investor;
      (7)   Any company providing multichannel video programming services or
communications services, as defined in KRS 136.602. If only a portion of an
entity’s business is providing multichannel video programming services or
communications services, including products or services that are related to and
provided in support of the multichannel video programming services or
communications services, this exclusion applies only to that portion of the
business that provides multi-channel video programming services or
communications services, including products or services that are related to and
provided in support of the multichannel video programming services or
communications services; and
      (8)   Domestic employees, specifically babysitters and in-home sitters
staying with ill and elderly, performing services at privately owned homes.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 2023-008, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 110.04 APPORTIONMENT.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) below, net profits shall be
apportioned as follows:
      (1)   For business entities with both payroll and sales revenue in more
than one tax district, by multiplying the net profits by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the payroll factor, described in division (B) below, plus
the sales factor, described in division (C) below, and the denominator of which
is two; and
      (2)   For business entities with sales revenue in more than one tax
district, by multiplying the net profits by the sales factor as set forth in
division (C) below.
   (B)   The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
amount paid in the city during the tax period by the business entity for
compensation, and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid by
the business entity everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid in
the city based on the time the individual’s service is performed within the
city.
   (C)   The sales factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total
sales revenue of the business entity in the city during the tax period, and the
denominator of which is the total sales revenue of the business entity
everywhere during the tax period:
      (1)   The sales, lease or rental of tangible personal property is in the
city if:
         (a)   The property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than
the United States government, or to the designee of the purchaser within the
city regardless of the f.o.b. point or other conditions of the sale; or
         (b)   The property is shipped from an office, store, warehouse,
factory or other place of storage in the city and the purchaser is the United
States government.
      (2)   Sales revenues, other than revenues from the sale, lease or rental
of tangible personal property or the lease or rental of real property, are
apportioned to the city based upon a fraction, the numerator of which is the
time spent in performing such income-producing activity within the city and the
denominator of which is the total time spent performing that income-producing
activity; and
      (3)   Sales revenue from the sale, lease or rental of real property is
allocated to the tax district where the property is located.
   (D)   If the apportionment provisions of this section do not fairly
represent the extent of the business entity’s activity in the city, the
business entity may petition the city or the city may require, in respect to
all or any part of the business entity’s business activity, if reasonable:
      (1)   Separate accounting;
      (2)   The exclusion of any one or more of the factors;
      (3)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors which will fairly
represent the business entity’s business activity in the city; or
      (4)   The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable
allocation and apportionment of gross receipts.
   (E)   When compensation is paid or payable for work done or services
performed or rendered by an employee, both within and without the city, the
license tax shall be measured by that part of the compensation paid as a result
of work done or service performed or rendered within the city. The license tax
shall be computed by obtaining the percentage which the compensation for work
performed or services rendered within the city bears to the total wages and
compensation paid. In order for the city to verify the accuracy of a taxpayer’s
reported percentages under this division (E), the taxpayer shall maintain
adequate records.
   (F)   All partnerships, S corporations and all other entities where income
is “passed through” to the owners are subject to this chapter. The occupational
license tax imposed in this chapter is assessed against income before it is
“passed through” these entities to the owners.
   (G)   If any business entity dissolves, ceases to operate or withdraws from
the city during any taxable year, or if any business entity in any manner
surrenders or loses its charter during any taxable year, the dissolution,
cessation of business, withdrawal or loss or surrender of charter shall not
defeat the filing of returns and the assessment and collection of any
occupational license tax for the period of that taxable year during which the
business entity had business activity in the city.
   (H)   If a business entity makes, or is required to make, a federal income
tax return, the occupational license tax shall be computed for the purposes of
this chapter on the basis of the same calendar or fiscal year required by the
federal government and shall employ the same methods of accounting required for
federal income tax purposes.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.05 EMPLOYERS TO WITHHOLD.
   (A)   Every employer making payment of compensation to an employee shall
deduct and withhold from the compensation an occupational license tax
calculated under §
110.03. Amounts withheld shall be paid to the city in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall, for the quarter ending after January 1 and for each quarter ending
thereafter, on or before the end of the month following the close of each
quarter, make a return and report to the city and pay to the city, the tax
required to be withheld under this section, unless the employer is permitted or
required to report within a reasonable time after some other period as
determined by the city.
   (C)   Every employer who fails to withhold or pay to the city any sums
required by this chapter to be withheld and paid shall be personally and
individually liable to the city for any sum or sums withheld or required to be
withheld in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   The city shall have a lien upon all the property of any employer who
fails to withhold or pay over to the city sums required to be withheld under
this section. If the employer withholds, but fails to pay the amounts withheld
to the city, the lien shall commence as of the date the amounts withheld were
required to be paid to the city. If the employer fails to withhold, the lien
shall commence at the time the liability of the employer is assessed by the
city.
    (E)   Every employer required to deduct and withhold tax under this section
shall annually on or before February 28 of each year complete and file on a
form furnished or approved by the city a reconciliation of the occupational
license tax withheld where compensation is paid or payable to employees. Either
copies of federal form W-2 and W-3, transmittal of wage and tax statements or a
detailed employee listing with the required equivalent information, as
determined by the city, shall be submitted.
   (F)   Every employer shall furnish each employee a statement on or before
January 31 of each year showing the amount of compensation and occupational
license tax deducted by the employer from the compensation paid to the employee
for payment to the city during the preceding calendar year.
   (G)   An employer shall be liable for the payment of the tax required to be
deducted and withheld under this section.
   (H)   The president, vice president, secretary, treasurer or any other
person holding an equivalent corporate office of any business entity subject to
this section shall be personally and individually liable, both jointly and
severally, for any tax required to be withheld from compensation paid or
payable to one or more employees of the business entity, and neither the
corporate dissolution or withdrawal of the business entity from the city; nor
the cessation of holding any corporate office, shall discharge that liability;
provided, that the personal and individual liability shall apply to each and
every person holding the corporate office at the time the tax becomes or became
obligated. No person shall be personally and individually liable under this
division (H) unless such person had authority to collect, truthfully account
for or pay over the tax imposed by this chapter at the time that the taxes
imposed by this chapter become or became due.
   (I)   Not withstanding divisions (G) and (H) above, every employee receiving
compensation in the city subject to the tax imposed under §
110.03 shall be personally liable for any amount due. In all cases where the
employer does not withhold the tax levied under this chapter from the employee,
such employee or employees shall be responsible for filing with the city each
quarter in the same manner as if they were the employer.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.06 RETURNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All business entity returns for the preceding taxable year shall be
made by April 15 of each year, except returns made on the basis of a fiscal
year, which shall be made by the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the close of the fiscal year. Blank forms for returns shall be supplied by the
city.
   (B)   When deemed necessary, the city may request a business or individual
federal income tax return and all supporting statements and schedules at the
time of filing its occupational license tax return with the city. Whenever, in
the opinion of the city, it is necessary to examine the federal income tax
return of any business entity in order to audit the return, the city may compel
the business entity to produce for inspection the entire return, a copy of any
statements and schedules. The city may also require copies of reports of
adjustments made by the federal government.
   (C)   Every business entity subject to an occupational license tax governed
by the provisions of this chapter shall keep records, render under oath
statements, make returns and comply with rules as the city from time to time
may prescribe. Whenever the city deems it necessary, the city may require a
business entity, by notice served to the business entity, to make a return,
render statements under oath or keep records, as the city deems sufficient to
determine the tax liability the business entity.
   (D)   The city may require, for the purpose of ascertaining the correctness
of any return or for the purposes of making an estimate of the taxable income
of any business entity, the attendance of a representative of the business
entity or of any other person having knowledge in the premises.
   (E)   The full amount of the unpaid tax payable by any business entity, as
appears from the face of the return, shall be paid to the city at the time
prescribed for filing the occupational license tax return, determined without
regard to any extension of time for filing the return.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.07 EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The city may grant any business entity an extension, upon written
request of the business entity, of not more than six months, unless an
extension has been granted by the Internal Revenue Service or is agreed to by
the city and the business entity, for filing its return, if the business
entity, on or before the date prescribed for payment of the occupational
license tax, requests the extension and pays the amount properly estimated as
its tax.
   (B)   If the time for filing a return is extended, the business shall pay,
as part of the tax, an amount equal to 12% per annum simple interest on the tax
shown due on the return, but not been previously paid, from the time the tax
was due until the return is actually filed and the tax paid to the city. A
fraction of a month is counted as an entire month.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.08 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Where there has been an overpayment of tax under §
110.05, a refund or credit shall be made to the employer to the extent of
overpayment only if a written application for refund or credit is received by
the city from the employer within two years from the date the overpayment was
made. A refund request form will be provided by the city.
    (B)   An employee who has compensation attributable to activities performed
outside the city, based on time spent outside the city, whose employer has
withheld and remitted to this city, the occupational license tax on the
compensation attributable to activities performed outside the city, may file
for a refund within two years of the date prescribed by law for the filing of a
return. The employee shall provide a schedule and computation sufficient to
verify the refund claim and the city may confirm with the employer the
percentage of time spent outside the city and the amount of compensation
attributable to activities performed outside the city prior to approval of the
refund. The employer shall document that time spent outside of the city and
within another taxing jurisdiction was reported to the appropriate entity and
that occupational taxes were paid on that portion as earned outside of the
city.
   (C)   Where there has been an overpayment of net profits tax upon business
levied under §
110.03, a refund or credit shall be made to any person or business entity to
the extent of overpayment only upon a written application for refund or credit
to the city within two years from the date that overpayment was made.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.09 FEDERAL AUDIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   As soon as practicable, after each return is received, the city
may examine and audit the return. If the amount of tax computed by the city is
greater than the amount returned by the business entity, the additional tax
shall be assessed and a notice of assessment mailed to the business entity by
the city within five years from the date the return was filed, except as
otherwise provided in this division (A).
         (a)   In the case of a failure to file a return or of a fraudulent
return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time.
         (b)   In the case of a return where a business entity understates net
profit, or omits an amount properly includable in net profits, or both, which
understatement or omission, or both, is in excess of 25% of the amount of net
profit stated in the return, the additional tax may be assessed at any time
within six years after the return was filed.
         (c)   In the case of an assessment of additional tax relating directly
to adjustments resulting from a final determination of a federal audit, the
additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of the times provided in
this division (A), or six months from the date the city receives the final
determination of the federal audit from the business entity, whichever is
later.
      (2)   The times provided in this division (A) may be extended by
agreement between the business entity and the city. For the purposes of this
division (A), a return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing
the return shall be considered as filed on the last day. Any extension granted
for filing the return shall also be considered as extending the last day
prescribed by law for filing the return.
   (B)   Every business entity shall submit a copy of the final determination
of the federal audit within 30 days of the conclusion of the federal audit.
   (C)   The city may initiate a civil action for the collection of any
additional tax within the times prescribed in division (A) above.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.10 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No suit shall be maintained in any court to restrain or delay the
collection or payment of the tax levied by this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any tax collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may
be refunded or credited within two years of the date prescribed by law for the
filing of a return or the date the money was paid to the city, whichever is the
later, except that:
         (a)   In any case where the assessment period contained in §
110.09 has been extended by an agreement between the business entity and the
city, the limitation contained in this division (B) shall be extended
accordingly; and
         (b)   If the claim for refund or credit relates directly to
adjustments resulting from a federal audit, the business entity shall file a
claim for refund or credit within the time provided for in this division (B) or
six months from the conclusion of the federal audit, whichever is later.
      (2)   For the purposes of this division (B) and division (A) above, a
return filed before the last day prescribed by law for filing the return shall
be considered as filed on the last day.
   (C)   The authority to refund or credit overpayments of taxes collected
pursuant to this chapter is vested exclusively in the city.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.11 INFORMATION TO REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   No present or former employee of any tax district shall intentionally
and without authorization inspect or divulge any information acquired by him or
her of the affairs of any person, or information regarding the tax schedules,
returns or reports required to be filed with the tax district or other proper
officer, or any information produced by a hearing or investigation, insofar as
the information may have to do with the affairs of the person’s business. This
prohibition does not extend to information required in prosecutions for making
false reports or returns for taxation, or any other infraction of the tax laws,
or in any way made a matter of public record, nor does it preclude furnishing
any taxpayer or the taxpayer’s properly authorized agent with information
respecting his or her own return. Further, this prohibition does not preclude
any employee of the tax district from testifying in any court, or from
introducing as evidence returns or reports filed with the tax district, in an
action for violation of a tax district’s tax laws or in any action challenging
a tax district’s tax laws.
    (B)   The city reserves the right to disclose to the State Commissioner or
his or her duly authorized agent all such information and rights to inspect any
of the books and records of the city if the State Commissioner of Revenue
grants to the city the reciprocal right to obtain information form the files
and records of the State Department of Revenue and maintains the privileged
character of the information so furnished. Provided, further, that the city may
publish statistics based on such information in such a manner as not to reveal
data respecting net profits or compensation of any person.
   (C)   In addition, the city is empowered to execute similar reciprocity
agreements as described in division (B) above with any other taxing entity,
should there be a need for exchange of information in order to effect diligent
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.12 USE OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX.
   All money derived from the license taxes under the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid to the city and placed to the credit of the city’s
General Revenue Fund.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007)
§ 110.13 YARD SALES.
   This section addresses the conduct of yard sales or garage sales and hereby
limits residential yard sales, regardless of the zone or location they are in,
to three per year per residence, per person or household. Those residences,
persons or households are not required to purchase a license for up to three
yard sales annually. Thereafter, a license must be obtained as stipulated in
the ordinance at a rate of $15 per day, per person. In any case, the number of
yard sales or garage sales allowed annually may not exceed six annually. A yard
sale constitutes an event lasting not more than three consecutive days.
(Ord. 2013-007, passed 6-20-2013)
§ 110.14 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   The legislative body of the city hereby finds that the following occupations
are of such a nature as to require special regulations and supervision, and
therefore the following minimum license fees are imposed on every person,
corporation, association, partnership, agent, LLC or other duly authorized
organization operating in the city limits shall pay in advance to the city for
each calendar year or fraction thereof, in accordance with the yearly basis the
license fee or fees herein set forth, where minimum fees are set forth in the
following table. Amounts will not be prorated in any case. In the event that a
licensee engages in more than one type of business activity, the highest
minimum license fee shall apply. The issuance of licenses does not guarantee
that zoning laws have been abided by. License fees are due prior to the start
of business in the city or annually before January 1 as follows on the schedule
below. Any license remaining unpaid as of January 31 or 30 days after the
business has been established will be charged double the fee listed.
Agent, representatives, solicitors taking orders or Per day, $15
making sales not otherwise specified herein         Per year, $25
Carnivals for exhibition or festivals in the city*  Per week, $100
Collection agent or agencies                        Per year, $25
Dance with less than 7,500 square feet floor space  Per day, $10
Dance with more than 7,500 square feet of floor
space (dances and events open to the public are     Per day, $100
subject to additional local ordinance regulations
Fortune tellers, hypnotist, magnetic healer, divine
healer, phrenologist, faith cure, palmistry or      Per day, $200
similar occupation for reward or compensation
Golf courses                                        Per year, $25
Itinerant contractor, painters, plumbers, plasters, Per year, $25
masonries, for each person or company
Itinerant merchants                                 Per year, $50
Laundry                                             Per year, $40
Loan companies                                      Per year, $50
Machine, slot or coin, including all vending
machines, soft chink, cigarette, phonographs,
radios, pinball machines, games or any other coin   Per year, $10
or slug operated machines, each machine (machines
in licensed businesses owned by business owner do
not require additional license fees)
Pawnbrokers                                         Per year, $150
Peddlers, or any kind of merchandise from any car,
truck, lot or premises (note: tractor-trailer       Per day (per person), $15**
trucks under separate fee below)
Real estate, insurance, investment agents and       Per day, $5
auctioneers                                         Per year, $25
Shooting gallery                                    Per year, $100
Skating rink                                        Per year, $100
Truck load retail sales of all other merchandise    Per day, $25
Truck load sales by farmers exclusively for the     Per day $5
sale of products grown on his or her farm
Truck, truck-trailer, semi-trailer, trailer,        Per day, $50
automobile wagon or dray used for the purpose of
hauling, transporting, loading or unloading any
freight livestock, furniture, machinery, junk,      Per year, $100
fruity, vegetables, groceries, fixtures, produce,
appliances, equipment or any other merchandise of
any kind, each truck***
Notes to Table:
*Carnivals are required to post a certificate of liability insurance with the
city showing a minimum of $300,000 coverage prior to performance or event.
**Any licensee performing door-to-door work will be required to produce proper
identification with photo and the city retains the right to make proper contact
with the Better Business Bureau prior to any conduct of business.
***No license will be required for a truck or vehicle exempted by state statues
from payment of city license fees or used exclusively for the transportation of
the products of his or her farm or land or used exclusively by any person, firm
corporation for calling on or making deliveries to and from the customers of an
already locally licensed business in the city.
 
(Ord. 2013-007, passed 6-20-2013)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   A business entity subject to tax on net profit or occupation
license fee withholding may be subject to a penalty equal to 1% of the tax due
for each calendar month or fraction thereof if the business entity:
         (a)   Fails to file any return or report on or before the due date
prescribed for filing or as extended by the city; or
         (b)   Fails to pay the tax computed on the return or report on or
before the due date prescribed for payment.
      (2)   The total penalty levied pursuant to this division (A) shall not
exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the penalty shall not be less than
$25.
   (B)   Every employer who fails to file a return or pay the tax on or before
the time prescribed under §
110.05 may be subject to a penalty in amount equal to 1% of the tax due for
each calendar month or fraction thereof. The total penalty levied pursuant to
this division (B) shall not exceed 25% of the total tax due; however, the
penalty shall not be less than $25.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business
entity or employer shall pay, as part of the tax, all amount equal to 12% per
annum simple interest on the tax shown due, but not previously paid, from the
time the tax was due until the tax is paid to the city. A fraction of a month
is counted as an entire month.
   (D)   Every tax imposed by this chapter, and all increases, interest and
penalties thereon, shall become, from the time the tax is due and payable, a
personal debt of the taxpayer to the city.
   (E)   The city may enforce the collection of the occupational tax due under
§
110.03 and any fees, penalties and interest as provided in divisions (A), (B),
(C) and (D) above by civil action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. To
the extent authorized by law, the city shall be entitled to recover all court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by it in enforcing any provision
of this chapter.
   (F)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section, any business
entity or employer who willfully fails to make a return or willfully makes a
false return, or who willfully fails to pay taxes owing or collected, with the
intent to evade payment of the tax or amount collected, or any part thereof,
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (G)   Any person who willfully aids or assists in, or procures, counsels or
advises the preparation or presentation under, or in connection with, any
matter arising under this chapter of a return, affidavit, claim or other
document, which is fraudulent or is false as to any material matter, whether or
not the falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of the person
authorized or required to present the return, affidavit, claim or document,
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, a RETURN shall mean and include any
return, declaration or form prescribed by the city and required to be filed
with the city by the provisions of this chapter, or by the rules of the city or
by written request for information to the business entity by the city.
   (I)   Any person violating the provisions of §
110.11 by intentionally inspecting confidential taxpayer information without
authorization, shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not longer
than six months, or both.
   (J)   Any person violating the provisions of §
110.11 by divulging confidential taxpayer information shall be fined not more
than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.
   (K)   Any person or corporation who shall fail, neglect or refuse to make
any return required by this chapter, or any employer who shall fail to withhold
said license fees or to pay over to the city fees so withheld under the terms
of this chapter, or any person who shall refuse to permit the Director of
Finance or any agent or employee designated by him or her, in writing, to
examine his or her books, records and papers, or who shall knowingly make any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or who shall attempt to do anything
whatever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of earnings or profits in
order to avoid payment of the whole or any part of the license fee shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 per
day for each day the offense exists, within the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 2007-010, passed 11-13-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 5-15-2017)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Peddling and soliciting on private property a nuisance
   
111.02   Administration
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY A NUISANCE.
   The practice of going in and upon private residence property in the city, by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners,
occupant or occupants of said private residence property for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the
purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking same, is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and punishable as much nuisance as a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 440.1) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Chief of Police and members of the police force of the city are hereby
required and directed to suppress and to abate any such nuisance as is
described in §
111.01.
(Prior Code, § 440.1)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted or perpetrating a nuisance as described and prohibited
in §
111.01, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum of not less than $25
nor more than $100, together with the cost of prosecution, and if not satisfied
by payment in cash, the same may be enforced by execution against the person or
anyone convicted of committing the misdemeanor herein prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 440.1)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Amusement permits generally
   
112.02   Permits for festivals, dances and the like
   
112.03   Billiard rooms
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 AMUSEMENT PERMITS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every person, group or organization sponsoring or promoting any show,
amusement, dance or other program at which admission is charged, if such show,
amusement, dance or other program is to be offered on any public property
within the city, shall obtain a permit issued by the City Clerk and approved
upon terms and conditions specified by the Chief of Police at least 14 days
before the commencement of such event, and pay a fee of $2 to the city. Such
person, group or organization shall place two responsible individuals in
control of the orderly conduct and safety of those in attendance.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any school activity taking place on
school property.
(Prior Code, § 620.8)
§ 112.02 PERMITS FOR FESTIVALS, DANCES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any person, group or organization sponsoring or promoting any festival
or entertainment, such as dance, show or other event being open to the general
public within the city, shall apply for a permit from the office of the City
Administrator at least 14 days prior to the date of the event.
   (B)   Application for the permit shall be on a form supplied by the City
Administrator and shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name of the person, group or organization sponsoring the event;
      (2)   The location of the event and the name of the owner of the
premises;
      (3)   The proposed dates and hours of the event;
      (4)   The nature of the event;
      (5)   The manner of advertising and promoting the event and the
anticipated attendance;
      (6)   The crowd capacity of the premises on which the event will be held;
      (7)   Parking facilities available; and
      (8)   Arrangements for security and traffic control.
   (C)   If the premises for which the event is to be held is indoors, no
greater than 7,500 square feet in space, open to the public and has sufficient
parking for the anticipated attendance, the city shall issue a permit if the
sponsor agrees in writing to the following:
      (1)   Close and clear the premises not later than 1:00 a.m. unless
extended by City Council;
      (2)   Not sell alcoholic beverages or permit alcoholic beverages unless
properly licensed to do so;
      (3)   Provide sufficient arrangements for security and traffic control;
and
      (4)   Pay a fee of $200.
   (D)   Any other event shall require approval by the City Council prior to
issuance of the permit. The City Council shall review said application for a
permit, and it shall be granted if it is determined that the sponsors or
promoters have taken the necessary steps to ensure protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (E)   The Council may attach conditions on the issuance of the permit as it
deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including the
requirements of posting a cash surety bond to ensure compliance with the
conditions.
   (F)   This section shall apply to new or existing businesses who allow, or
plan to allow live entertainment performances, such as band, animal acts, and
the like on said premises.
   (G)   This section shall apply to singular events or to events planned
regularly or on an intermittent basis.
(Prior Code, § 620.11) (Ord. 91-011, passed 11-18-1991; Ord. 90-004, passed 5-
14-1990)
§ 112.03 BILLIARD ROOMS.
   Any establishment which has billiard tables on the premises shall close at
12:00 a.m. each night and not open until 6:00 a.m. the following morning.
(Prior Code, § 430.4)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
112.01 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $100. In addition,
violation of any of the terms of a permit issued as provided in §
112.01 shall cause immediate revocation and shall constitute cause for denial
of a similar permit by the same applicant in the future.
(Prior Code, § 620.8)
   (C)   In the event an establishment which has billiard tables refuse to
close at the time provided in §
112.03, it shall be prohibited from doing business within the city for a period
of 30 days and, upon the second violation, shall be prohibited from doing
business within the city.
(Prior Code, § 430.4)
CHAPTER 113: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Insurance license and tax
   
113.02   Imposition of license fee
   
113.03   Amount of fee for companies issuing life insurance
   
113.04   Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
   
113.05   Due date; interest
   
113.06   Written breakdown of collections
Fire and Casualty Insurance Companies
   
113.20   Filing required
   
113.21   Definition
   
113.22   License tax
   
113.23   Use of levied money
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 INSURANCE LICENSE AND TAX.
   (A)   (1)   Insurance companies engaged in the business of soliciting,
issuing or delivering policies or receiving premiums for insuring residents of
the city or property located within the city shall not engage in business in
the city until such company shall have obtained a license therefor.
      (2)   Insurance companies engaged in such insurance business within the
city shall pay a license fee or tax equal to 4% of the gross premiums received
from such insurance business during the preceding calendar year, but in no
event shall the license fee or tax be less than $5. When no insurance company
makes original application for a license fee to begin business within the city,
such insurance company shall pay a license fee of $5 for the calendar year
within which it commences business.
   (B)   (1)   Computation for the license fee or tax shall be made upon
business done by the insurance company for the year immediately preceding
January 1 of the year in which the license is payable. Upon making application
for such license, the insurance company or its duly designated officer or agent
shall furnish the City Clerk a sworn statement of the amount of such business
done during the preceding year.
      (2)   The license fee or tax shall become due and payable April 1 of each
year and shall become delinquent if not paid prior to May 1, or in case of a
company beginning business, 30 days after commencement of business, after which
date a penalty of 20% shall be added.
    (C)   The City Clerk shall issue the license herein provided for and shall
receive $1 for each license issued to be paid by the insurance company.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for an insurance company to do business in the
city without first obtaining the license provided for in this section, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to act as agent for any insurance company
which has not obtained the license required by this section.
   (E)   The revenue derived from the license fee or tax herein levied shall be
paid into and become a part of the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 220.7) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.02 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license-fee for the
privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits
of the city for the calendar year 1985, and thereafter on a calendar-year
basis.
(Prior Code, § 220.8)
§ 113.03 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING LIFE INSURANCE.
   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues life
insurance policies on the lives of persons residing within the corporate limits
of the city shall be 6% of the first year’s premiums actually collected within
each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of such policies.
(Prior Code, § 220.8)
§ 113.04 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.
   The license fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any
insurance policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be 6% of the
premiums actually collected within each calendar quarter by reason of the
issuance of such policies on risks located within the corporate limit of the
city on those classes of business which such company is authorized to transact,
less all premiums returned to policy holders; however, any license fee of tax
imposed upon premium receipts shall not include premiums received for insuring
employers against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death
caused thereby, under the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act, being
KRS Chapter 342, and shall not include premiums received on policies of group
health insurance provided for state employees under KRS 18A.225(2).
(Prior Code, § 220.8)
§ 113.05 DUE DATE; INTEREST.
   (A)   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30
days after the end of each calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid on
or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate, as defined
in KRS 131.010(6).
   (B)   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30
days after the end of each calendar quarter. License fees which are not paid on
or before the due date shall bear interest at the tax interest rate as defined
in KRS 131.010(6). Requests for refunds will be accepted with written proof of
detailed overpayment and detailed written explanation. The city reserves the
right to request further proof of payment and, if deemed appropriate, may
request that the insurance company take credit on subsequent returns. The
period for which the city will consider reimbursement is limited to three years
prior to the posted date of request.
(Prior Code, § 220.8) (Ord. 2007-013, passed 12-19-2007)
§ 113.06 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine;
   (D)   Fire and allied perils;
   (E)   Health; and
   (F)   Life.
(Prior Code, § 220.8)
FIRE AND CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANIES
§ 113.20 FILING REQUIRED.
   On or before March 1 of each year, each fire and casualty insurance company
doing business in the city shall file in the office of the City Clerk a
statement of the total amount of direct premiums received by it or its
representative during the preceding calendar year for insurance on property or
risks located within the corporate limits of the city, less, however, premiums
returned to policyholders and premiums on policies not taken, and less
dividends paid or credited to policyholders.
(Prior Code, § 220.1)
§ 113.21 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PREMIUM. Any assessment collected by any fire and casualty insurance company
on or any payment made to it as herein provided for insurance on property or
risks within the corporate limits of the city, but the word PREMIUM shall not
be construed to include any reinsurance premiums paid to or received by any
such insurance company, nor to include premiums received for insuring employers
against liability for personal injuries to their employees, or death caused
thereby under the provisions of the Workers’ Compensation Act, being KRS
Chapter 342.
(Prior Code, § 220.1)
§ 113.22 LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   At the time of filing said statement, said company shall pay to the
City Clerk a license tax of a sum equal to 1.5% of said premiums received, less
the deductions hereinabove set out; provided, however, that the minimum annual
license tax so paid shall be the sum of $5.
   (B)   However, if any said insurance company has not issued any insurance on
property, or covered any risk, within the corporate limits of the city during
the preceding year, than at the time it appoints an agent to write insurance on
property or cover risks within the corporate limits of the city, or if it does
not write said insurance through an agent, then at the time it writes any
insurance on property, or covers any risk, within said corporate limits it
shall pay a license tax of $5, which shall be credited upon the amount of
license tax due and payable when said company files its report for said
calendar year as hereinabove provided.
(Prior Code, § 220.1)
§ 113.23 USE OF LEVIED MONEY.
   The money derived from the license tax herein levied shall be used for
general purposes.
(Prior Code, § 220.1)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
113.01 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $200 for each offense,
each day during which a violation occurs or exists constituting a separate
offense. Any person violating any provision of §
113.01 as an agent or employees of another shall be subject to the same
penalty. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the license fee or tax
may be collected when due from the insurance company by a civil action brought
by the city.
(Prior Code, § 220.7)
   (C)   A penalty of 10% of the total tax payable as provided in §§
113.20 through
113.23 is hereby imposed upon any company failing to make said report or pay
said tax when due, and, upon failure of any said company to make said report or
pay said tax, as required by §§
113.20 through
113.23, upon the due date aforesaid, all of such tax and such penalty shall
immediately become due and payable.
(Prior Code, § 220.1)
CHAPTER 114: RESTAURANTS AND LODGING
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Fee levied
   
114.03   Gross sales report
   
114.04   Lien
   
114.05   City Tourism Commission
   
114.06   Records, receipts, invoices and the like
   
114.07   Refunds
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LODGING FACILITY. An establishment that accommodates overnight visitors, on
a daily, weekly, monthly basis, for a charge, regardless of how the charge is
characterized by the establishment and includes hotels/motels, suite, bed and
breakfasts and similar transient lodging establishments. A LODGING FACILITY is
not to be construed to include apartments, apartment houses and complexes where
rental arrangements are usually fixed and ongoing and customarily for the
period of 30 days or longer.
   RESTAURANT. Any fixed or mobile commercial establishment that engages in the
preparation and serving of ready-to-eat foods in portions to the consumer,
including, but not limited to: restaurants; coffee shops, cafeterias; short-
order cafés; luncheonettes; grilles; tea rooms; sandwich shops; soda fountains;
roadside and festival stands; street vendors; catering kitchens; grocery
delicatessen, convenience store delicatessen; or similar places in which food
is prepared for sale for consumption on the premises or elsewhere. It does not
include schools, food vending machines, establishments serving beverages only
in single service or original containers.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
§ 114.02 FEE LEVIED.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 91A.400, there is hereby levied upon the retail sales
of all food, beverage and alcoholic beverages by restaurants and on lodging in
the city a fee of 3% of the gross amount of such sales, which shall be passed
on to the customer or ultimate consumer.
   (B)   Temporary food stands, booths, street concessions and similar type
operations, whether operated by nonprofit corporations or not, when food is
prepared and sold for immediate consumption, are not exempt from this fee.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
§ 114.03 GROSS SALES REPORT.
   (A)   On or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, each restaurant
and lodging owner/operator shall report to the City Treasurer, on forms
provided by the city, the gross sales of that restaurant/lodging facility from
food and all beverages for the preceding calendar month and on the gross
revenue of motels, hotels and other overnight establishments, and calculate the
fee due for that month by computing 3% of its gross sales from food and all
beverages and on lodging, and the operator shall remit with the form the fee
due to the City Tourism Commission. The collection agency shall be City of
Springfield, 127 West Main Street, Springfield, Kentucky.
   (B)   For each one to 30-day period the report and the fee, or either, is
past due, there shall be added as a penalty 2% of the fee due. There is a
minimum of $10 regardless of the amount of fee due, if any.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
§ 114.04 LIEN.
   A lien is hereby granted unto the city upon all property, real and personal
of any restaurant/lodging facility, to secure the unpaid fee receipts due from
that restaurant/lodging facility, which lien shall be perfected by filing a
notice of the amount due and statement of lien in the office of the county
court clerk, describing the property on which the lien is asserted.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
§ 114.05 CITY TOURISM COMMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   The City Tourism Commission shall expend funds within the
guidelines of KRS 91A.350 through 91A.390.
      (2)   The City Tourism Commission shall account for all funding deposited
by the city in an account entitled “Springfield Tourism Commission.”
      (3)   The Commission shall annually submit to the City Council a proposed
budget for funds for the operation of the Commission for the ensuing year.
   (B)   No present or former employee of the City Tourism Commission, the city
or any other person shall divulge any information acquired by him or her of the
affairs of any person, or information regarding fee schedules, returns or
reports required to be filed with the Tourism Commission, or any information
produced by a hearing or investigation, insofar as the information may have to
do with the affairs of the person’s business. This prohibition does not extend
to information required in prosecutions for making false reports or any other
infraction of this chapter, nor does it extend to any matter, which is in any
way made a matter of public record, nor does it preclude finishing any taxpayer
or his or her properly authorized agent with information respecting his or her
own report. Further, this prohibition does not preclude the Tourism Commission
or any employee of the Commission from testifying in any court, or from
introducing as evidence returns or reports filed with the Tourism Commission,
in an action for violation of state or federal tax laws.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.06 RECORDS, RECEIPTS, INVOICES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Every restaurant/lodging facility, as defined in this chapter, shall
keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form
as the Tourist Commission may require, for not less than four years from the
making of such records unless the Tourism Commission in writing sooner
authorizes their destruction.
   (B)   The Tourism Commission or the City Clerk/Treasurer may have access to
all of the above records to the extent necessary to determine proper compliance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
§ 114.07 REFUNDS.
   In the event of an overpayment or an incorrect payment, a request for refund
will be accepted with proof of detailed overpayment and explanation. The city
reserves the right to request further proof of overpayment or incorrect payment
and if deemed appropriate the request that the business making such a claim
take credits on future returns in lieu of a reimbursement by check. The period
for which the city will consider reimbursement is limited to two years prior to
the posted date of request.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, on being adjudged liable thereof, be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $50 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the collection of the past due amount. Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate civil offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2015-010, passed 10-29-2015)
CHAPTER 115: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Adult entertainment establishments conditions
   
115.03   Adult entertainment establishment licenses
   
115.04   Clear view
   
115.05   Restrictions on advertisement
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT DANCING. Includes, but is not limited to, any dancing which exposes to
view by patrons or spectators on the premises at any time the specified
anatomical areas and/or consists of specified sexual activities, both as set
forth herein.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult motion picture theater, massage
parlor or establishment, an adult book store, an adult escort service or any
other business establishment whose principal business use or regular business
use is to offer adult-oriented entertainment or matter as characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities and/or exposure of specified anatomical
areas. ADULT-ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT shall mean any exhibition, live
performance, display or dance of any type which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance any specified sexual activities as
defined herein, or the exhibition of any specified anatomical area.
   ENTERTAINMENT AREA. An area in an adult entertainment establishment
consisting of a platform or other structure raised not less than 18 inches
above the immediately surrounding main floor area and encompassing an area of
at least 100 square feet.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), trust, estate,
assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   PREMISES. The entire property, interior and exterior, including parking lots
and other outside areas.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic
region; the cleavage of the human buttock; any portion of the human female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or
other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
      (2)   The human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes, but is not limited to, bestiality,
erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, human
genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence, fondling,
touching of human genitalia, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast, acts
of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism,
sadomasochism sexual intercourse or sodomy, or any excretory functions as part
of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above.
(Ord. 98-009, passed 10-12-1998)
§ 115.02 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS CONDITIONS.
   In addition to the licensing and other general requirements contained in
this chapter relating to adult entertainment establishments, each adult
entertainment establishment shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Prohibited activities. No person shall display or expose specified
anatomical areas or simulate specified sexual activities, individually or with
any patron, spectator, employee or other person, on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment.
   (B)   Entertainment area. No person in an adult entertainment establishment
shall engage in any form of entertainment or dancing except while said person
is positioned in or occupying an entertainment area, as defined in §
115.01 and, while the person so dancing, performing, displaying or exhibiting,
is positioned not less than six feet from any patron or spectator.
   (C)   Entertainment area exclusion. No spectator, patron or person who is
not employed by the adult entertainment establishment shall be present in an
entertainment area, as defined above, during the course of any adult
entertainment, dancing or performance.
   (D)   Physical contact prohibition. While on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment, no employee thereof shall be permitted to have any
physical contact with any other employee thereof, patron, spectator or other
person while that employee is entertaining, dancing or performing, and all such
performances shall occur only in an entertainment area. No employee of the
adult entertainment establishment shall touch the breast, buttock or genitals
of any patron, spectator, person or other employee of the adult entertainment
establishment, and no patron, spectator or other person, shall touch the
breast, buttock or genitals of any employee of the adult entertainment
establishment, patron, spectator or other person, while on the premises of the
adult entertainment establishment. No person on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment shall be permitted to use or be present in areas
partitioned or screened from public view and which are designed to be occupied,
together or alone, by any person or persons for the display of or exhibition of
specified anatomical areas.
   (E)   Age restriction. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted in
an adult entertainment establishment.
   (F)   Alcoholic beverages prohibited. The sale, use or possession of
alcoholic beverages by any employee of the adult entertainment establishment,
patron, spectator or other person, while on the premises of the adult
entertainment establishment, is prohibited.
   (G)   Business hours. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open for
business between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day, or at any time
during the 24 hours of a Sunday.
(Ord. 98-009, passed 10-12-1998) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES.
   (A)   General requirements. No person shall own an adult entertainment
establishment, as defined in §
115.01, without first obtaining an adult entertainment establishment license.
No person shall operate an unlicensed adult entertainment establishment.
   (B)   Application process.
      (1)   The owner of an adult entertainment establishment shall apply for a
license with the City Clerk. The applicant shall complete an application on the
form prescribed by the city and shall submit the following information:
         (a)   The name and business address of the establishment, including
any assumed or fictitious names under which the establishment is or will be
operated;
         (b)   The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias,
business address, Social Security or tax identification number of the owner and
every officer, partner, director or person performing a similar function to an
officer, partner or director and the names and addresses of all individuals who
own 10% or more of the partnership, corporation, limited liability corporation
or company, or limited liability partnership, which is the owner of the
establishment;
         (c)   In the event the owner of the adult entertainment establishment
is not the owner of record of the real property on which the establishment is
located, or is to be located, the application shall include a notarized
statement from the owner(s) of record of the real property acknowledging that
an adult entertainment establishment is located or is to be located on the real
property upon the issuance of the license. The applicant also shall furnish the
name and address of the owner(s) of record of the real property and a copy of
the lease or rental agreement or memorandum thereof;
         (d)   The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias,
business address, date of birth, Social Security number and photograph of all
persons engaged in the day to day management of the adult entertainment
establishment. All person who at any time shall be responsible for attending
the entrance of the establishment for the purpose of compliance with this
chapter shall be included in this division (B)(1)(d);
         (e)   The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias,
business address, date of birth, Social Security number and photograph of the
individual designed by the applicant to undertake to keep the applicant, if
licensed, at all times in compliance with the restrictions, requirements and
conditions set forth in this chapter, together with the written statement of
such individual stating that he or she has received a copy of this chapter and
that he or she willfully undertakes on behalf of the applicant to comply
therewith;
         (f)   The name, including any assumed or fictitious name or alias,
business address, date of birth, Social Security number and photograph of the
individual designated by the applicant to be responsible for keeping current
the information required hereunder at all times, together with a written
statement from such individual stating that he or she has received a copy of
this chapter and that he or she willfully undertakes on behalf of the applicant
to comply with the requirements herein pertaining to the disclosure of
information;
         (g)   The nature of the activity or activities to be engaged in at
such location;
         (h)   A criminal record report for the applicants, owners, officers,
directors, partners, employees or other persons whose names are required
pursuant to this section together with a list of all criminal convictions of
such persons within the last five years for the offenses listed below in this
chapter. Any of such persons who is on parole shall submit with the application
the terms of said parole; and
         (i)   The name and mailing address of the owner to whom notice will be
given in case of violations or other matters affecting the license hereunder.
      (2)   The applicant must submit to fingerprinting by the City Police
Department.
      (3)   The applicant must be current on all fees or taxes of any kind or
nature owed to the city.
      (4)   The premises to be licensed must meet all established zoning, fire,
building and/or plumbing codes and cannot provide direct interior access to
residential living quarters.
      (5)   The applicant shall file a floor plan exhibiting all entrances,
exits, stairways and all rooms in the building and their intended uses, for
purposes of enabling the city to provide emergency services.
   (C)   Supplemental information. The information required by division (B)
above shall be kept current at all times even after the granting of the adult
entertainment license. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or other
person designated in the license application to notify the City Clerk, in
writing, no later than 48 hours after the effective date of any change,
alteration or modification in any information contained in the application.
   (D)   Review process. The Building Inspector or his or her designee shall
inspect the premises proposed to be licensed within 15 days after the completed
application and all information required by this chapter has been submitted and
the application fee has been paid. The Building Inspector shall report to the
City Clerk, who shall issue a license if all restrictions, requirements,
conditions and all applicable requirements of this chapter and other applicable
laws have been met. The City Clerk shall grant or deny a license application
within 20 days of the filing of such application.
   (E)   Prohibitions. No adult entertainment establishment license shall be
issued if the applicant or any operator, officer, director, partner or
shareholder:
      (1)   Is less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   Has been convicted of any of the following offenses within five
years of the date of the application:
         (a)   Gambling, conspiracy to promote gambling or possession of
gambling records or gambling devices;
         (b)   Prostitution, promoting prostitution, permitting prostitution or
solicitation for the purpose of prostitution;
         (c)   The sale, transfer, possession or use of any controlled
substance;
         (d)   Any sexual offenses, including rape, sodomy, sexual abuse,
sexual misconduct or indecent exposure;
         (e)   Distribution of obscene material to a minor, use of a minor to
produce, promote or distribute obscene material, advertising obscene materials
or promoting the sale of obscenity;
         (f)   Unlawful transaction with a minor (as defined in KRS Chapter 530
or other similar laws), use of a minor in a sexual performance, promoting a
sexual performance by a minor or possession of or advertising matter portraying
a sexual performance by a minor; or
         (g)   Murder, manslaughter or felony assault (as defined in KRS
Chapters 507 or 508 or similar laws).
      (3)   Has failed in the operation of an adult entertainment establishment
to comply with any health, zoning, fire or building code enacted or adopted by
the city and has failed to correct such violation as provided in this chapter.
   (F)   Notice. If the Building Inspector’s inspection reveals a failure to
comply with any provisions of this chapter or of any required code, regulation
or law, the Building Inspector shall notify the applicant in writing of that
fact, stating what failures have been discovered, allowing a reasonable time to
correct such defects and informing the applicant of the appeal procedure if the
applicant does not agree with the Building Inspector’s decision or finding.
   (G)   No transfer of license. The adult entertainment establishment license
issued under this chapter does not authorize the operation of an adult
entertainment establishment at any place other than the address designated in
the application and such license is not transferable. A transfer is deemed to
occur when the business is sold, leased or subleased; when securities which
constitute a controlling interest in the business are sold or otherwise
exchanged; or when a trust, gift or other similar legal device is established
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for a transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the natural person
possessing the ownership or control of the business.
   (H)   Access to licensed premises. The application for or the granting of an
adult entertainment establishment license is deemed to permit periodic
inspections by law enforcement officers, or by other persons designated or
authorized by the Building Inspector, of all areas of any establishment
requiring a license under this chapter for the purpose of verifying compliance
with the terms and conditions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for an
applicant, licensee, owner, operator or employee of an adult entertainment
establishment to refuse to permit a law enforcement officer or authorized
person to inspect the entire premises or any part thereof at any time during
the normal business hours of the establishment, or at any time the
establishment is open or occupied.
   (I)   Application and license fee. Concurrent with the submission of a
license application, the applicant shall pay to the city a nonrefundable fee of
$100. Every adult entertainment establishment shall pay to the city an annual
license fee of $3,000, which fee is due and payable upon the issuance of a
license and on or before July 1 of each year thereafter. When a license is
first issued, the annual fee may be prorated at the rate of $250 per month for
the remaining months of the current fiscal year, which prorated fee is fully
due and payable upon the issuance of the license; provided, however, that no
license shall be issued for less than the sum of $1,500. No licensee shall be
rebated any portion of any license fee paid to the city.
   (J)   Expiration. Each license shall expire on June 30 of each calendar year
unless earlier suspended or revoked. Application for a new license should be
made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date.
   (K)   Suspension. The Chief of Police may suspend an adult entertainment
establishment license for a period of not to exceed 30 days if the Chief of
Police determines that the applicant, owner, operator or any employee thereof
has violated any provision of this chapter, has been on the adult entertainment
establishment premises while intoxicated or in a disorderly condition
(consistent with the definition of disorderly conduct contained in KRS Chapter
525), has refused to allow an inspection of the premises, or any part thereof,
or has knowingly permitted any violation of state law to occur on the premises.
   (L)   Revocation. The Chief of Police shall revoke an adult entertainment
license if he or she determines that:
      (1)   Cause for suspension under division (K) above occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 24 months;
      (2)   An applicant knowingly gave false or misleading information in the
initial license application or in any subsequent license application;
      (3)   An applicant, owner, operator or employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances on the
premises;
      (4)   An applicant, owner, operator or employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution or solicitation for prostitution on the premises;
      (5)   An applicant, owner, operator or employee has knowingly operated an
adult entertainment establishment during a period of time when the
establishment’s license was suspended; or
      (6)   An applicant, owner, operator or employee has knowingly allowed a
violation specified in division (E) above to occur on the premises.
   (M)   Hearing for denial, suspension or revocation; appeal. If the Chief of
Police determines that grounds exist to deny, suspend or revoke an adult
entertainment license, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant or
licensee in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including the
grounds therefor. The notice shall be hand delivered to the applicant or
licensee or sent to the applicant or licensee by certified mail at the address
specified in the application, and a copy shall be sent to the City Clerk.
Within five business days of receipt of such notice, the applicant or licensee
may provide to the Chief of Police, in writing, a response which shall include
a statement of reasons why the license should not be denied, suspended or
revoked and may include a request for a hearing. A copy shall be sent to the
City Clerk. If a response is not timely received by the Chief of Police, the
notice shall be a final administrative act of denial, suspension or revocation.
If a timely response is received by the Chief of Police, he or she shall,
within three business days of his or her receipt of the response, either
withdraw the written notice of intent to deny, suspend or revoke by giving
notice of such withdrawal to the applicant or licensee or schedule a hearing
before the City Council and shall give notice of such hearing to the applicant
or licensee. A copy thereof shall be provided to the City Clerk. The hearing
shall be informal in nature and shall be conducted within 20 business days of
receipt of the applicant’s or licensee’s response by the Chief of Police. The
City Council shall issue an oral decision at the conclusion of the hearing and
shall render a written decision within five business days after the completion
of the hearing and shall serve the applicant or licensee with a copy of the
decision by certified mail. The applicant or licensee may appeal a decision of
the City Council to the county circuit court after receipt of the written
notice of the decision. If an applicant or licensee pursues a judicial appeal
of a final decision of the City Council, then that licensee or applicant may
continue to operate the adult entertainment establishment pending the
completion of judicial review.
(Ord. 98-009, passed 10-12-1998) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 CLEAR VIEW.
   (A)   General requirements. An adult entertainment establishment shall at
all times provide a clear view of the entire area open to the public, from the
front entrance to the entertainment area. No partition, box, stall, screen,
curtain, plant or other object shall be installed or placed so as to obstruct
the view or the general observation from the front entrance of persons in any
entertainment area; however, partitions, subdivision or panels that are not
higher than 48 inches from the floor shall not be construed as obstructing view
or the general observation of persons from the front entrance.
   (B)   Prohibitions. The darkening of any portion of the adult entertainment
establishment open to the public in any manner as to prevent any person
standing at the front entrance from observing the conduct of patrons therein or
of the entertainment areas shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 98-009, passed 10-12-1998) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.05 RESTRICTIONS ON ADVERTISEMENT.
   Any adult entertainment establishment license holder shall be required to
identify such business as “adult” in any advertisement. No lettering, words or
representation of matter relating to sexual activities as defined in this
chapter shall be contained in any advertisement. Adult entertainment activities
or photographs of the same shall not be displayed about or within any adult
entertainment establishment in such a manner as to be open to the general
public view from outside the adult entertainment establishment. Each
application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be
accompanied by a photograph or drawing of any signs to be displayed on or about
the exterior of the premises with an indication as to the dimensions of the
same. Signage shall be posted in conspicuous locations indicating that persons
must be of appropriate age or older to enter.
(Ord. 98-009, passed 10-12-1998)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
115.02 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500, and each
day of violation shall be considered to be a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
115.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500, and each
day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
   (D)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
115.04 shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500, and each
day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 98-009, passed 10-12-1998)
CHAPTER 116: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
116.001   Title
   
116.002   Purpose
   
116.003   Definitions
   
116.004   Application
   
116.005   State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
   
116.006   Implementation of chapter
Licenses
   
116.020   City licenses
   
116.021   Expiration of license; proration of fees
   
116.022   Payment of license fees; delinquency
   
116.023   Refund of fees
   
116.024   Application and maintenance of license
   
116.025   General license conditions
   
116.026   Denial of license
   
116.027   Form of license
   
116.028   Change of information
   
116.029   Renewal of license
   
116.030   Lost or destroyed license
Administration and Enforcement
   
116.045   Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator
   
116.046   Revocation or suspension of license
   
116.047   Appeals
   
116.048   Transfer or assignment
   
116.049   Review of license; books, records and reports
   
116.050   Dormancy
   
116.051   Authorization to enforce chapter
Conditions; Licensed Premises
   
116.065   Hours of sale
   
116.066   Gambling
   
116.067   Disorderly premises prohibited; security
   
116.068   Prizes, premiums, free samples prohibited
   
116.069   Intoxicated persons; drunkenness
   
116.070   Underage sales
   
116.071   Notice to persons under the age of 21
   
116.072   License to be displayed
   
116.073   Legal transactions for wholesalers, distributers and retailers
   
116.074   Employment restrictions
   
116.075   Lavatory facilities required
   
116.076   Nudity and adult entertainment activities prohibited
   
116.077   Minors
   
116.078   Consumption at package stores prohibited
   
116.079   Mandatory responsible beverage service training
   
116.080   Signs and advertising
   
116.081   Sidewalk café permit
 
   
116.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Alcoholic Beverage Control Ordinance” of
the City of Springfield, Kentucky (hereinafter referred to as the “city”).
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform regulations and
requirements for the licensing and regulation of alcoholic beverage manufacture
and sales pursuant to authorization under KRS Chapters 241 through 244.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions set out in the alcoholic
beverage control laws (KRS Chapters 241 through 244) of the state, and all
amendments and supplements thereto, shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.004 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall be construed to apply to the manufacture and traffic in
both malt beverages and distilled spirits and wine where the context permits
such application. Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee,
or the owner, proprietor, employee, agent or person in charge of any licensed
premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, from the restrictions,
requirements and penalties of any other ordinance of the city, or of any
statues of the state relating to violations pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.005 STATE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL LAW.
   The provisions of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law (KRS Chapters 241
through 244), and all amendments and supplements thereto, are adopted so far as
applicable to this chapter except as otherwise lawfully provided herein.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.006 IMPLEMENTATION OF CHAPTER.
   The City Council may promulgate rules and regulations, and/or amendments
thereto, as is in its discretion in order to ensure the proper implementation
of this chapter. Such will be done as according to local, state and federal
law.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
LICENSES
§ 116.020 CITY LICENSES.
   For the privilege of causing, permitting and engaging in the actions,
business and transactions authorized thereby in regard to traffic in alcoholic
beverages in the city, and pursuant to the authority of KRS 243.070, there is
hereby established a corresponding city license for each of the city licenses
described in KRS 243.070. The fee for each city license shall be as set out in
the schedule set forth below. In the event KRS 243.070 shall hereafter be
amended to authorize additional city licenses, the city shall have authority to
issue that additional city license type and the fee for such license shall be
the maximum fee provided in KRS 243.070 as amended.
Authorized public consumption license, per annum (if want to allow) $250
Bottling house or bottling house storage license, per annum         $1,000
Brewer’s license, per annum                                       $500
Caterer’s license, per annum                                      $600
Distiller’s license, per annum                                    $500
Extended hours supplement license, per annum                        $2,000
Limited golf course license, per annum                              $500
Limited restaurant license, per annum                               $600
Malt beverage distributor’s license, per annum                    $400
Microbrewery license, per annum                                     $500
Nonquota retail malt beverage package license, per annum            $200
Nonquota Type 1 retail drink license, per annum                     $600
Nonquota Type 2 retail drink license, per annum                     $600
Nonquota Type 3 retail drink license, per annum                     $600
Nonquota Type 4 retail malt beverage drink license, per annum       $600
Qualified historic site, per annum                                  $1,030
Quota retail drink license, per annum                               $600
Quota retail package license, per annum                             $600
Rectifier’s license                                                
   Class A, per annum                                            $3,000
   Class B (craft rectifier), per annum                          $960
Special Sunday retail drink license, per annum                      $0
Special temporary alcohol auction license, per event                $100
Special temporary license, per event                                $100
Wholesaler’s license, per annum                                   $3,000
 
   (B)   The fee for each of the first five supplemental bar licenses shall be
the same as the fee for the primary drink license. There shall be no charge for
each supplemental license issued in excess of five to the same licensee at the
same premises.
   (C)   The holder of a nonquota retail malt beverage package license may
obtain a nonquota Type 4 malt beverage drink license for a fee of $50. The
holder of a nonquota Type 4 malt beverage drink license may obtain a nonquota
retail malt beverage package license for a fee of $50.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.021 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEES.
   (A)   All city licenses, except temporary licenses, shall begin on July l of
any year and shall expire on June 30 of the following year as set forth in KRS
243.090 and 804 KAR 4:390. Any licenses issued after July 1 of any year shall
be assessed a fee which is based on the pro rata portion of the remainder of
the license period; however, the cost of any license shall not be less than
one-half the amount of the full fee for an annual license of that type.
   (B)   Special temporary licenses requires an application to be filed with
the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control no later than five working days
prior to the date for which the license is requested. The Department will deny
all applications that are received less than five days prior to the requested
date.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.022 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES; DELINQUENCY.
   No licensee shall enter into or begin operating any business for which a
license is required by this chapter until the license fee has been paid in
full. The fee for renewal of any license shall be paid with the renewal
application. Failure to pay any license fee within ten days after it becomes
due shall result in a penalty equal to 10% of the license fee. Any licensee
failing to pay the fees, including penalties, within ten days after such fees
are due may be subject to revocation of the license and to other penalties as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.023 REFUND OF FEES.
   (A)   Should any licensee under this chapter be prohibited from conducting
the licensed business for the full period covered by the license because of any
changes that may hereafter be made in the laws of the state with reference to
alcoholic beverages or other cause outside licensee’s control, then the city
shall refund to licensee the proportionate part of the license fee for the
period during which licensee is prevented from carrying on said business if the
licensee provides sufficient proof to the City ABC Administrator that such
period of inactivity was not the fault of the licensee or the result of a
revocation, suspension or other wrongdoing by licensee, or an agent or employee
of the licensee.
   (B)   In the event a violation of this chapter occurs that results in the
suspension or revocation of the license, the city shall not be required to
refund any portion of the license fee.
   (C)   Payment of said regulatory fee shall be remitted to the City ABC
Administrator, who shall transmit all fees to the City Clerk, or his or her
designee, for deposit into the appropriate designated account. The city may use
said fees as permitted by law, including, but not limited to, any cost of
additional policing, regulatory or administrative expenses related to the sale
of alcoholic beverages in the city. The regulatory license fee shall be in
addition to any other fees or licenses permitted by law, except that a credit
against a regulatory license fee in the city shall be allowed in an amount
equal to any license fee shall be based on paperwork required by the local and/
or State ABC Administrator, which may include, but is not limited to, tax
returns and financial statements. Said paperwork and payment will be due
according to the schedule set forth by the Mayor, or his or her designee, which
may be set at, but is not limited to, time periods consisting of a monthly or
quarterly billing by the local ABC office and/or the city.
   (D)   Failure to pay such remittance within ten days of the due date
constitutes a violation and shall subject a licensee to suspension or
revocation.
   (E)   Penalty for failure to file a return and pay remittance by the due
date is 5% of the regulatory fee for each 90 days or fraction thereof. The
total late filing penalty shall not exceed 25% of the regulatory fee; provided,
however, that in no case shall the penalty be less than $10.
   (F)   Interest at the rate of 8% per annum will apply to any late payments.
   (G)   The City ABC Administrator shall transmit all fees and any other types
of payment made to the city, upon collection, to the City Clerk or his or her
designee, for deposit into the appropriate designated account.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.024 APPLICATION AND MAINTENANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Advertisement. Before an application for a license shall be
considered, the applicant must publish a notice of its intent to apply for an
alcoholic beverage license in the newspaper used by the city for legal notices
under KRS 424.120. The notice shall include the following.
      (1)   The advertisement shall state the name and address of the applicant
and the name and address of each principal owner, partner, member, officer and
director if the applicant is a partnership, limited partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, governmental agency or other business entity
recognized by law. All advertisements shall state the location of the proposed
premises for which the licenses sought, and the type of business, and type of
license for which application is made.
      (2)   The applicant shall attach to the application a newspaper clipping
of the advertisement.
   (B)   Form of application.
      (1)   All licenses granted under this chapter shall be approved by the
City ABC Administrator. Applications for the issuance of new licenses and for
renewals of existing licenses shall be in writing and upon the forms provided
by the State ABC Board and/or the city, both of which may be amended and
supplemented from time to time by each respective agency.
      (2)   The application shall be verified and shall set forth in detail
such information concerning the applicant and the premises for which the
license is sought, as required by the state statutes, the State Department and
the city, including as follows:
         (a)   Name and address;
         (b)   Nature of interest;
         (c)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
         (d)   Date of birth;
         (e)   Date of residence was established in the state, if a resident of
the state;
         (f)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license
or LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a
license under this chapter;
         (g)   Extent of stock or company ownership; and
         (h)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or LLC,
corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a license in
any other state or province.
      (3)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certified check, cashier
check or money order for the amount of the license fee.
      (4)   In addition to the above specified information, the applicant shall
file, with the application, responses to any additional questions as may be
posed or prescribed by the City ABC Administrator. The City Council has adopted
a statement of guidelines and priorities for the issuance of licenses within
this chapter to determine the extent to which applications may further, or
impede, the objectives of those guidelines. Therefore, in addition to the
information contained in the application, the City ABC Administrator may
require such other information as the Administrator may, in his or her
discretion, deem desirable, reasonable or appropriate to the consideration of
the application.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.025 GENERAL LICENSE CONDITIONS.
   In addition to any other inquiries, conditions or considerations required or
permitted by law:
   (A)   The City ABC Administrator shall not grant any alcoholic beverage
license or approve a renewal of a license until the applicant and his or her
place of business shall have been approved by a licensed building inspector and
any and all other inspections required by the State Building Code or other
applicable law;
   (B)   No license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages may be granted or
renewed to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any property taxes,
both real and personal, any other taxes due to the city, fees of any type, or
charges due to any department of the city at the time of issuing the license,
nor may any license be granted or renewed to sell upon any premises or
property, owned and occupied by the licensee upon which there are any of the
above delinquent payments due and owing to the city. Further, if a licensee
becomes delinquent in the payment of any of the above at any time during the
license period, the license to sell alcoholic or malt beverages may be subject
to revocation or suspension; and
   (C)   No person, whether an applicant for license or a licensee, shall in
any manner attempt to bribe, threaten, unduly influence or intimidate the City
ABC Administrator, or any member of the city’s staff, or any State ABC
Administrator or staff, in any matter in which an application or proposed
application for license, or procedure for revocation or suspension is pending
before such officer. This division (C) is not intended to stifle expressions of
opinion, however, it is intended to make clear that the ABC Administrators are
public officials charged with the administration and enforcement of the law,
both local and state. Any person applying for a license or contesting the
revocation or suspension of a license who engages in attempted bribes, threats,
attempted undue influence or intimidation of a city or State ABC Administrator
or staff shall be disqualified from receiving or retaining a license in
addition to other penalties as provided by law. The procedures for appeals
shall apply to disqualifications, revocations or suspensions under this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit monetary
settlements in lieu of revocation or suspension of license after a final order
or revocation or suspension, where this chapter and applicable statutes allow
for such payments in settlement.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.026 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City ABC Administrator may deny a city license for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Causes for refusal to issue or renew a license and for suspension
or revocation of a city license shall be the same as provided for state
licenses according to KRS 243.450, 243.490 and 243.500, as well as violation of
any city ordinance regarding alcohol beverage licensing, sales or the
administration thereof;
      (2)   If the applicant has done any act for which a revocation of license
would be authorized under local, state or federal law; or
      (3)   If the applicant has made any false material statement in his or
her application.
   (B)   An applicant who has been refused a license by the City ABC
Administrator may appeal the refusal to the State Board pursuant to §
116.047.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.027 FORM OF LICENSE.
   All city licenses shall be in such form as may be provided by the ABC
Administrator but at the least shall contain:
   (A)   The name and address of the licensee;
   (B)   The number of the license;
   (C)   The type of license;
   (D)   A description by street and number, or otherwise, of the licensed
premises;
   (E)   The expiration date of the license; and
   (F)   A statement in substance that the license shall not be a property or
vested right and that it may be revoked at any time pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.028 CHANGE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   If after a license to individuals or to a sole proprietor has been
issued, there is a change in any fact required to be set forth in the
application, a verified amendment in writing giving notice of the change shall
be filed with the City ABC Administrator with ten days of the change.
    (B)   Since a number of licenses issued by the city are in the name of
corporations or other business organizations, it is necessary that ownership
changes in such organizations be reported to the City ABC Administrator. The
City ABC Administrator can, therefore, investigate the person to whom the
ownership or management is transferred in order to ascertain whether that
person is precluded by statute from holding an interest in an alcoholic
beverage license.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, and as used with regard to a
partnership, corporation, LLC or other business organization herein, the word
CHANGE is construed to include any change in managers, partners or LLC members,
directors or officers of the corporation, or change in ownership or stock
whereby any person secures 10% of the outstanding ownership or stock. Transfer
of more than 10% of the total ownership or stock shall require a new license.
   (D)   The following information shall be required concerning any new
manager, partner or LLC member, new director, officer or person securing any
interest in alcoholic beverage license:
      (1)   Name and address;
      (2)   Nature of interest;
      (3)   Whether or not a citizen of the United States;
      (4)   Date of birth;
      (5)   Date residence was established in the state, if a resident of the
state. If a resident, indicate when residence was established;
      (6)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any other license or
in any LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a
license under this act;
      (7)   Extent of stock or company ownership; and
      (8)   Whether or not he or she has any interest in any license or in any
LLC, corporation, partnership or other business organization holding a license
in any other state or province.
   (E)   This information shall be filed with the City ABC Administrator as a
verified amendment of the application pursuant to which the license was
granted. Filing shall be made within ten days of any change of required
information.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.029 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every year, except in the case of temporary licenses, each licensee
shall renew his, her or its license. All renewal licenses must be on file with
the City ABC Administrator no less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the
license for the preceding license period or the same shall be canceled, except
where the licensee is unable to continue in business at the same premises
licensed during the preceding license period as a result of construction, act
of God, casualty, death, the acquisition or threatened acquisition of the
premises by any federal, state, city or other governmental agency or private
organization possessing power of eminent domain, whether such acquisition is
voluntary or involuntary, or loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew
exiting lease; provided, that said licensee shall file a written verified
statement no less than 20 days from the expiration date of the license, setting
forth these facts, and the City ABC Administrator is hereby authorized to
extend the time for filing of a renewal of such license for a reasonable length
of time within the sound discretion of the City ABC Administrator; provided,
however, that such licensee shall pay a license fee from the expiration date of
the former license or licenses. Said license fee shall not be payable until
application is made for the transfer of said license to a new location.
   (B)   The renewal by the City ABC Administrator of the license shall not be
construed to be a waiver or acceptance of any violation which occurred prior to
such renewal and shall not prevent subsequent proceedings against the licensee.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.030 LOST OR DESTROYED LICENSE.
   When a license shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the
licensee or his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu of the original
license shall be issued by the City ABC Administrator after the Administrator
shall have been satisfied as to the facts; provided, however, that the
applicant for said duplicate license shall pay a fee of $10 for the duplicate
license.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 116.045 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 241.160 and 241.170, there is hereby created the
office of the City Alcoholic Beverage Control Administrator (hereinafter “the
Administrator”).
   (B)   The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor based upon the
qualifications of the candidates to fill the position, subject to the approval
of the City Council for a term of one year. Initial budget for the office shall
be $400 per month and be reviewed annually. The duties of the Administrator are
to carry out the provisions of this chapter and all other state and local
ordinances pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city.
   (C)   The City Alcohol Beverage Administrator may from time to time appoint
such additional personnel, such as alcohol beverage control investigator(s), as
is necessary to assist him or her in the administration of this chapter.
   (D)   The City ABC Administrator shall have the same duties and functions
regarding local license applications and renewals as the State Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control (“Department”) with respect to state licenses. The
City ABC Administrator shall have the same duties and functions regarding local
license penalization as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board (“Board”) with
respect to state license penalization.
   (E)   To prevent potential conflicts of interests, no person shall be a City
ABC Administrator, an investigator or an employee of the city, under the
supervision of the City ABC Administrator, who would be disqualified to be a
member of the Board under state law set forth in KRS 241.100.
   (F)   The City ABC Administrator shall have authority delegated by the
Mayor, and as authorized under KRS Chapters 241 through 244. The City ABC
Administrator and his or her investigators shall have jurisdiction co-extensive
with the boundaries of the city.
   (G)   The City ABC Administrator and his or her investigators shall have
available at all reasonable times for their inspection all books and records
required to be maintained by licenses under KRS 244.150, and the City ABC
Administrator shall receive copies of all reports submitted by licensee to the
Department.
   (H)   The City ABC Administrator, before entering upon his or her duties,
shall take the oath as prescribed in § 228 of the Constitution. The ABC
Administrator and any employee delegated or assigned to the ABC Administration
may also be asked to execute a bond in such penal sum as the city deems
necessary unless said person if already covered under the city’s active bonds
in regards to officials and employees of the city.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.046 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license may be revoked or suspended by the City ABC Administrator
if the licensee shall have violated any of other provisions of KRS Chapters 241
through 244, or any rule or regulation of the State Board, or of the State
Department of Revenue, relating to the regulation of the manufacture, sale and
transportation, or taxation, of alcoholic beverages or if such licensee shall
have violated or shall violate any act of Congress or any rule or regulation of
any federal board, agency or commission, or this chapter, now, heretofore or
hereafter in effect relating to the regulation of the manufacture, sale and
transportation or taxation of intoxicating liquors, or any rules or regulations
of the city heretofore in existence or authorized by the terms of KRS Chapters
241 through 244 to be created, irrespective of whether the licensee knew of or
permitted the violation or whether the violation was committed is disobedience
of his or her instructions.
   (B)   A license may be revoked for any of the reasons for which the City ABC
Administrator would have been required to refuse a license if the facts had
been known.
   (C)   In addition to the foregoing stated causes, any license may be revoked
or suspended for the following causes:
      (1)   Conviction of the licensee or the licensee’s agent, servant or
employee for selling any illegal alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises;
      (2)   Making any false material statements in an application or renewal
application for a license or supplemental license;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or any of the licensee’s agents,
servants or employees of:
         (a)   Two violations of the terms and provisions of KRS Chapters 241
through 244, or any act regulating the manufacture, sale and transportation of
alcoholic beverages within two consecutive years;
         (b)   Two misdemeanors directly or indirectly attributable to the use
of alcoholic beverages within two consecutive years; or
         (c)   Any felony.
      (4)   Failure or default of a licensee to pay an excise tax or any part
of the tax or any penalties imposed by or under the provisions of any statutes,
ordinances or Acts of Congress relative to taxation, or for a violation of any
related administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Revenue;
      (5)   Revocation of any state license provided in KRS 243.030 or 243.040,
or a permit granted under any Act of Congress relative to the regulation of the
manufacture, sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages;
      (6)   Setting up, conducting, operating or keeping, on the licensed
premises, any gambling game, device, machine, contrivance, lottery, gift
enterprise, handbook or facility for betting or transmitting bets on horse
races; or permitting to be set up, conducted, operated, kept or engaged in, on
the licensed premises, any gambling game, device, machine, contrivance,
lottery, gift enterprise, handbook or facility. This division (C)(6) shall not
apply to:
         (a)   The sale of lottery tickets sold under the provisions of KRS
Chapter 154A;
         (b)   The operation of a pari-mutuel system for betting, where
authorized by law;
         (c)   The conduct of charitable gaming by a charitable organization
licensed or permitted under KRS Chapter 238; or
         (d)   Special temporary raffles of alcoholic beverages under KRS
243.036.
      (7)   Conviction of the licensee, the licensee’s agents, servants or
employees for:
         (a)   The trafficking or possession upon the licensed premises of
controlled or illegal substances described in KRS Chapter 218A, including
synthetic drugs;
         (b)   Knowingly permitting the trafficking or possession by patrons
upon the licensed premises of controlled or illegal substances described in KRS
Chapter 218A, including synthetic drugs; or
         (c)   Knowingly receiving stolen property upon the licensed premises.
      (8)   Failure to comply with the terms of the City ABC Administrator.
   (D)   The proceedings for the revocation or suspension of license are as
follows.
      (1)   Upon the verified complaint of any person, or on the initiative of
any law enforcement officer, or of the City ABC Administrator, the City ABC
Administrator may institute proceedings to revoke or suspend any license
granted under this chapter. A license may be revoked or suspended only after
the licensee shall have been given written notice, by certified or registered
mail, of the proposed revocation, including notice of the reasons for such
proposed action. The licensee shall be given opportunity to be heard in
opposition to the proposed revocation or suspension. The notice of proposed
action shall advise the licensee of the date, time and place of the hearing.
Notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the licensee at the address shown in
the last application for a license or in the last statement supplemental to or
in amendment of the application, whether or not the mailing is receipted for or
claimed.
      (2)   The specific procedures to be followed in hearings on actions for
revocation or suspension shall provide constitutional due process rights to the
City ABC license holder.
      (3)   A decision of the City ABC Administrator revoking or suspending a
license may be appealed to Board as provided in KRS 241.200 and 243.550.
      (4)   Within three days after any order of revocation or suspension of a
license becomes final, notice of revocation shall be given to the licensee and
to the owner of the licensed premises. A notice mailed to the licensee and to
the owner of the licensed premises at the address shown in the last application
for a license or in the last statement supplemental to the application shall be
deemed sufficient compliance with this section. The licensee shall at once
surrender his or her license to the City ABC Administrator. If the revoked or
suspended license is not forthwith surrendered by the licensee, the Chief of
Police, at the request of the City ABC Administrator, shall immediately cause
one of his or her officers to take physical possession of the license and
return it to the City ABC Administrator.
      (5)   When a license has been revoked or suspended, the former licensee
may, with prior approval of the City ABC Administrator, dispose of and transfer
his or her stock of alcoholic beverages to an appropriate entity.
      (6)   An appeal from the decision of the City ABC Administrator revoking
or suspending a license shall be to the State Board pursuant to §
116.047. The timely filing of an appeal shall stay further proceedings for
revocation.
      (7)   If a license is revoked or suspended by an order of the City ABC
Administrator, and the decision is not appealed, the licensee shall suspend all
operations authorized under his or her license upon finality and effectiveness
of the order. Upon finality of any final order of the State Board sustaining or
ordering revocation or suspension on appeal, the licensee shall at once suspend
all operations authorized under the suspended or revoked license.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.047 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals from the orders of the City ABC Administrator may be taken to
the State ABC Board by filing a notice of appeal with the Board within 30 days
after the decision or order of the County ABC Administrator is mailed or
delivered by personal service. The notice of appeal shall specify the County
Administrator by name and shall identify the decision or order, or part of the
decision or order, being appealed. The notice shall contain a certificate that
a copy of the notice has been served on the City ABC Administrator and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the decision or order being appealed. Matters at issue
shall be heard by the Board as upon an original proceeding. Appeals from
decisions or orders of the County Administrator shall be governed by KRS
Chapter 13B.
   (B)   As provided by law no appealed City ABC Administrator order or
decision, or resulting State Board order, shall become effective or final until
all Board appeals, court appeals or appeal times shall have been exhausted.
When a Board order becomes final and effective, the City ABC Administrator,
shall enter such orders and take such action as required by the final order of
the Board.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.048 TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned either
as to licensee or location except with prior approval of the City ABC
Administrator and not then until a payment of $100 shall be made to the City
ABC Administrator.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.049 REVIEW OF LICENSE; BOOKS, RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Applicants to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter shall
provide periodic information demonstrating compliance with the conditions of
any license, such as, but not limited to, the continuing requirement that a
minimum percentage of the applicant’s business income is earned from the sale
of food. This documentation shall be provided on a schedule to be coordinated
with the applicant’s quarterly regulatory fee filings. The city shall provide
the form schedule to the licensee. The licensee’s acceptance of a license to
manufacture or traffic in alcoholic beverages shall constitute consent to the
filing of the quarterly report. In the case of caterer filing, the quarterly
report shall identity each catered event by type of event, date and address of
the event and shall provide a per event breakdown of sales and the ratio of
food sales to alcohol sales during the reporting period. This requirement for
filing of reports notwithstanding, the city may at any time come upon the
premises of any licensee and examine the books and records to determine whether
the licensee is in compliance with all parts of this chapter. In the event the
conditions of any license requirement are not met during any particular
quarter, the City ABC Administrator shall have discretion in determining
whether revocation is appropriate or whether the licensee may be allowed a
reasonable period of time to reach compliance. If a good faith effort is
demonstrated by the licensee, the City ABC Administrator may apply an
accounting period of at least one year in determining whether or not the food
sale percentage requirement has been met.
   (B)   Every licensee under this chapter shall keep and maintain, upon the
licensed premises, adequate books and records of all transactions involved in
the sale of alcoholic beverages in the same manner required by the rules and
regulations of the ABC Board. Such books and records shall be available at all
reasonable times for inspection by the City ABC Administrator and such city
employees who may assist the City ABC Administrator in his or her review.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.050 DORMANCY.
   (A)   It is necessary that a licensee actually conduct the business
authorized by such a license or else the license will be declared dormant and
become null and void after 90 days. Such is the intent of this section.
Realizing that a licensee, like other business, may have his or her business
interrupted by situations not under his or her control, various exceptions to
the dormancy rule have been included in this section.
   (B)   Any license under which no business is transacted during a period of
90 days shall be deemed inactive and, unless the conditions set forth in
division (C) below are proved to the satisfaction of the City ABC
Administrator, the license shall be surrendered to the City ABC Administrator.
If the license is not voluntarily surrendered, it shall be revoked by the City
ABC Administrator.
   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply to any licensee
who is unable to continue in business at the premises for which a license is
issued due to construction, an act of God, casualty, death, the acquisition of
the premises by any federal, state, city or other governmental agency under
power of eminent domain, whether acquisition is voluntary or involuntary, or
loss of lease through failure of landlord to renew existing lease. Prior to the
expiration of 90 days of inactivity, such licensee shall furnish to the City
ABC Administrator a verified statement setting forth the fact that the licensee
is unable to continue in business, for any of the specific reasons set forth
herein, and the City ABC Administrator may grant an extension of the dormancy
with the license continuing to remain in effect during the license period or
until same is transferred to another premises, notwithstanding the fact that no
business is transacted during said period; provided, however, that no such
license shall be considered valid unless business is conducted thereunder
within 12 months from the date of notice to the City ABC Administrator. Such
extension may not extend beyond the renewal date but may be for such times as
the City ABC Administrator deems appropriate in exercise of his or her sound
discretion.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.051 AUTHORIZATION TO ENFORCE CHAPTER.
   City police officers and the City ABC Administrator and his or her
investigator(s) are hereby authorized to enforce this chapter in full.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
CONDITIONS; LICENSED PREMISES
§ 116.065 HOURS OF SALE.
   A licensee for distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages shall be
permitted to sell distilled spirits, wine and/or malt beverages between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. The sale of malt
beverages, distilled spirits or wine may be sold on Sundays during the hours of
10:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. and during the hours the polls are open for any
regular, primary, school or special election.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.066 GAMBLING.
   No gambling or game of chance unless otherwise authorized by the state shall
be permitted in any form on such licensed premises. Dice, slot machines,
quarter pushers, prize redemption machines with programmable payouts, or any
device of chance is prohibited and shall not be kept on such premises.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.067 DISORDERLY PREMISES PROHIBITED; SECURITY.
   The licensee shall be responsible for keeping the premises orderly and must
maintain adequate security for the premises to ensure the safety, health and
welfare of the general public utilizing the licensed premises. Security
standards are further necessary to discourage unlawful activity in and around
the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.068 PRIZES, PREMIUMS, FREE SAMPLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prizes and premiums prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to
give away or offer to give away anything tangible of value as a premium or
prize, or for any other purpose in direct connection with the sale of malt
beverages unless permitted by KRS 244.500.
   (B)   Treating prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the licensee under this
chapter to give away any alcoholic beverage to a consumer in any quantity for
free or for less than paid or current wholesale cost, unless the licensee holds
a sampling license or its license type permits limited free samples (i.e.,
small farm winery, microbrewery, brewer’s), or a bona fide “close out” sale
approved by the State Administrator.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.069 INTOXICATED PERSONS; DRUNKENNESS.
   The licensee shall not sell, give or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any
person who appears to a reasonable person to be actually or apparently under
the influence of alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, other intoxicating
substances or any of these substances in combination, to the degree that the
person may endanger any person or property, or unreasonably annoy persons in
the vicinity.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.070 UNDERAGE SALES.
   The licensee shall not sell, give or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any
person who is under 21 years of age, or permit same.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.071 NOTICE TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
   Per state law, the licensee shall display at all times in a prominent place
a sign at least eight inches by 11 inches in 30-point or larger type font which
states that persons under the age of 21 are subject to a fine of up to $100 if
they:
   (A)   Enter licensed premises to buy, or have served to them, alcoholic
beverages;
   (B)   Possess, purchase or attempt to purchase, or get another to purchase
alcoholic beverages; and/or
   (C)   Misrepresent their age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.072 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   (A)   The licensee, before commencing any business for which a license has
been issued, shall post and display at all times in a conspicuous place in the
room or principal room where the business is carried on so that all persons
visiting the place may readily see the license. The licensee shall not at any
time post the license on premises other than the licensed premises or upon
premises where traffic in alcoholic beverages is being carried on by any person
other than the license, or knowingly deface, destroy or alter the license in
any respect.
   (B)   The licensee shall post in a prominent place easily seen by patrons a
printed sign at least eight inches by 11 inches with gender-neutral language
supplied by the State Cabinet for Health and Family Services, which shall warn
that drinking alcoholic beverages prior to conception or during pregnancy can
cause birth defects.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.073 LEGAL TRANSACTIONS FOR WHOLESALERS, DISTRIBUTERS AND RETAILERS.
   No wholesaler or distributor shall sell any alcoholic beverages to any
person in the city for any consideration except under cash terms of the
wholesaler or distributor at or before the time of delivery. A wholesaler is
also permitted to extend credit for 30 days to a retailer for the purchase of
distilled spirits and wine.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.074 EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS.
   No licensee shall knowingly employ in connection with his or her business
any person who:
   (A)   Has been convicted of any felony within the last two years unless
permitted by KRS 244.090(2);
   (B)   Has been twice convicted of any misdemeanor or offense directly or
indirectly attributable to the use of intoxicating liquors within the last two
years unless permitted by KRS 244.090(2);
   (C)   Is under the age of 20 years, who will be serving alcoholic beverages
or who will be having any contact whatsoever with the sale of alcohol as
defined under state statute, unless said person is exempt or permitted by KRS
244.090; or
   (D)   Within two years prior to the date of his or her employment has had
any city license under this chapter revoked for cause.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.075 LAVATORY FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   All retail beer and retail drink licenses shall be required to provide
indoor or outdoor lavatory facilities for their customers where such beverages
are consumed on the premises.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.076 NUDITY AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   No licensee shall offer or permit nudity, adult entertainment activities,
including nude or nearly nude dancing, adult motion picture, television, slide
or stage shows, cabarets or sexual entertainment centers on any licensed
premises. No licensee shall permit explicit sexual activity, whether actual or
simulated, upon any licensed premises. No licensee shall sponsor or permit wet
t-shirt or wet clothing contests, lingerie fashion shows, mud wrestling, Jell-
O wrestling or similar activities, nor shall a licensee allow dancing with
touching for compensation (including, but not limited to, wages, tips or
gratuities) or any other service, display or contest requiring physical contact
between patrons and/or patrons and employees on any licensed premises. No
licensee shall sponsor, offer or permit drinking contests, all-you-can-drink
specials or free drinks on any licensed premises in the city.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.077 MINORS.
   (A)   Except as specifically authorized under KRS Chapters 241 through 244,
no person under the age of 21 may possess alcoholic beverages or enter onto any
licensed premises for the purpose of acquiring alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   Except as permitted by KRS 244.085 and 804 KAR 5:070, no person under
the age of 21 may remain on any premises licensed for the package sale of
alcoholic beverages unless in the company of a parent or guardian. No person
under the age of 21 may enter any premises licensed for drink sales of
alcoholic beverages unless permitted by KRS 244.085(5) and 804 KAR 5:070. The
prohibition contained in this division (B) shall not apply to premises where
the usual and customary business of the establishment is a gas station,
convenience store, grocery store, drugstore and other business types listed in
KRS 244.085 and by the State Board in 804 KAR 5:070.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly permit, aid, assist, induce, cause or
otherwise encourage any minor to be in possession of, use or consume alcoholic
beverages. All licenses, as set out in this chapter, shall require proof of age
of all persons attempting to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages on the
licensee’s premises.
   (D)   No person being the owner or occupant or otherwise in possession or
control of any property located within the city shall knowingly allow any minor
to remain on such property while in possession of, using or consuming alcoholic
beverages.
   (E)   It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section if the
person charged, upon discovery of said minor individuals, manifests a proper
effort to enlist the aid of and cooperate with law enforcement personnel in
stopping the minor individuals’ possession, consumption or use of alcoholic
beverages.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.078 CONSUMPTION AT PACKAGE STORES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No licensee of a package store, whether trafficking in distilled
spirits, wine or malt beverages, shall permit consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises unless it also holds the appropriate drink license.
The licensee shall post a prominent notice on the premises stating that
consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises is prohibited.
   (B)   This restriction regarding on-premises consumption shall not prohibit
sampling as allowed for microbreweries and wineries under the provisions of KRS
Chapter 243, or where sampling is permitted for a retail distilled spirits and
wine licensee under the provisions of KRS 244.050, or beer tastings as
permitted in 804 KAR 11:030.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.079 MANDATORY RESPONSIBLE BEVERAGE SERVICE TRAINING.
   (A)   All persons employed in the selling and/or serving of alcoholic
beverages shall participate in and complete a responsible beverage serving
(“RBS”) program acceptable to the City ABC Administrator.
   (B)   All persons required to complete training under division (A) above
shall complete that training within 30 days of the date on which the person
first becomes subject to the training requirement. When a new business is
licensed to serve alcoholic beverages, all employees must be trained prior to
the opening of the business.
   (C)   Each licensee shall be responsible for compliance with the training
requirements and shall maintain for inspection by the City ABC Administrator a
record or file on each employee that shall contain the pertinent training
information. Each premises licensed hereunder must at all times when alcoholic
beverages are being served have at least one person currently certified in
responsible beverage service training on duty as described herein.
   (D)   All persons completing the training required by this section shall be
re-certified not less than once every three years thereafter.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.080 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   (A)   All signage shall be in compliance with any and all other existing
rules, regulations and ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to,
the Planning and Zoning Ordinance as currently enacted, and/or as may be
amended in the future.
   (B)   No flashing lights shall be used to illuminate the exterior of any
premises licensed under this chapter.
   (C)   Any advertising by any licensee under this chapter shall be in
compliance with KRS 244.130 and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (D)   No licensee shall publish or display advertising that is false or
misleading, nor shall any licensee publish or display advertising that implies
that consumption of alcoholic beverages is fashionable or the accepted course
of behavior, or advertising that contains any statement, picture or
illustration implying that the consumption of alcoholic beverages enhances
athletic prowess, whether or not any known athlete is depicted or referred to,
nor shall any licensee publish or display advertising that encourages
intoxication by referring to the intoxicating effects of alcohol (or the use of
terms such as “high test,” “high proof’ or “extra strong”) or depicting
activities that tend to encourage excessive consumption.
   (E)   No licensee shall erect or allow to be erected any banner that
displays any particular brand of alcoholic beverage on the outside of the
building or on the property.
   (F)   Signage which refers directly or indirectly to alcoholic beverages
will be limited to one sign not over two square feet that must be displayed
from the inside of the window or interior of the business. No additional signs,
banners, posters or other type of displaying advertising which refers either
directly or indirectly to alcoholic beverages shall be displayed on, nor shall
it be visible from the exterior of any premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages, except that reference to such may be included in the name
of the business. This restriction shall not prevent any licensee from placing
in the windows of the licensed premises business cards not larger than two and
one-half inches in size, setting forth the price at which the licensee offers
alcoholic beverages for sale.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to distribute
or cause to be distributed any handbills, circulars or cards as a medium of
advertising alcoholic beverages.
   (H)   No licensee shall advertise alcoholic beverages on any municipally
owned property or at any municipally sponsored event.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024) Penalty, see § 
116.99
§ 116.081 SIDEWALK CAFÉ PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Licensees in the downtown business district/area may request a
permit to use sidewalk as an adjunct to the primary and adjacent licensed
premises to serve food and alcoholic beverages there. In the case of permitted
sidewalk cafés, they shall be deemed part of the licensed premises.
      (2)   Any licensee/restaurant that is licensed under this chapter and the
provisions of the state ABC laws, may, upon application to the local ABC
Administrator, ask permission to expand the operation of the business/
restaurant onto a part, and only that part, of the public sidewalk which
immediately adjoins the licensed premises (hereinafter referred to as “sidewalk
café”). Licensees who do not serve food shall not be eligible to apply for a
sidewalk café permit.
    (B)   The issuance of a permit shall be subject to the following conditions
and restrictions; provided, however, that the ABC Administrator may without
adverse hearing procedures impose additional reasonable restrictions or
withdraw approval upon the operation of any sidewalk café where necessary in
the judgment of said Administrator to protect the public health, safety or
welfare or to prevent a nuisance from developing or continuing.
      (1)   No sidewalk café shall be permitted in any portion of the public
sidewalk where normal pedestrian traffic flow is obstructed. A minimum
clearance width of 36 inches must be maintained on the public sidewalk at all
times. The sidewalk café shall not be permitted in any manner to obstruct the
entrance/exit to the restaurant.
      (2)   No tables, chairs or any other furnishings, except plant tubs,
shall be placed in the area used for the sidewalk café during any period when
the sidewalk café is not open and being operated. They shall be removed at the
end of each business day at the hour specified in the permit. Umbrellas,
tables, chairs and other portable appurtenances shall be confined to the area
shown on the approved permit. While such café is in operation, all tables and
chairs shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition.
      (3)   The use of a portion of the public sidewalk as a sidewalk café
shall not be an exclusive use. All public improvements, including, but not
limited to, trees, light poles, traffic signals, pull boxes or manholes, or any
public-initiated maintenance procedures, shall take precedence over said use of
the public sidewalk at all times.
      (4)   The licensee shall, in addition to all other requirements of law,
take reasonable steps to ensure that alcoholic beverages are consumed only by
patrons of the establishment who are of age, and not by passers-by or persons
who are not of age or who are obviously or apparently intoxicated.
      (5)   No disposable cups or drinking vessels may be used and the licensee
shall not permit any alcoholic beverages to be taken off premises by patrons,
customers or guests.
      (6)   No amplified sound shall be used within a sidewalk café. At no time
shall any music originating from any part of the premises create a nuisance.
      (7)   Dancing shall not be permitted or allowed in the sidewalk café.
      (8)   The licensee must at all times comply with all federal, state and
local laws regarding the sale, service and consumption of alcohol and the
operation of the premises.
      (9)   The permit for sidewalk café may not be assigned or transferred.
   (C)   No sidewalk café permit shall be effective unless the licensee has
filed with the City ABC Administrator evidence of insurance, insuring the
licensee against liability imposed by law arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or operation of such sidewalk café, in an amount to be established
by the City Attorney and the City Safety Coordinator. The city shall be named
an additional insured in the policy required. Such insurance policy shall
further provide expressly that it may not be canceled except upon ten days’
written notice (or more) filed with the ABC Administrator and the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 116.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to any criminal prosecution instituted in county
district court against an alleged violator, the City ABC Administrator may
assess civil fines in lieu of suspension as authorized in KRS 243.480,
including the per diem assessments for ongoing violations. Payment of all fines
shall be remitted to the City ABC Administrator, who shall then transmit the
fines to the City Clerk for deposit in the appropriate designated account.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter, for which no other penalty is hereby provided, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and subject to prosecution in the county court system, as
follows: for the first offense, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200
nor more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. The
penalties provided for in this division (B) shall be in addition to the
revocation or suspension of the offender’s license. If the offender is a
corporation, LLC, joint stock company, association or other business
organization or a fiduciary, the principal officer or officers responsible for
the violation may be imprisoned.
   (C)   Violation of §§
116.065 through
116.076 shall subject the licensee to penalties provided in division (A) above
and shall be cause for revocation or suspension of city licenses.
(Ord. 2024-019, passed 11-12-2024)
CHAPTER 117: CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Section
   
117.01   FCC rate regulations
   
117.02   Rate filing submission
   
117.03   Notice of filing
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 FCC RATE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the
basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television
system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent
provisions in the franchise.
   (B)   In connection with such regulations, the city will ensure a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
   (C)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf
of the city and file with the FCC such certification form or other instruments
as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to
enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges.
(Ord. 94-001, passed 2-14-1994)
§ 117.02 RATE FILING SUBMISSION.
   An operator that is notified that its basic service and equipment rates are
subject to regulation must file a submission (“the rate filing”) within 30 days
of the notification, justifying its then-existing basic service and equipment
rates. All rates for all customer classifications must be justified. Once an
operator has been so notified by the city that its rates for basic service or
equipment are subject to regulation, it may not thereafter increase its rates
for basic service or equipment without the prior approval of the city. This
requirement applies in all cases, including with respect to increases in rates
announced prior to the date the operator was notified its rates were subject to
regulation, where the increases were not implemented prior to the date of
notice. An operator must submit a rate filing to justify any increase in basic
service or equipment rates or any new basic services or equipment rates
(collectively referred to herein as “rate increases”). An increase occurs when
there is an increase in rates or a decrease in program or customer services.
Rate filings proposing and supporting rate increases must be filed for review
at least 30 days in advance of the proposed effective date of the increase.
This requirement does not alter or eliminate any other notice requirement. To
facilitate providing notice of filings to the public, an operator shall give
the Mayor of the city notice by facsimile machine, or hand delivery, of its
intent to make a filing at least three days before the filing is made. Every
rate filing must be submitted to the Mayor. A rate filing shall be considered
filed for review on the date the rate filing and all required copies are
received by the Mayor. Seven copies of each rate filing (including all
supporting materials) must be submitted. Subject to any FCC regulations
governing the burden of proof, a rate filing submitted by an operator must show
that the rates the operator proposes to charge for basic service and equipment
are reasonable. If the operator seeks to support a rate based upon a cost of
service, the city will establish a rate that provides the operator an
opportunity to recover the reasonable costs associated with providing basic
cable service, including a reasonable profit. An expense or investment is not
presumed reasonable merely because the operator has incurred or made it. An
operator is not entitled to recover monopoly rents in any form. In addition to
the information the city requires the operator to provide, and unless the city
grants a waiver of this provision, an operator who seeks to justify all or any
part of its rates based upon its cost of service must submit a complete cost of
service analysis that shows all expenses it incurs and all revenues derived
from the system, directly or indirectly, by the operator or any person that
constitutes a cable operator of the system within the meeting of 47 U.S.C. §
522(5).
(Ord. 94-001, passed 2-14-1994)
§ 117.03 NOTICE OF FILING.
   (A)   The Mayor shall promptly publish a notice of a filing and that, except
for those parts which may be withheld as confidential, it will be available for
public review. The notice shall state that interested parties may comment on
the filing and shall provide interested parties seven days to submit written
comments on the filing to the Mayor. The Mayor shall submit the comments
received and its recommendations for action to the City Council no later than
20 days after the filing and shall make those recommendations available for
public inspection. The operator may submit a response to public comments or the
Mayor’s recommendations, but must do so no later than three business days after
the Mayor notifies the operator that comments and recommendations have been
submitted to the City Council. The response shall be filed with the Mayor, and,
if submitted in a timely fashion, the Mayor shall forward a copy to the City
Council. Within 30 days of the date of the filing, the City Council shall issue
a written order (“initial rate order”), which may be in any lawful form,
approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the proposed rate in
whole or in part; or tolling the proposed rate in whole or part. If the Council
tolls the rate in whole or in part, its written order shall explain that it
requires additional time to review the rate filing and state that the operator
may cure any deficiency in its filing by submitting a supplementary filing
within 20 days.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, and with respect to existing rates,
TOLLING means the rates may remain in effect, subject to refunds; with respect
to rate changes, TOLLING means the portion of the rate change that is tolled
may not go into effect.
(Ord. 94-001, passed 2-14-1994)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   The failure of the operator to comply in good faith with this chapter will
constitute a misdemeanor and subject the operator to a fine of $500 and/or 12
months imprisonment and a civil penalty equal to cost or damages which may be
proven by the city for violating this provision.
(Ord. 94-001, passed 2-14-1994)
CHAPTER 118: CANNABIS BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Cannabis businesses authorized
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABINET. The Cabinet for Health and Family Services.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. An entity licensed under this chapter as a cultivator,
dispensary, processor, producer or safety compliance facility.
   CULTIVATOR. An entity licensed as such under KRS 218B.080, 218B.085 and
218B.090.
   DISPENSARY. An entity licensed as such under KRS 218B.080, 218B.085 and
218B.090.
   MEDICINAL CANNABIS.
      (1)   Marijuana as defined in KRS 218A.010 when cultivated, harvested,
processed, produced, transported, dispensed, distributed, sold, possessed or
used in accordance with this chapter;
      (2)   Includes MEDICINAL CANNABIS products and raw plant material; and
      (3)   Does not include industrial hemp or industrial hemp products as
defined in KRS 260.850;.
   PROCESSOR. An entity licensed as such under KRS 218B.080, 218B.085 and
218B.090.
   PRODUCER. An entity licensed as such under KRS 218B.080, 218B.085 and
218B.090.
   SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY. An entity licensed as such under KRS 218B.080,
218B.085 and 218B.090.
(Ord. 2024-018, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 118.02 CANNABIS BUSINESSES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   All cannabis businesses are hereby authorized to operate in the city
limits.
   (B)   CANNABIS BUSINESS means any entity licensed under KRS Chapter 218B as
a cultivator, dispensary, processor, producer or safety compliance facility.
(Ord. 2024-018, passed 10-8-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Careless conduct in smoking and use of matches or lighters
   
130.02   Dumping trash and the like prohibited
   
130.03   Weeds and trash
   
130.04   Public streets to be kept clean
   
130.05   Weapons and firearms
   
130.06   Disturbing the peace; noise
   
130.07   Curfew for minors
   
130.08   Synthetic drugs; regulations, controls and restrictions
   
130.09   Tobacco-free zones
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 CARELESS CONDUCT IN SMOKING AND USE OF MATCHES OR LIGHTERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully, wantonly or carelessly to use
matches or smoking material or dispose of lighted matches, cigarettes or cigars
or live embers of any smoking material so as to result in setting fire to any
building or part of building, furnishings or fixtures, covers, mattresses or
rugs where the public sleeps or boards such as hotels, rooming houses and other
public sleeping accommodations.
(Prior Code, § 1010.1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DUMPING TRASH AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump any
garbage, trash, cans, bottles or any other trash, debris or refuse on their
premises or on the streets, alleys or other public places of the city. All such
garbage, trash, cans, bottles or other debris or refuse shall be placed in
metal or wood containers.
(Prior Code, § 1010.2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 WEEDS AND TRASH.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall permit trash, tin
cans, bottles, old cars and/or trucks, old tires, weeds, grass or any other
debris to accumulate or remain upon his, her or their property, or upon any
property which said person, firm, partnership or corporation occupies as a
tenant.
   (B)   No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall permit any old or
unused or obsolete building to remain on their premises.
   (C)   The city may, after due notice to the owner or occupant of any
premises violating this section, cause said trash, tin cans, bottles, old cars
and/or trucks, old tires, weeds, grass or other debris to be removed, or any
unused or obsolete building to be removed, and the owner or occupant of said
premises shall pay to the city the costs of said removal, same being a civil
penalty.
(Prior Code, § 1010.3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 PUBLIC STREETS TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to litter, toss or
throw debris of any nature or description onto the streets, alleys, branches,
drainage ditches or other public places of the city or to sweep or move dirt
and debris from the sidewalks onto any roadway or other city property.
(Prior Code, § 1010.4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 WEAPONS AND FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except an officer of the law to fire or
discharge any gun, pistol or firearms, including .22 rifles and BB guns, within
the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 1020.1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 DISTURBING THE PEACE; NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation to make
or permit to be made noise within the city which disturbs or tends to disturb
the peace and dignity of the residents of the city.
   (B)   The following shall be deemed to be unreasonable and unnecessary
noises in violation of division (A) above:
      (1)   Any sound emanating from the use or operation of any radio,
phonograph, tape player, compact disc player or other electronic device in a
motor vehicle or carried on foot which produces a sound that is audible 25 feet
from the point of origin if traveling on a public right-of-way, or which sound
is audible upon property belonging to another shall be prima facie evidence of
a violation of this section; or
      (2)   Any sound emanating from the operation of any machine, radio,
phonograph, tape player, compact disc player or other electronic equipment or
device on one’s own property that is plainly audible beyond the property line
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to any person who is participating in a
school band or in any community event such as a parade or festival which has
received permission from the city to perform as part of that parade or
festival. This section shall not apply to the operation of emergency vehicles
or bells and music generated by churches.
   (D)   No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any motor
vehicle which is not equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation
and properly maintained to prevent any unnecessary noise, and no such muffler
or exhaust system shall be modified or used with a cut-off, by-pass or similar
device.
(Ord. 91-002, passed 3-13-1991) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Regulation and responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient
control to allow such minor to be on or remain in or upon any business
establishment, public assembly, building, place, street or highway within the
city during the curfew, for minors under the age of 18 years, which shall be in
effect during the following periods:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
      (2)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
      (3)   Between 11:30 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
   (B)   Exceptions. In the following exceptional cases, a minor in or upon any
business establishment, public assembly, building, place, street or highway
within the city during the hours set out in division (A) above shall not be
considered in violation of the curfew established by this section:
      (1)   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;
      (2)   When the minor is accompanied by an adult pre-authorized by the
minor’s parent or guardian;
      (3)   When a reasonable necessity or urgency would require an exception
to this curfew period by the minor and only during the time of such necessity
or urgency;
      (4)   When the minor is returning to his or her home by a direct route
from and within one hour of the termination of a school activity, or any
activity of a religious or voluntary association;
      (5)   When engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of the
state authorize a person under 18 years of age to perform;
      (6)   When the minor is a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle passing
through the city, by direct route, from one location to another either within
or out of the city; and
      (7)   Anyone under the age of 18 who is legally emancipated.
   (C)   Detaining minor.
      (1)   Each member of the Police Department while on duty is hereby
authorized to detain any minor whose parent or guardian is reasonably believed
to be in violation of this section, for the purpose of attaining the minor’s
name, age, address and the name and address of the minor’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   If the officer has reasonable cause to believe that a curfew
violation has occurred, the officer may issue a citation to the minor’s parent
or guardian and either take the minor home or direct the minor to proceed
immediately to his or her home.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALLOW. Either permit or neglect to refrain or prevent. It requires actual
or constructive knowledge on the part of the parent or guardian, that is, the
parent or guardian must actually know about the minor violating this section,
or the circumstances must be such that a reasonably prudent parent or guardian
should have known the minor was contributing to a violation of this section.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or
adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands “in loco parentis”
or as a person to whom legal custody has been granted by order of a court.
      REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon or in any
public assembly, building, place, street or highway.
(Ord. 97-006, passed 5-12-1997) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08 SYNTHETIC DRUGS; REGULATIONS, CONTROLS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADMINISTER. The direct application of a synthetic drug, as defined
herein, whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion or any other means, to the
body of a patient or research subject by:
         (a)   A practitioner or the practitioner’s authorized agent in the
practitioner’s presence; or
         (b)   The patient or research subject at the direction and in the
presence of the practitioner.
      AGENT. An authorized person who acts on behalf of or at the direction of
a manufacturer, distributor or dispenser. AGENT does not include a common or
contract carrier, public warehouse worker or employee of the carrier or
warehouse worker.
      DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer from
one person to another of a synthetic drug, as defined herein, with or without
consideration, and whether or not there is an agency relationship.
      DISPENSE. To deliver a synthetic drug, as defined herein, to an ultimate
user or research subject by or pursuant to the lawful order of a practitioner,
including the prescribing, administering, packaging, labeling or compounding
necessary to prepare the substance for that delivery.
      DISTRIBUTE. To deliver other than by administering or dispensing a
synthetic drug, as defined herein.
      MANUFACTURE. The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of any synthetic drug, as defined herein, either
directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis and includes any packaging or
repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container, except
that the term shall not include the preparation, compounding, packaging or
labeling of any synthetic drug, as defined herein, by:
         (a)   A practitioner as an incident to administering or dispensing any
synthetic drug, as defined herein, in the course of professional practice; and
         (b)   A practitioner or an authorized agent under the practitioner’s
supervision, for the purpose of, or as an incident to, research, teaching or
chemical analysis and not for sale.
      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, estate,
association, organization, business or any other legal entity.
      POSSESS or POSSESSION. Either actual possession or constructive
possession. POSSESSION may be sole or joint and may be inferred from all
relevant facts surrounding the circumstances.
         (a)   ACTUAL POSSESSION. The exercise of direct physical control or
dominion over an object.
         (b)   CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION. The power and intent to exercise
control over an object although not in actual physical possession of an object.
      PRACTITIONER.
         (a)   A physician, dentist, optometrist, veterinarian, pharmacist,
scientific investigator or other person who is licensed, registered or
otherwise lawfully permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with
respect to, or to administer a synthetic drug, as defined herein, in the course
of professional practice or research in the state; or
         (b)   A pharmacy, hospital or other institution licensed, registered
or otherwise lawfully permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with
respect to, or to administer a synthetic drug, as defined herein, in the course
of professional practice or research in the state.
      PRODUCTION. The planting, cultivating, tending, growing or harvesting of
a synthetic drug, as defined in this section.
      SELL or SALE. A bargained-for or agreed upon offer and acceptance and an
actual or constructive transfer or delivery of a synthetic drug as defined
herein.
      SYNTHETIC DRUG.
         (a)   Any substance, however denominated, and no matter the common
street, brand or trade name of such substance, containing one or more of the
following chemicals:
            1.   Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant
presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not,
the seeds thereof; any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or extracts;
            2.   (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-
2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (some trade or other names
being: HU-210);
            3.   1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (some trade or other names
being: JWH-018);
            4.   1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (some trade or other names
being: JWH-073);
            5.   1-[3-(Trifluoro-methyl)-phenyl] piperazine (some trade or
other names being TFMPP);
            6.   3, 4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) (some trade or other
names being MDPK);
            7.   4-Methylmethcathinone (Mephedrone);
            8.   3, 4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (Methylone);
            9.   3-Methoxymethcathinone;
            10.   4-Methoxymethcathinone;
            11.   3-Fluoromethcathinone; and
            12.   4-Fluoromethcathinone.
         (b)   Any other substance which mimics the effects of any controlled
substance (including, but not limited to, any opiates, opium derivatives,
hallucinogenic substances, methamphetamine, MDMA, cocaine, PCP, marijuana,
cannabis, cannabinoids, cannabicyclohexanol and tetrahydrocannabinoids),
including, but not limited to, “bath salts,” “plant food,” “incense” or “insect
repellant,” but excluding legitimate bath salts containing as the main
ingredient the chemicals sodium chloride (sea salt) and/or magnesium sulfate
(Epsom salt) or legitimate plant foods or insect repellant not intended for
human consumption, or legitimate incense used as an odor elimination product.
         (c)   Any similar substances to the above which when inhaled, or
otherwise ingested, may produce intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness,
paralysis, irrational behavior or in any manner changes, distorts or disturbs
the auditory, visual or mental process, and the product or substance has no
other apparent legitimate purpose for consumers.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, sell, deliver,
distribute, transport, transfer, trade, barter, exchange or purchase any
synthetic drug, as defined herein, or to attempt to use, possess, sale,
deliver, distribute, transport, transfer, trade, barter, exchange or purchase
any synthetic drug as defined herein, within the city limits.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly display for sale
any synthetic drug, as defined herein, within the city limits.
   (C)   Exception. An act otherwise prohibited and unlawful under this section
shall not be unlawful if done by or under the direction of a practitioner, as
defined herein, provided such act is otherwise permitted by general law, or to
otherwise prohibit substances regulated as controlled substances by the United
States Food and Drug Administration or the Drug Enforcement Administration, and
is not intended to and shall not be construed to supersede any other federal or
state law pertaining to synthetic drugs now or hereafter in effect, but to
supplement any such laws in so far as lawfully permitted.
(Ord. 2012-007, passed 10-9-2012) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 TOBACCO-FREE ZONES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product
intended for the inhalation in or through the mouth in any manner or in any
form of the smoke or other vapor produced by same. SMOKING also includes the
use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor in any manner or form or the use of
any other device intended for the inhalation into or through the mouth of such
vapor, or tobacco, or other plant product smoked.
      TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Includes tobacco that is used for chewing and is
typically tobacco product that is placed in the mouth, chewed and spit.
   (B)   Prohibition of the use of tobacco products at Idle Hour Park. Smoking
is prohibited on the city-owned property that is known as Idle Hour Park. This
includes all park property, but is not limited to all playground areas, ball
park areas, including ballfields and spectator areas, restrooms, concession
areas, indoors or outdoors, picnic areas, walking tract areas and all grounds
owned and operated by the city at the address of 1075 Highway 555, known as
Idle Hour Park.
   (C)   Posting of signage. Tobacco-Free Zone signs will be posted in
conspicuous areas at Idle Hour Park to advise all visitors and spectators that
tobacco products and their use is strictly prohibited on all
grounds of Idle Hour Park.
   (D)   Enforcement. The city, under the direction of the City Police
Department, is charged with enforcement, under the direction of the Park
Director.
(Ord. 2017-006, passed 6-20-2017) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
130.01 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1 nor
more than $100 or by imprisonment of not less than ten days nor more than 30
days or both so fined and imprisoned.
(Prior Code, § 1010.1)
   (C)   Any person who violates §
130.02 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $10, for each offense.
Each day shall be considered as a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 1010.2)
   (D)   As a criminal penalty, any firm, person partnership or corporation who
violates §
130.03 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $20, and each day shall be
considered as a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1010.3)
   (E)   Any person who violates §
130.04 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 1010.4)
   (F)   Any person who violates §
130.05 shall be fined not less than $1 nor more than $10, and said gun, pistol
or firearms, including .22 rifles or BB guns, shall be ordered confiscated by
the court.
(Prior Code, § 1020.1)
   (G)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
130.06 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense.
   (H)   Any parent or guardian violating the provisions of §
130.07 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500.
A violation of §
130.07 is a civil offense.
   (I)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
130.08 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be subject to
imprisonment and/or fines as provided in the state statutes for a Class A
misdemeanor.
   (J)   Persons who violate §
130.09 are subject to a fine not exceeding $50 per offense. Persons who refuse
to extinguish their tobacco use when asked may be required to leave the
premises and shall be subject to prosecution for trespass if they do not leave
when asked. Each day on which a violation exists is considered a separate and
distinct violation.
(Ord. 91-002, passed 3-13-1991; Ord. 97-006, passed 5-12-1997; Ord. 2012-007,
passed 10-9-2012; Ord. 2017-006, passed 6-20-2017)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   ADDRESSING PLAN
      
152.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
153.   TREES
      
154.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
155.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
156.   ZONING
      
157.   SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   State Building Code
   
150.02   City Building Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.03   Building inspection program
   
150.04   Permits and fees
§ 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(1), it is required that all buildings
constructed in the city shall be built in compliance with the Uniform State
Building Code as adopted by the Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction.
   (B)   KRS 198B.060(18) authorizes each local government to establish a
schedule of fees which are designed to cover the cost of the service performed
but not to exceed it.
   (C)   (1)   The State Building Code, promulgated in 815 KAR 7:120, and the
State Residential Code, promulgated in 815 KAR 7:125 by the State Board of
Housing, Buildings and Construction, are hereby adopted in full as an ordinance
of the city as if set out at length herein.
      (2)   A copy of said State Building Code is on file with the city, and
the city shall at all times keep a copy of said Building Code for reference.
(Ord. 2007-003, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 150.02 CITY BUILDING CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Building Code Enforcement Officer shall be designated as the
local enforcement agent for said State Building Code. All building code
inspections shall be performed by persons certified by the State Department of
Housing, Buildings and Construction.
   (B)   All electrical inspections shall be performed by a certified
electrical inspector specifically approved by this jurisdiction or by the
county government.
(Ord. 2007-003, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 150.03 BUILDING INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   Pursuant to KRS 198B.060(8), a building inspection program is hereby
established in the city for application to all buildings, excluding single-
family dwellings, fences, residential storage or utility occupancies, as
provided in the adopted codes.
(Ord. 2007-003, passed 3-13-2007)
§ 150.04 PERMITS AND FEES.
   The fees for permits and inspections shall be as provided for by ordinance.
(Ord. 2007-003, passed 3-13-2007)
CHAPTER 151: ADDRESSING PLAN
Section
   
151.01   New structures and mobile homes
   
151.02   Posting of designated numbers of existing buildings
   
151.03   Refusal to comply
   
151.04   Application
§ 151.01 NEW STRUCTURES AND MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   All persons, firms, corporations and other legal entities constructing
new structures or locating or relocating mobile homes in the city shall, from
and after the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, obtain an
addressing form, duly issued by the addressing authority.
   (B)   Applicants shall apply for the address with the City Police
Department, 911 dispatch division.
   (C)   Immediately upon the filing of the addressing form, the City Police
Department, 911 dispatch division, shall assign a number and address to the
structure.
(Ord. 2006-012, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 151.02 POSTING OF DESIGNATED NUMBERS OF EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house, building, mobile
home or other structure to which a number has been assigned:
   (A)   Shall, within 30 days after the receipt of such number, affix the
number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place;
   (B)   Shall, within 30 days, remove any different number which might be
mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to said structure by the
issuing authority;
   (C)   Shall, for each principal building or structure, display the number
assigned to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case the
principal building or structure is occupied by more than one business or family
dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a separate number;
   (D)   Shall post numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal
building, or each front entrance to such building, in a manner as to be legible
and distinguishable from the street or road on which the property is located,
with numbers applied, of not less than two inches in height;
   (E)   Mailboxes shall be marked with the house numbers; and
   (F)   If the structure is not visible from the street or road on which it is
located, and no mailbox is beside the driveway leading to the structure, a sign
or number post shall be erected to display the number which may be displayed
either vertically from the top down or horizontally.
(Ord. 2006-012, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 151.03 REFUSAL TO COMPLY.
   In the event that the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or
building refuses to comply with the terms of this chapter by failing to affix
the number assigned within 30 days after notification, or by failing within
said period of 30 days to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or
house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned
thereto, then the owner, occupant or person in charge he or she shall be
punished by paying a fine of not less than $10 for every day that the situation
is not rectified.
(Ord. 2006-012, passed 12-11-2006)
§ 151.04 APPLICATION.
   This chapter applies to all structures in the city.
(Ord. 2006-012, passed 12-11-2006)
CHAPTER 152: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
152.01   Opening permit required
   
152.02   Application and penalty bond
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person, utility or business entity that intends to disturb the
surface of any street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the city limits for any
purpose shall, prior to said opening or disturbance, apply to the office of the
City Clerk for a permit authorizing the street or sidewalk disturbance or
opening.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, DISTURBANCE shall mean any disruption
of the sidewalk, street surface, right-of-way or curbing, including, but not
limited to, any excavation, digging, paintings or markings.
(Ord. 2013-003, passed 5-14-2013)
§ 152.02 APPLICATION AND PENALTY BOND.
   (A)   The application for a street or sidewalk opening or disturbance permit
shall be made upon a form supplied by the City Clerk’s office and shall
designate the location of the opening or disturbance, the purpose for the
opening or disturbance and the date and manner that the opening or disturbance
will be restored or completed. Orders for BUD (referred to as Before-U-Dig and
KY 811) regarding markings for bona fide utilities are not required to receive
such a permit for painting and markings but are required to use temporary/
washable paints.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant shall submit a penalty
bond in the amount of $1,500. The penalty bond shall be returned upon
inspection of the street, sidewalk or right-of-way and determination that it
was restored to its original grade, surface quality or condition. Additionally,
a penalty bond in the amount of $5,000 may be submitted on an annual basis for
a utility or business entity that has multiple disturbances to complete in a
calendar year, only with the understanding that an application still must be
submitted for each individual opening for recording and inspection purposes.
The amount of any penalty bond may be increased or decreased at the discretion
of the Public Works Director.
   (C)   This chapter shall establish a revised application for any person,
utility or business entity that intends to disturb surfaces of the street,
sidewalk or right-of-way within city limits and shall establish specifications
for any person, utility or business entity that intends to disturb surface of
the street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the city limits. These documents
can be obtained at the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2013-003, passed 5-14-2013; Ord. 2024-002, passed 2-13-2024)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter occurs whenever anybody, by either act or
omission, conspires causes, permits, encourages, aids, assists, allows or
engages in any of the acts, actions, behavior, condition and occurrences
prohibited by this chapter; and each and every separate non-continuing
occurrence thereof, and each and every day of each continuing occurrence
thereof is a separate violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Each violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor for which
everybody convicted thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction shall be
sentenced to pay a criminal fine not to exceed the maximum amount of $250 as
set forth in KRS 534.040(2)(b) or a term of imprisonment not to exceed the
maximum period of 90 days as set forth in KRS 532.090(2), or both. For a
corporation, the fine shall be fixed by KRS 534.050(c) and not exceed $5,000
per offense.
(Ord. 2013-003, passed 5-14-2013)
CHAPTER 153: TREES
Section
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   City Tree Board
   
153.03   Street tree species to be planted
   
153.04   Spacing
   
153.05   Distance from curbs, sidewalks and power lines
   
153.06   Distance from street corners and fireplugs
   
153.07   Public tree care
   
153.08   Tree topping
   
153.09   Pruning, corner clearance
   
153.10   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property
   
153.11   Interference with Tree Board
   
153.12   Arborists license and bond
   
153.13   Review by City Council
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access, such as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.02 CITY TREE BOARD.
   (A)   Creation and establishment of a City Tree Board. There is hereby
created and established a city Tree Board for the city, which shall consist of
five members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the
Mayor shall be three years, except that the term of two of the members
appointed to the first Board shall be for only one year, and the term of two
members of the first Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy
shall occur during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be
appointed for the expired portion of the term.
    (C)   Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
   (D)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel, develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of
trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan
will be presented annually to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city.
      (2)   The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work.
   (E)   Operation. The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its findings. A majority of the members
shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.03 STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.
   The Tree Board will formulate an official street tree species list for the
city. The list of allowable species other than those included in this list may
be planted as street trees without written permission of the City Tree Board.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.04 SPACING.
   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species
classes referred to in §
153.03, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following except
in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect:
   (A)   Small trees, 30 feet;
   (B)   Medium trees, 40 feet; and
   (C)   Large trees, 50 feet.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.05 DISTANCE FROM CURBS, SIDEWALKS AND POWER LINES.
   (A)   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in §
153.03, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following:
      (1)   Small trees, two feet;
      (2)   Medium trees, three feet; and
      (3)   Large trees, four feet.
   (B)   Only small trees can be planted within 15 feet of power lines.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.06 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
   No street trees shall be planted closer than 20 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street
tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.07 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The City
Tree Board may remove or causes or order to be removed, any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other
pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners; provided, that the selection and location of said trees is in
accordance with §§
153.03 through
153.06 and this section.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.08 TREE TOPPING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree or public property.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, TOPPING is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the
tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure
the tree.
   (C)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempt from this chapter at the determination of the City
Tree Board.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.09 PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the city shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view
of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight
feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all
dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device
or sign.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.10 DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city.
   (B)   The City Tree Board will notify in writing the owners at their own
expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice.
   (C)   In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
city shall have the authority to remove such trees and to recover such amount
from the owner(s).
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.11 INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
City Tree Board or any of its agents or servants while engaging in and about
the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any
street tree, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this
chapter.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.12 ARBORISTS LICENSE AND BOND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or
occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the
city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall
be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be
required of any public service company of city employee doing such work in the
pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued,
each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance
in the minimum amounts of $25,000 for bodily injury and $10,000 property
damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.13 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the City Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the City Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the matter and
make the final decision.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilt, subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 92-011, passed - -)
CHAPTER 154: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Interpretation
   
154.03   Definitions
   
154.04   Intent, compatibility with other regulations
Design Criteria; Performance Standards
   
154.15   Stormwater management plan
   
154.16   Design criteria
   
154.17   Performance standards
Bonds, Maintenance, Assurances; Fees
   
154.30   Performance bonds and other assurances
   
154.31   Maintenance agreement
   
154.32   Fees and security
   
154.33   Schedule of fees
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.45   Compliance
   
154.46   Variances
   
154.47   Official maps and profiles
   
154.48   Inspections
   
154.49   Certification
   
154.50   Enforcement procedure
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce or eliminate the hazards to public
health and safety caused by excessive stormwater runoff, reduce economic losses
to individuals and the community at large and to protect, conserve and promote
the orderly development of land and water resources. The provisions of this
section further supplement sections regulating:
   (A)   The subdivision, layout and improvement of lands located within the
corporate limits of the city;
   (B)   The excavation, filling and grading of lots and other parcels or
areas;
   (C)   The construction of buildings and the drainage of the sites on which
these structures are located, to include parking and other paved areas; and
   (D)   The design, construction and maintenance of stormwater drainage
facilities and systems.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.02 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this section, the provisions
expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes or exercised by home
rule units.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANKFULL ELEVATION. The water level or stage at which the stream, river or
lake is at the top of its banks and any further rise would result in water
moving into the floodplain.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). A schedule of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices which are
proven to be effective in preventing or reducing runoff, erosion and
sedimentation.
   BUFFER ZONE. The area defined from the bankfull elevation extending toward a
construction activity that shall be protected from disturbance.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any structure which is designed to collect and store
surface water for subsequent gradual discharge.
   DRAINAGE FACILITY. Any component of the drainage system.
   EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of stormwater which exceeds the safe
storm drainage capacity of storm sewers or natural drainage channels serving a
specific watershed.
   IMPERVIOUS AREAS. The horizontal-projected plain area of roof and paved
areas of all permanently constructed roofs of houses, garages, mobile homes,
businesses, industries, paved driveways, patios and parking lots, but does not
include non-permanent structures, such as temporary buildings and tents. Also
excluded are impervious areas of stored materials and equipment, swimming
pools, ponds and lakes and stormwater retention and detention basins. Gravel or
rock roads and gravel or rock parking areas are not considered as IMPERVIOUS
AREAS.
   LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any change that may result in soil erosion from
wind, water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands
or rights-of-way within the city, including, but not limited to, building
demolition, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and
filling of land. It can also include unintentional acts, such as natural
weathering and intentional acts, such as vandalism. It does not include minor
land disturbances activities, such as underground utility repairs, replacement
of services, gardens and maintenance work. Nor does it include installation of
fence, signs, utility poles or posts. Emergency work to protect life, limb or
property and emergency repairs are not included in LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES.
   LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT. A permit is required by this chapter for land
disturbance activities.
   PROTECTED CHANNEL. A channel which receives stormwater discharge and which
is paved, rip-rapped or otherwise improved by addition of human-made materials
so as to reduce the potential for erosion.
   SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY. The quantity of stormwater runoff that can be
transported by a channel or conduit without having the water surface rise above
the top of the channel or conduit.
   STORMWATER CHANNEL. A natural or human-made open watercourse with definite
bed and banks which periodically or continuously contains moving water or which
forms a connecting link between two bodies of water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Water that results from precipitation which is not
absorbed by the soil or vegetation or evaporated and which flows over the
ground surface or is collected in channels or conduits.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF RELEASE RATE. The rate at which stormwater runoff is
released from dominant to servient land.
   TWENTY-FIVE-YEAR, 24-HOUR FREQUENCY RAINFALL. A precipitation event of 24-
hours’ duration, having a 4% chance of occurring in any one year.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.04 INTENT, COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the
public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation
of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to
the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This section
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this section are to:
      (1)   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by any person;
      (2)   Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the
municipal separate storm sewer system;
      (3)   Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills,
inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer
system; and
      (4)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout
the incorporated area of the city.
   (C)   Compatibility with other regulations.
      (1)   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other
ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law.
      (2)   The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the
requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of
law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision
of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective
standards for human health or the environment shall control.
   (D)   Responsibility for administration. The city shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter through its officers and
agents.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
DESIGN CRITERIA; PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   A stormwater management plan shall be required for any new
single-family residential developments having a gross aggregate area, including
roads, utility rights-of-way and any other dedicated lands of five or more
acres, and having a density of greater than one dwelling unit per acre or for
any new commercial, multi-family residential, industrial, institutional, large
expansion of impervious area (roof or asphalt/concrete) of 10,000 square feet
or more, or utility development having a gross aggregate area of one-half of an
acre or more. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no building
permits shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has
been reviewed and approved by the city. Owners of residential property within
subdivisions for which final subdivision plats have been approved prior to the
date of the approval of this chapter shall not be required to comply with this
chapter.
      (2)   The city or his or her duly authorized designees may also require
stormwater management plans for any drainage area if adverse impacts are
anticipated. A stormwater management plan may also be required prior to any
grading or excavation which would fill, obstruct or otherwise alter any creek,
stormwater channel or drainage facility.
   (B)   The required stormwater management plan shall identify means for
controlling the stormwater runoff release rate from the development and
providing storage potential for the excess stormwater runoff (where required).
All computations, plans and specifications related to the implementation of
this chapter must be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered
in the state.
      (1)   Requirements for controls of runoff for projects under
construction/new construction. The following best management practices, which
address the problem of urban runoff, shall apply to all projects undergoing
construction in the city limits. The best management practices list set forth
below is the minimum required by the city. Any BMP or BMP plan utilized shall
be equal to or more effective than the BMPs contained in the State Erosion
Prevention and Sediment Control Field Guide. The requirements set forth below
shall apply at the time of demolition of an existing structure or commencement
of construction and until receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
         (a)   Runoff sediment and construction waste from construction sites
and parking areas shall not leave the site.
         (b)   Any sediments or other materials which are tracked off the site
shall be removed the same day as they are tracked off the site. Where
determined by the city or his or her designated representative, a temporary
sediment barrier shall be installed.
         (c)   On an emergency basis only, plastic covering may be utilized to
prevent erosion of an otherwise unprotected area, along with runoff devices to
intercept and safely convey the runoff.
         (d)   Excavated soil shall be located on the site in a manner that
eliminates the possibility of sediments running into the street or adjoining
properties. Soil piles shall be covered until the soil is either used or
removed. A plastic or micromesh fabric should be used.
         (e)   No washing of construction or other industrial vehicles shall be
allowed adjacent to a construction site. No runoff from washing vehicles on a
construction site is allowed to leave the site.
         (f)   Drainage controls shall be utilized as needed, depending on the
extent of proposed grading and topography of the site, including, but not
limited to, the following:
            1.   Detention ponds, sediment ponds or infiltration pits;
            2.   Dikes, filter berms, silt fences or ditches; and
            3.   Down drains, chutes or flumes.
      (2)   Projects shall observe basic principles, such as:
         (a)   Preserve existing vegetation as much as possible;
         (b)   Mulch or seed bare soil immediately for the best and cheapest
erosion protection;
         (c)   Use silt fences, brush barriers or other approaches to pond and
filter sediment from runoff;
         (d)   Install silt check dams made of rock, brush or other products to
prevent ditch erosion and remove sediment;
         (e)   Protect inlets and outlets; and
         (f)   Settle out soil particles in sediment traps and basins.
   (C)   The stormwater management plan should contain, but not be limited to,
the following information unless specifically addressed by the city and the
developer in the stormwater planning and submittal stage:
      (1)   A topographic map of the project site and adjacent areas, of
suitable scale and contour interval, which shall define the location of
streams, the extent of floodplains and calculated high water elevations, the
shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins, including their inflow
and outflow structures, if any;
      (2)   The location and flowline elevation of all existing sanitary, storm
or combined sewers;
      (3)   Detailed determination of runoff anticipated for the entire project
site following development indicating design volumes and rates of proposed
runoff for each portion of the watershed tributary to the storm drainage
system, the calculations used to determine said runoff volumes and rates and
restatement of the criteria which have been used by the project engineer
throughout calculations;
      (4)   A layout of the proposed stormwater management system, including
the location and size of all drainage structures, storm sewers, channels and
channel sections, detention basins and analyses regarding the effect said
improvements will have upon the receiving channel and its high water elevation;
      (5)   The slope, type and size of all existing and proposed storm sewers
and other waterways impacting or impacted by the proposed development on the
site;
      (6)   For all detention basins, a plot or tabulation of storage volumes
with corresponding water surface elevations and of the basin outflow rates for
those water surface elevations;
      (7)   For all detention basins, design hydrographs of inflow and outflow
for the two-, ten- and 25-year events for the site under existing and developed
conditions;
      (8)   A profile and one or more cross-sections of all existing and
proposed channels or other open drainage facilities, showing existing
conditions and the proposed changes thereto, together with the high water
elevations expected from stormwater runoff under the controlled conditions
called for by these regulations and the relationship of structures, streets and
other utilities to such channels;
      (9)   Show specific erosion control methods to be utilized during
construction; and
      (10)   Total area of the site and total area of disturbance. To find out
further about required information, obtain checklists and other technical and
guidance documents from the city further required information.
   (D)   Any land-disturbing activity that disturbs one acre of land or more is
required to submit a SWPPP to the city. For all sites that disturb one acre or
more, a notice of intent (NOI) must be filed with the State Division of Water
as well as the SWPPP prior to any disturbance. The NOI and SWPPP shall be
submitted with the design plans and stormwater management plan to the city. The
SWPPP shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed
grading on water resources and measure proposed to minimize soil erosion and
off-site sedimentation. The owner/developer, contractor shall perform all
clearing, grading, drainage, construction and development in strict accordance
with the approved plan and this chapter.
      (1)   The SWPPP shall include all items required in this chapter and as
defined in the KPDES No. KYR100000, latest revision. Information can also be
obtained from EPA’s website.
      (2)   All items within the SWPPP shall be site specific.
      (3)   The SWPPP shall be signed and certified in accordance with the
signatory requirements in 401 KAR 5:065, § 1(11).
      (4)   A current copy of the SWPPP shall be readily available on the
construction site from the date of project initiation (NOI) to the date of
termination (NOT, notice of termination). The NOT shall be sent to the State
Division of Water.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.16 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to develop or adopt other guidance
documents to serve as design and implementation standards. Other guidance
documents distributed by the city should be reviewed and considered when
preparing design and maintenance plans.
   (B)   Checklists, technical manuals, administrative or procedural matters
may be modified as needed to meet the objectives of this chapter; provided,
that said modifications are consistent with the intent of this chapter and the
requirements of the state.
   (C)   The following criteria, along with accompanying technical manuals and/
or guidance documents as mentioned above, shall be implemented when designing
improvements with respect to managing stormwater runoff.
      (1)   Methods of determining stormwater runoff discharge rate and volume.
The volume of required stormwater storage and discharge rate for drainage areas
totaling 100 acres or less shall be calculated on the basis of the runoff from
a 25-year frequency storm event with a 24-hour duration for pre- and post-
development conditions. The calculations can be made in accordance with the
instantaneous runoff factor method, the rational method, soil conservation
service (SCS) method or other methods that may be deemed appropriate by the
city. The Intensity Duration Curves for Louisville MSP may be used for the
city. For larger drainage systems, the SCS hydrologic methods or the regional
method of the State Transportation Cabinet, Department of Highways shall be
used to determine peak runoff rates.
      (2)   Release rate.
         (a)   All developments undertaken as outlined in this section shall be
done in such a way as to ensure that stormwater falling on a given site shall
be absorbed or detained on site to the extent that the controlled release rate
of stormwater runoff from all developments described in §
154.15(A) shall not exceed the pre-development stormwater runoff rate, unless
it can be shown that no significant adverse downstream impacts will result from
higher rates. The rate at which stormwater runoff is delivered to a designated
stormwater storage area shall be unrestricted.
         (b)   In the event that the city determines that the natural
downstream channel or storm sewer system is inadequate to accommodate the
release rate provided above, then the allowable release rate shall be reduced
to that rate permitted by the capacity of the downstream channel or storm sewer
system.
      (3)   Development design.
         (a)   Where it can be demonstrated by the developer that a higher
stormwater release rate will not be contrary to the purpose and intent of this
chapter and where such proposed release rate will not adversely affect
properties in the downstream portion of the watershed, the city may permit such
release to be used as deemed appropriate.
         (b)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to minimize the velocity of overland
flow and allow maximum opportunity for infiltration of stormwater into the
ground, and to preserve and utilize existing and planned streams, channels and
detention basins, and include, whenever possible, streams and floodplain within
parks and other public grounds.
      (4)   Excess stormwater passage.
         (a)   An excess stormwater passage shall be provided for all
stormwater areas. Such passage shall have the capacity to convey through the
proposed development the excess stormwater. The capacity for a passage shall be
such that it will be able to transport the peak rate of run-off from a 100-
year, 24-hour return frequency storm.
         (b)   There shall be no buildings or structures constructed within
excess stormwater passage or within the elevation of the flood of record.
Parking lots, playgrounds and park areas which shall not impair or endanger the
water holding capability of a development shall be considered compatible uses.
         (c)   Appropriate land planning shall be undertaken to preserve the
existing natural drainage of a proposed development as part of the excess
stormwater passage.
         (d)   Open channels shall be protected from erosion by appropriate
vegetative cover, lining or other treatment and earthen channel side slopes
shall be no steeper than three to one (3:1). Open channels with lining shall
have a maximum gradient on side slopes of 67%, and channel side slopes steeper
than 67% shall be designed as structural retaining walls. Refer to the State
Transportation Center’s BMP Manual for controlling erosion, sediment and
pollutant runoff to protect channels with steep side slopes or set on a steep
gradient.
      (5)   Stormwater storage/detention areas. The increased stormwater runoff
resulting from the proposed development may be accommodated by the provision of
appropriate detention facilities, including wet or dry bottom reservoirs, flat
roofs, parking lots or streets. Storage areas shall be designed to the
satisfaction of the city and if possible, to provide secondary purposes for
recreation, open spaces, parking lot or other types of use that will not be
adversely affected by intermittent flooding. The following shall govern the
design of detention facilities.
         (a)   Storage volume.
            1.   All stormwater storage areas must be designed to contain and
safely pass stormwater runoff. The combined capacity of these storage areas
shall be sufficient to contain the stormwater from the development. The
detention facility must be designed for periodic maintenance and energy
dissipators shall be provided at points necessary.
            2.   The ponding of stormwater runoff shall not exceed a depth of
one foot on a pedestrian mall area or one and one-half feet maximum in parking
lots. Where these areas are used for ponding the maximum depth should occur in
the most remote and least used areas.
            3.   The drainage and grading design shall be prepared to ensure
that in a 100-year storm the depth of water run-off in any street, alley or
pedestrian mall will not exceed the level of the first floor of any building.
The finished floor elevation shall be set two feet above the 100-year flood
elevation for all new development, and the minimum finished floor elevations
for homes shall be stated on the record plat.
            4.   For wet pond storage areas when calculating the storage
capacity, only the volume available to store excess stormwater shall be
considered. Permanent water storage does not constitute control of excess storm
runoff.
         (b)   Release rate. At no time during the design storm shall the
stormwater runoff release rate exceed the allowable release rate as set forth
in division (C)(2) above. Detention basins shall be fully discharged within 36
hours of the end of the storm event.
         (c)   Release velocity. Detention facilities shall release stormwater
at a non-erosive velocity. The protected channel receiving the detention
discharge shall incorporate features to reduce velocity to non-erosive levels
at the point where such discharge enters the unprotected channel. If release is
into a subsurface conduit the energy gradient in the receiving facility shall
not be increased beyond the slope of the conduit.
         (d)   Spillway.
            1.   Overflow for each stormwater storage area shall be provided in
the event a storm in excess of the design capacity occurs. Such overflows hall
be constructed to function without specific attention and shall become part of
the excess stormwater passage.
            2.   Emergency spillways shall be provided to permit the safe
passage of runoff generated from a 100-year, 24-hour storm or greater if
required by state law. The spillway dimensions shall be clearly dimensioned and
protected from erosion.
            3.   Where rooftop storage or excess stormwater is provided, the
building shall be provided with adequate structural design to ensure that roof
failure does not occur. Overflow areas shall be provided so that the weight of
stored stormwater will not exceed the structural capacity of the roof.
         (e)   Dam. The dam slopes shall not exceed three to one (3:1) on the
interior of the pond. The minimum width of the top of dam shall be two feet,
and the back side of the dam shall not exceed a slope of two to one (2:1).
Detention/retention pond dams built with the maximum allowable slope may be
required to utilize erosion control blankets or other means beyond seed straw
to stabilize the slopes.
         (f)   Basin slope. Dry basins shall have a minimum 1% bottom drainage
slope to allow for positive drainage during and immediately following a rain
event. For dry basins with bottom slopes less than 2%, a paved channel is
required.
      (6)   Sinkholes and subterranean water channels.
         (a)   The use of sinkholes or subterranean water channels for direct
drainage of excess stormwater shall not be permitted although they may be used
to drain a stormwater storage area. The introduction of any foreign matter or
the filling, clogging or interfering with the natural drainage capabilities of
the sinkholes shall not be permitted.
         (b)   Any person, firm or corporation proposing alterations,
improvements or other disturbances of any sinkholes or known subterranean water
channel must submit plans to the city showing that said alterations,
improvements or disturbance would not interfere with the drainage capability.
Also, erosion control methods must be shown for any activities which might
create erosion or sedimentation and must be included in the plans.
         (c)   Sinkholes shall not be altered in any way which would negatively
affect the drainage capabilities of the sinkhole. Development within the 100-
year floodplain of a sinkhole shall not be permitted.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.17 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Stormwater channel location. Generally acceptable locations of
stormwater channels in the design of a subdivision may include, but are not
limited to the following:
       (1)   Adjacent to roadways;
      (2)   In a depressed median of a divided roadway, provided the median is
wide enough to permit slopes of one foot drop in six feet horizontal or
flatter;
      (3)   Centered on lot lines or entirely within the rear yards of a single
row of lots or parcels; and
      (4)   In each of the foregoing cases, a drainage easement with sufficient
width to facilitate maintenance and design flow shall be provided and shown on
the plat.
   (B)   Storm sewer outfall. The storm sewer outfall shall be designed to
provide adequate protection against downstream erosion and scouring.
   (C)   Lot lines. Whenever the plans call for the passage and/or storage of
stormwater runoff along lot lines, the grading of all such lots shall be
prescribed and established for the passage and/or storage of waters, and no
structure or vegetation which would obstruct the flow of stormwater shall be
allowed, nor shall any change be made to the prescribed grades and contours of
the specified stormwater channels.
   (D)   Manholes. All utility sewer manholes constructed in an area designed
for the storage or passage of stormwater shall be provided with either a
watertight manhole cover or be constructed with a rim elevation of a minimum of
one foot above the high water elevation of the design storm.
   (E)   Easements. Permanent easements for the detention and conveyance of
stormwater, including easements of access to structures and facilities, shall
be dedicated to the city.
   (F)   Drainage obstruction. The keeping or disposal of grass clippings,
trash, debris, obstructions or unwanted materials into the storm sewers or
within or along stormwater channels or in adjacent floodplain areas which may
wash into sewers and channels, is prohibited.
   (G)   Maintenance. Required maintenance for detention basins or other
structures shall be permanently provided by the developer with responsibility
becoming that of the private landowner after complete development, subject to
inspection by the city or duly authorized representative. Every detention basin
or structure shall be legally defined on both deed and plat and the maintenance
entity shall be specified. Refer to §
154.31.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
BONDS, MAINTENANCE, ASSURANCES; FEES
§ 154.30 PERFORMANCE BONDS AND OTHER ASSURANCES.
   Upon approval of the stormwater management plan but before the issuance of a
building permit or subdivision plat approval, the city shall require the
applicant to either complete all required improvements or the applicant shall
post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check, letter of credit or
other acceptable form of performance security in an amount sufficient to ensure
the execution of the plan. After determination by the city or designee that all
facilities are constructed in compliance with the approved plan, the
performance bond or other securities shall be released.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.31 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   General. Individual property owners, whether residential or
commercial, shall be responsible for the general and overall maintenance of the
drainage easements and the street right-of-way ditch. Such maintenance includes
mowing, keeping the drainway free of leaves and debris and following the
guidelines within this section. Property owners shall install and maintain
their permitted entrance pipe. The pipe shall be kept free of debris, and
excess sediment that builds up over time, which constricts the flow of the
street runoff. No one shall fill-in the right-of-way ditch or any drainage way
without first obtaining a land disturbance permit. All proposed piping of
ditches shall be appropriately sized and may be required to have a catch basin
to allow for intake of surface water. The property owner shall ensure that
adequate vegetation remains in the drainway and provide a hardened surface
where applicable to prevent erosion.
   (B)   Stormwater maintenance agreement. A stormwater maintenance agreement,
approved by the city, assuring perpetual maintenance of stormwater management
improvements, including post-construction BMPs, shall be executed by the
applicants to the city. The agreement shall be recorded among the deed records
in the County Clerk’s office upon final plan approval. The agreement shall be a
covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the landowner, its
administrators, executors, heirs, assigns and any other successors of interest,
including any homeowner’s association. A copy of an appropriate maintenance
agreement can be obtained from the city.
      (1)   Operation and maintenance of all stormwater quality and quantity
devices, BMPs and drainage ways shall be the responsibility of the property
owner. Operation and maintenance shall be required sufficient to maintain
proper function and water quality at the discharge point.
      (2)   Routine inspections are the responsibility of property owner to
ensure the stormwater facilities/BMPs are operating and functioning as designed
and that required maintenance activities have occurred.
      (3)   The city and its agents shall have the right of entry to inspect,
observe, test or perform any other related activity to the operation,
maintenance and function of the stormwater infrastructure. The city has the
right to perform inspections and emergency maintenance on the facilities;
however, it is not the city’s obligation to maintain the stormwater quality/
quantity facility.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.32 FEES AND SECURITY.
   (A)   Permits.
      (1)   Land disturbance permit. A land disturbance permit must be obtained
from the city when land disturbance activities are to be performed for sites,
as defined per the city’s fee schedule for land disturbance activities,
hereafter referred to as “fee schedule.”
      (2)   Encroachment permit. An encroachment permit must be obtained from
City Hall when any work is to be performed in the city right-of-way. The permit
shall cover only one specified encroachment activity. Such right-of-way
encroachments include permanent or temporary entrances, installation or repair
of sidewalks, curb cuts, ditch work or any other activities in the public
right-of-way that may impact proper drainage or damage public infrastructure. A
drawing, sketch and/or description of the work shall be provided. All work must
be done in accordance with all city ordinances, regulations and standards.
Refer to regulations relating to streets, curbs and sidewalks in Chapter 157
for more information. Future maintenance of the encroachment is the
responsibility of the permit holder.
      (3)   Time frame. The permit holder shall have 12 months (one year) from
date of permit issuance to construct the entrance, encroachments and/or land-
disturbing activities in accordance with the permit. Failure to complete the
work properly within this one-year time frame shall be reasons for forfeiture
of the bond. If the work is not completed properly within the one-year time
frame, no further permits will be issued to the permit holder until the
property comes into compliance with this chapter. Extensions may be approved by
the City Engineer or designee.
      (4)   Bonds. A minimum performance bond shall accompany the submittal of
each permit as required. Bond values shall be no less than $500 as described in
the fee schedule and shall be an amount sufficient enough to cover the cost of
the improvements as approved by the city. Such items to be bonded may include,
but are not limited to, erosion control measures and their maintenance,
construction of stormwater facilities as described in this chapter, all
encroachment work, including entrances, sidewalks, curb cuts, utility crossings
and the like. The bond is fully refundable provided all improvements are
constructed as specified on the permit and the approved improvement plans. The
design engineer shall submit certifications for detention ponds and other
control facilities, as required, to the city. A representative from the city
shall inspect the completed work to ensure all areas within the public right-
of-way and stormwater facilities have vegetation established and are
functioning as designed before releasing the bond.
      (5)   Permit fees. All land disturbance and encroachment permits shall
have a permit fee to cover administrative and inspection costs which shall be
not less than $25 and no more than $5,000. All permit fees are due at the time
of application and shall be assessed according to the fee schedule.
      (6)   Late fee. A late fee shall be assessed to permits when construction
activities begin prior to the land disturbance permit being issued. The late
fee shall be equal and in addition to the original permit fee (i.e., late fee
equals original permit fee; revised permit fee equals late fee plus original
permit fee).
   (B)   Review fees. Projects that must go through the plan review process
shall be charged a review fee per the fee schedule. Review fees shall be not
less than $25 and no more than $5,000. All review fees are due at the time of
plan submittal. No permits shall be issued until all review fees have been
paid.
      (1)   For new residential, commercial and industrial developments that
require a SWPPP and/or SWMP per this section, review fees shall be assessed
according to the fee schedule.
      (2)   Review of development plans where infrastructure will be taken over
by the city and become part of the public road and/or utility systems (i.e.,
water, sewer, street and the like), additional plan review fees shall be
assessed according to the fee schedule.
      (3)   Incomplete plans and/or submittal packages will not be reviewed
until all required documents have been received by the city. Plans and/or
documents of the submittal package requiring major revisions may be assessed a
resubmittal fee equal to one-half the original review fee. Revisions that take
place after approval and issuance of the land disturbance permit may be
assessed the same resubmittal fee.
   (C)   Recording fees. For sites that require documents to be recorded by the
County Clerk’s office, recording fees will be charged per the County Clerk’s
fee schedule for land records. Such documents may include, but are not limited
to, deed of easements, maintenance agreements, subdivision agreements and the
like. The city will handle recording on behalf of the permittee and will
collect fees at the time of plan submittal.
   (D)   Establishment of Stormwater Management Fund.
      (1)   The stormwater management program is established and the stormwater
system is provided to protect the waterways and land in the city by managing
flooding and to benefit the natural environment. The costs of designing,
developing, improving, operating, maintaining and monitoring the stormwater
system required in the city should, therefore, be allocated, to the extent as
practicable, to all property owners. In order to provide revenue to fund those
costs and to fairly allocate those costs, a Stormwater Management Fund (“the
Fund”) is established.
      (2)   All revenues collected from the stormwater management fee from
grants, permit fees and other charges collected under the stormwater management
program, shall be deposited to the Fund. The City Council may make additional
appropriations to the Fund. All disbursements from the Fund shall be for the
purposes of the Fund as set forth in division (E).
   (E)   Purposes of the Fund. The Fund shall be used for the following
purposes:
      (1)   The acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and
personal property, and interests therein, necessary to construct, operate and
maintain stormwater management facilities;
      (2)   All costs of administration and implementation of the stormwater
management program, including the establishment of reasonable operating and
capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency stormwater management
requirements;
      (3)   Engineering and design, debt service and related financing
expenses, construction costs for new facilities, amid enlargement or
improvement of existing facilities;
      (4)   Operation and maintenance of the stormwater system;
      (5)   Monitoring, surveillance and inspection of stormwater control
devices;
      (6)   Water quality monitoring and water quality programs;
      (7)   Retrofitting developed areas for pollution and flood control;
      (8)   Inspection and enforcement activities;
      (9)   Costs of public education relating to stormwater and related
issues;
      (10)   Billing and administrative costs; and
      (11)   Other activities which are reasonably required.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.33 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   All fees are paid at the time of submittal unless otherwise noted. All fees
are non-refundable unless an error has been made internally.
Land disturbance permit: non-single-family residential: less than one acre of
disturbance
Application                            $50
Land disturbance permit                $100
Plan resubmittal (first free), if      $100
applicable
Plan review (for construction and      $100
permanent stormwater design and plan)
Land disturbance permit: non-single-family residential, commercial or
industrial: greater than one acre of disturbance
Application                            $100
Engineering review, earthen stormwater $400
retention pond
Engineering review fee (if necessary)  $20 per disturbed acre
Land disturbance permit                $20 per disturbed acre
Plan resubmittal (first free), if      $150
applicable
Plan review (for construction and      $250, plus $20 per lot
permanent stormwater design and plan
Land disturbance permit: single-family residential
Application                            $25
Land disturbance permit                $50 if disturbance is less than one
                                       acre; $100 if greater than one acre
Plan resubmittal (first free), if      $50
applicable
Plan review (for construction and      $50
permanent stormwater design and plan)
 
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.45 COMPLIANCE.
   Before starting any activities regulated by this chapter, an applicant shall
comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable ordinances with
respect to the submission and approval of preliminary and final subdivision
plats, improvement plans, building and zoning permits, inspections, appeals and
similar matters, along with those set forth in this chapter and as may be
required by state statutes and the regulations of any department of the state.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.46 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Standards. Variances from these standards, provisions and
specifications may be granted when it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the City Council that, owing to special conditions, a strict adherence to the
provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and that the
spirit and intent of the ordinance will be observed.
   (B)   Procedure. A written request for variance shall be filed by the owner,
seeking to develop or change the use of his or her property, or his or her
agent with the city and shall state specifically what variance is sought and
the public’s interest in granting the variance. The applicant must specify
hardships to result in following the prescribed regulations. The city must then
examine and decide the validity of the proposed hardships. This request is then
submitted to the City Council by the city along with a recommendation about
granting the variance.
      (1)   The variance will be granted only upon showing that there is good
and sufficient cause and that the failure to grant a variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant. Financial hardship to the property
owners does not constitute appropriate grounds for a variance under this
chapter.
      (2)   A record of all variance actions shall be maintained by the city,
including the justification for issuance.
      (3)   Variances may be considered for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.47 OFFICIAL MAPS AND PROFILES.
   Responsibility for all changes to official maps and profiles remains with
the city.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.48 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   City requirements.
      (1)   The city shall be responsible for determining whether the
stormwater management plan is in conformance with requirements specified in §§
154.15 through
154.17, and whether development is proceeding in accordance with the approved
stormwater management plan. Periodic inspection of the development site shall
be made by the city or authorized representative to ensure that the stormwater
management plan is properly implemented.
      (2)   The city, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and other duly authorized
employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation and
measurement, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
       (3)   Authorized inspectors from the city shall have the power to
inspect any land-disturbing activity and to review the records of all
inspections, repairs and modifications made by the permit holder in order to
ensure compliance with the approved SWPPP and to examine field practices to
determine if control measures are adequate.
      (4)   The inspector with the city shall complete a report after each
inspection and keep it on file in City Hall.
      (5)   Inspections will be made a minimum of every 30 days until all land-
disturbing activities have been completed and permanently stabilized or until
the NOT with the State Division of Water has been issued. If deficiencies are
noted, more frequent inspections will be made. See §
154.50.
   (B)   Permit holder requirements.
      (1)   The permit holder must have a qualified inspector making
inspections weekly. Bi-weekly inspections are allowed if inspections are also
performed within 24 hours after one-half-inch rain events or larger.
      (2)   Inspectors shall have training in stormwater construction
management as recognized by the current KYR1000000 permit requirements.
      (3)   The permit holder’s qualified inspector shall prepare an inspection
report that shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   Date;
         (b)   Time of day;
         (c)   Name of person performing the inspection and qualification ID
number;
         (d)   Company represented;
         (e)   Scope of inspection;
         (f)   Duration and approximate amount of rainfall for each storm event
(in inches);
         (g)   Observations of the SWPPP and BMPs installed;
         (h)   Any changes in SWPPP or BMP;
         (i)   Recommendations for correction of deficiencies; and
         (j)   Signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in 401 KAR
5:065.
      (4)   Refer to the KPDES permit, KYR100000, part II, § 7, entitled
“Inspections” for further information on inspection requirements.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.49 CERTIFICATION.
   At the completion of the improvements approved in the stormwater management
plan, the applicant shall provide to the city a certification by a professional
engineer that the improvements have generally been built in conformance with
the plan. No certificate of occupancy will be issued or performance bond
released prior to receipt of certification.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.50 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   The city, in conjunction with the City Public Works and Code Enforcement,
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. Duly authorized
representatives have the authority to issue notices of violation, stop-work
orders and levy fines. Enforcement actions shall be served to the property
owner as listed on the permit or most current property owner as held by the PVA
office.
   (A)   Notice of deficiency (NOD). If any site violates the conditions of
this chapter when inspected by the city’s authorized representative, a NOD
shall be issued to the violator. The NOD may be verbal or written to either NOI
holder or the property owner. The violator shall be given seven calendar days,
or as directed by the city or designee, to correct the deficiency per the
details as specified in the NOD.
   (B)   Notice of violation (NOV). A written NOV shall be issued to either the
holder of the NOI or the owner(s) of the site, when previously sited, does not
comply with the terms of the NOD within the time period given. The violator
shall be given five calendar days to correct the deficiency per the details as
specified in the NOV. The city’s authorized representative has the right to
modify the time frame for corrections based on his or her judgment, due to
project conditions.
   (C)   Stop-work order (SWO). A stop-work order shall be issued to anyone
previously cited with an NOV that does not comply with the terms or the
violation within the time frame given. All work on the site shall stop except
for activities necessary to correct the violation. The violator shall be given
seven days, or as directed, to correct the deficiency per the details of stop-
work order. Upon completion of remediated actions as inspected the city, then
the stop-work order shall be rescinded, and work can continue on the site.
      (1)   If the holder of the NOI or property owner does not comply with the
stop-work order conditions within the time period specified, the violator will
be penalized as specified in §
154.99. The city may also perform the remedial work and make claim against the
permit holder to recover its expenses and costs.
      (2)   For violations where no permit has been issued, the office of the
city will notify the property owner and cooperate for resolution prior to
enforcement. Should the owner not cease the land-disturbing activities or
demonstrate a history of noncompliance of the same nature, the city may request
the City Attorney to seek injunctive relief as described in §
154.99.
      (3)   The city may deny the issuance of any permits for any project or
property to an applicant when it determines that the applicant is not in
compliance with the provisions of any land disturbance permit or approved
stormwater management or erosion and sediment control plan, or has failed to
comply with any other provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The city is authorized to require immediate abatement of any
violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health,
safety or well-being of the public. If any violation is not abated immediately,
the city is authorized to enter onto private or public property and to take any
and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to
such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the
property owner and/or responsible party. The cost of remediation plus any
administrative and attorneys’ fees shall be billed to the owner. Failure to
reimburse the city within 30 days will result in a lien being placed on the
property.
   (D)   Appeals. A permit holder or property owner may appeal an enforcement
action to the City Council within 15 days of the date of notification. The
appeal shall be made in writing to the Mayor. The Mayor may then allot time at
a regular Council meeting or call a special meeting where the owner or permit
holder shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he or she may call
witnesses and present evidence on his or her behalf. After such meeting, if the
City Council concludes that the issuance of additional correction notices would
be futile, any bonds or cash deposits posted with the city shall be forfeited,
whereupon said security shall be used for completion of the stormwater
management plan as approved.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than
$250, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Violators of this chapter may be issued a citation by the officer in charge of
enforcement.
(Ord. 2023-018, passed 1-9-2024)
CHAPTER 155: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Statutory authorization
   
155.02   Findings of fact
   
155.03   Statement of purpose
   
155.04   Objectives
   
155.05   Definitions
   
155.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
155.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
155.08   Compliance
   
155.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
155.10   Interpretation
   
155.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
155.25   Establishment of development permit
   
155.26   Local Administrator; designation; duties and responsibilities
   
155.27   Appeals and variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
155.40   General standards
   
155.41   Specific standards
   
155.42   Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways
   
155.43   Standards for shallow flooding zones
   
155.44   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
155.45   Standards for accessory structures in all “A” zones
   
155.46   Critical facilities
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky has in KRS 82.082 delegated
to local government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the City Council hereby adopts the following floodplain management
ordinance, as follows.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increased flood height and velocity, and by the location
in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands
which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood
damage.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flooding by
provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood height or velocity;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
areas.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as: water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets; and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
    (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas in such
a manner as to minimize future flood blighted areas caused by flooding;
   (G)   Ensure that potential home buyers are on notice that property is in a
special flood hazard area; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principle structure, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principle structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and should be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay
sheds.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   A1-30 AND AE ZONES. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 1% annual
chance flood (100-year flood). Base flood elevations (BFEs) are determined.
   A99 ZONE. The part of the SFHA inundated by the 100-year flood which is to
be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection system under
construction. No base flood elevations are determined.
   AH ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one
and three feet (usually shallow ponding). Base flood elevations are shown.
   AO ZONE. An area of 100-year shallow flooding where water depth is between
one and three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain). Flood depths are
shown.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or from the Floodplain
Administrator’s ruling on a request for a variance.
   AR/A1-A30, AR/AE, AR/AH, AR/AO AND AR/A ZONES. Special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood
protection system that is in the process of being restored to provide a 100-
year or greater level of flood protection. After restoration is complete, these
areas will still experience residual flooding from other flooding sources.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) where the base flood depths range from one to three
feet, there is no clearly defined channel, the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the
principle source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination
of both. In A ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are
usually not a significant threat to structures. Areas of 100-year flood, base
flood elevations and flood hazard factors are not determined.
   B AND X ZONES (SHADED). Arens of the 0.2% annual chance (500-year) flood,
areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot
or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. (Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.) BASE FLOOD is the term used
throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH and AR/AO
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1%
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all four sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure that is principally above ground,
including a manufactured home, gas or liquid storage tank or other human-made
facility or infrastructure. See STRUCTURE.
   C AND X (UNSHADED) ZONES. Areas determined to be outside the 500-year
floodplain.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity having the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (CFHA). An area that has been determined by the
Floodplain Administrator (or other delegated, designated or qualified community
official) from available technical studies, historical information and other
available and reliable sources, which may be subject to periodic inundation by
floodwaters that can adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare. Included are areas downstream from dams.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal Insurance
Administration to provide incentives to those communities in the regular
program to go beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop
extra measures for protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any property that, if flooded, would result in severe
consequences to public health and safety or a facility which, if unusable or
unreachable because of flooding, would seriously and adversely affect the
health and safety of the public. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not
limited to: housing likely to contain occupants not sufficiently mobile to
avoid injury or death unaided during a flood; schools, nursing homes,
hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations; vehicle and
equipment storage facilities; emergency operations centers likely to be called
upon before, during and after a flood; public and private utility facilities
important to maintaining or restoring normal services before, during and after
a flood; and those facilities or installations which produce, use or store
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials,
hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   D ZONE. An area in which the flood hazard is undetermined.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
piling, columns (post and piers), shear walls or breakaway walls. (See
freeboard requirements for residential and nonresidential structures.)
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor on the FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification that verifies a structure’s elevation and other related
information to verify compliance with this chapter.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The initial phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP, intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized
rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date
of the initial FIRM.
   ENCLOSURE. The portion of a structure below the base flood elevation (BFE)
used solely for parking of vehicles, limited storage or access to the
structure.
   ENCROACHMENT. The physical advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, structures, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to
as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the city based on
specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of
special flood hazards.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood that has a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any year. Areas subject to the 500-YEAR FLOOD have a moderate to
low risk of flooding.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated the areas of flood hazards and the regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD, FLOODING or FLOODWATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (mudflows). See MUDSLIDES (MUDFLOWS).
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map on which the boundaries of the
flood, mudslide (mudflow) and flood-related erosion areas having special
hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has
delineated special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) containing
flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and/or the flood boundary
floodway map (FBFM), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed by an NFIP participating
community to administer and enforce the floodplain management ordinances.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by floodwaters from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing
natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management ordinance s and
open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of
police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state and/or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect, on a FEMA-approved form in effect at the time of
certification stating that a nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities is watertight to a specified design elevation
with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water and all
structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as the REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory
floodway where encroachment may be permitted without additional hydraulic and/
or hydrologic analysis.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related in §
155.27, a requirement that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council
will consider the fact that every newly constructed structure adds to
government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100
years. Structures that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood
elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those
increased flood damages may incur. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood. FREEBOARD must be applied not
just to the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing level, but also to
the level of protection provided to all components of the structure, such as
building utilities, HVAC components and the like.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE FACILITY. A facility, structure or other
development, which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only a docking or
port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood processing facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality that
is empowered to adopt and implement ordinances to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   HAZARD POTENTIAL. The possible adverse incremental consequences that result
from the release of water or stored contents due to failure of a dam or
misoperation of a dam or appurtenances. The HAZARD POTENTIAL classification of
a dam does not reflect in any way the current condition of a dam and its
appurtenant structures (e.g., safety, structural integrity, flood-routing
capacity).
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).
      (1)   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE coverage provides for the payment of a
claim for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws
or ordinances after a direct physical loss by flood. When a building covered by
a standard flood insurance policy under the NFIP sustains a loss and the state
or community declares the building to be substantially or repetitively damaged,
ICC will help pay up to $30,000 for the cost to elevate, floodproof, demolish
or remove the building.
      (2)   ICC COVERAGE is available on residential and nonresidential
buildings (this category includes public or government buildings, such as
schools, libraries and municipal buildings) insured under the NFIP.
   KRS 151.250. Plans for dams, levees and the like to be approved and permit
issued by the Environmental and Public Protection Cabinet.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person and no city,
county or other political subdivision of the state, including levee districts,
drainage districts, flood control districts or systems, or similar bodies,
shall commence the construction, reconstruction, relocation or improvement of
any dam, embankment, levee, dike, bridge, fill or other obstruction (except
those constructed by the Department of Highways) across or along any stream, or
in the floodway of any stream, unless the plans and specifications for such
work have been submitted by the person or political subdivision responsible for
the construction, reconstruction or improvement and such plans and
specifications have been approved in writing by the cabinet and a permit
issued. However, the cabinet, by regulation, may exempt those dams, embankments
or other obstructions, which are not of such size or type as to require
approval by the cabinet in the interest of safety or retention of water supply.
      (2)   No person, city, county or other political subdivision of the state
shall commence the filing of any area with earth, debris or any other material,
or raise the level of any area in any manner, or place a building, barrier or
obstruction of any sort on any area located adjacent to a river or stream or in
the floodway of the stream so that such filling, raising or obstruction will in
any way affect the flow of water in the channel or in the floodway of the
stream unless plans and specifications for such work have been submitted to and
approved by the cabinet and a permit issued as required in division (1) of this
definition.
      (3)   Nothing in this section is intended to give the cabinet any
jurisdiction or control over the construction, reconstruction, improvement,
enlargement, maintenance or operation of any drainage district, ditch or system
established for agricultural purposes, or to require approval of the same
except where such obstruction of the stream or floodway is determined by the
cabinet to be a detriment or hindrance to the beneficial use of water resources
in the area, and the person or political subdivision in control thereof so
notified. The Department for Natural Resources, through KRS Chapter 350, shall
have exclusive jurisdiction over KRS Chapter 151 concerning the regulation of
dams, levees, embankments, dikes, bridges, fills or other obstructions across
or along any stream or in the floodway of any stream which structures are
permitted under KRS Chapter 350 for surface coal mining operations.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps and flood insurance studies. LOMCs include the following
categories.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated SFHA. A LOMA
amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a specific property is
not located in a SFHA.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical dam
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations and planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that
a structure or parcel has been elevated by properly placed engineered fill
above the BFE and is, therefore, excluded from the SHFA.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM.
      (1)   A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
      (2)   For a LEVEE SYSTEM to be recognized, the following criteria must be
met.
         (a)   All closure devices or mechanical systems for internal drainage,
whether manual or automatic, must be operated in accordance with an officially
adopted operation manual (a copy of which must be provided to FEMA by the
operator when levee or drainage system recognition is being sought or revised).
         (b)   All operations must be under the jurisdiction of a federal or
state agency, an agency created by federal or state law, or an agency of a
community participating in the NFIP.
   LIMITED STORAGE. An area used for storage and intended to be limited to
incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low
flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant material, void
of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be temperature
controlled.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The elevation of the sidewalk, patio, deck support or
basement entryway immediately next to the structure and after the completion of
construction. It does not include earth that is emplaced for aesthetic or
landscape reasons around a foundation wall. It does include natural ground or
properly compacted fill that comprises a component of a structure’s foundation
system.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a structure’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected or attached to the required utilities. The
term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable
structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to
be improved property. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
    MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number on a flood map, followed by a
letter suffix, assigned by FEMA. The first four digits represent the map panel.
The letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been
revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is the first
revision.)
   MARKET VALUE. The structure value, excluding the land (as agreed between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of structure (actual cash value) or
adjusted assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL (MSL). The average height of the sea for all stages of the
tide. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the MSL is used
as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain as
shown on a community’s FIRM. For purposes of this chapter, the term is
synonymous with either National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) 1929 or North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the costs of
disaster response and recovery.
   MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river, flow or
inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in
progress, and will be recognized as such by the Floodplain Administrator only
if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that
occurs.
   MUDSLIDE OR MUDFLOW AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of and overall program of
corrective and preventative measures for reducing mudslide or mudflow damage,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control
works and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE OR MUDFLOW PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes of
unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used as the vertical datum on the older FIRMs. Refer to
FIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the city’s floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the city’s adopted floodplain management ordinances.
   NONRESIDENTIAL. Structures that are not designed for human habitation,
including, but not limited to, small business concerns, churches, schools, form
structures (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational structures, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, warehouses and hotels or motels with normal room rentals for less
than a six-month duration.
    NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD). As corrected in 1988, a vertical
control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain. (Generally used on the newer FIRMs and digitally referenced FIRMs
(DFIRMs)). (Refer to FIRM or DFIRM legend panel for correct datum.)
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge,
conduit, culvert, structure, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water, due to its location, its propensity to snare or
collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried
downstream.
   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that
begins with the letter A is subject to the 100-YEAR FLOOD. Over the life of a
30-year loan, there is a 26% chance of experiencing such a flood with the SFHA.
(See BASE FLOOD.)
   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. A community that voluntarily elects to participate
in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that
are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that started
on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating NFIP communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local
floodplain management regulations. During periods of PROBATION, each insurance
policy is subject to a $50 surcharge.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management standards or of the standards of 44 C.F.R. §§
60.3, 60.4, 60.5 and/or 60.6.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to safety or health
of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons,
or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of
any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable to a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of a community’s participation in the NFIP where
more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher
amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
(See BASE FLOOD.)
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. The process by which a community brings a structure or
other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impact of
noncompliance. Reduced impact may include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations or
reducing state or federal financing exposure with regard to the structure or
other development.
   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period where the value of damages
equals or exceeds an average of 50% of the current value of the structure,
beginning on the date when the damage first occurred, or four or more flood
losses of $1,000 or more over the life of the structure, or three or more flood
losses over the life of the structure that are equal to or greater than the
current value of the structure.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., as amended, which states that no new or renewal
flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the
Administrator finds has been declared by a duty constituted state or local
zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or
local laws, regulations or ordinances that are intended to discourage or
otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The portion of the floodplain subject to
inundation by the base flood and/or flood-related erosion hazards as shown on a
FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AO or AR.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development. The date a building permit is issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement or other improvement is within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
(including manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, the installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation on the
property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground,
including manufactured homes, gas or liquid storage tanks, or other human-made
facilities or infrastructures. See BUILDING.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, for the purposes of sale, lease or development,
either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and
conditions, of any tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels.
   SUBROGATION. An action brought by FEMA to recover insurance money paid out
where all or part of the damage can be attributed to acts or omissions by a
community or other third party.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
      (1)   Any damage to a building for which the cost of repairs equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the building prior to the damage occurring.
This term includes structures that are categorized as repetitive loss.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, repair is considered to occur
when the first repair or reconstruction of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences.
      (3)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any combination of reconstruction, alteration or improvement to a
building, taking place during a one-year period in which the cumulative
percentage of improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the current market value of
the building. For the purposes of this definition, an improvement occurs when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
      (2)   The term does not apply to:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to comply
with existing health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the Code Enforcement Official and which are solely necessary to
assure safe living conditions;
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic
structure; or
         (c)   Any building that has been damaged from any source or is
categorized as repetitive loss.
   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS OR SUBDIVISIONS.
Repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities
and pads equaling or exceeding 50% of the value of the streets, utilities and
pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
   SUSPENSION. Removal of a participating community from the NFIP for failure
to enact and/or enforce floodplain management regulations required for
participation in the NFIP. New or renewal flood insurance policies are no
longer available in suspended communities.
   UTILITIES. Includes electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment.
   VARIANCE. Relief from some or all of the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. Failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with
this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically.
   WATERSHED. All the area within a geographic boundary from which water,
sediments, dissolved materials and other transportable materials drain or are
carried by water to a common outlet, such as a point on a larger stream, lake
or underlying aquifer.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X Zones shown on recent FIRMs (B Zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% probability of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood) in any year. Unshaded X Zones (C Zones on older
FIRMS) designate areas where the annual exceed once probability of flooding is
less than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood
insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHA), areas
applicable to KRS 151.250 and, as determined by the Floodplain Administrator or
other delegated, designated or qualified community official as determined by
the City Council from available technical studies, historical information and
other available and reliable sources, areas within the jurisdiction of the City
Council which may be subject to periodic inundation by floodwaters that can
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the city.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) for the county,
dated February 17, 2010, with the accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRMS), other supporting data and any subsequent amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations by
the city, and for those land areas acquired by the city through annexation.
This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this
chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by
the Floodplain Administrator and were enacted by City Council pursuant to
statutes governing land use management regulations. The FIS and/or FIRM are
permanent records of the city and are on file and available for review by the
public during regular business hours at the City Hall.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.08 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable state regulations. Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shell prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall riot create liability on the part of the City Council of the city, any
officer or employee, the state, the Federal Insurance Administration or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.25 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provision of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in the special flood hazard areas (SFHA). See division (B) below for
instructions and explanation.
      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or
other development begins within any special flood hazard area established in
division (A) above. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities and
may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Endorsement of the local
Administrator is required before a state floodplain construction permit can be
processed. Specifically, the following information is required.
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the
proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone A and
elevation of highest adjacent grade;
         (b)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
         (c)   All appropriate certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet
the floodproofing criteria in §§
155.41(B) and
155.43(B); and
         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon placement of the lowest floor, and before construction
continues, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, it shall be the
duly of the permit bolder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator and to the
state a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed
elevation, as built, in relation to mean sea level. In AE, A1-30, AH and A
Zones where the Community has adopted a regulatory base flood elevation, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
         (b)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
certified professional engineer or architect. Any continued work undertaken
prior to the submission of the certification shall bent the permit holder’s
risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and
floodproofing elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further
progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or
failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.26 LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR; DESIGNATION; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Designation. The City Council hereby appoints the Mayor or designee to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter by granting or
denying development permits in accordance with its provisions and is herein
referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities. The Floodplain Administrator and/or staff
is hereby appointed, authorized and directed to administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Floodplain Administrator is further
authorized to render interpretations of this chapter which are consistent with
its spirit and purpose by granting or denying development permits in accordance
with its provisions. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following.
      (1)   Permit review. The Administrator shall review all development
permits to ensure that:
         (a)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
         (b)   All other requited state and federal permits have been obtained;
the Administrator shall advise permittees that additional federal or state
permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements
are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on
file with the development permit;
         (c)   Flood damages will be reduced in the best possible manner; and
         (d)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of affected watercourses. For the purpose of this division (B)(1)(d),
ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point.
      (2)   Review end use of any other base flood data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with §
155.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer §§
155.40 through
155.46. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for
adoption.
      (3)   Notification of other agencies. The Administrator shall:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities, the State Division of Water and any
other federal and/or state agencies with statutory or regulatory authority
prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse;
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and
         (c)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (4)   Documentation of floodplain development. The Administrator shall
obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the
following:
         (a)   Certification required by §
155.41(A) (lowest floor elevations) as shown on a completed and certified
elevation certificate. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
155.25(B)(2);
         (b)   Certification required by §
155.41(B) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) as shown on
a completed and certified floodproofing certificate. Verify and record the
actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with §
155.25(B)(2);
         (c)   Certification required by §
155.41(C) (elevated structures);
         (d)   Certification of elevation required by §
155.44(A) (subdivision standards);
          (e)   Certification required by §
155.41(E) (floodway encroachments);
         (f)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;
         (g)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance; and
         (h)   Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in
§
155.99.
      (5)   Map determinations. The Administrator shall make interpretations,
where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood
hazard areas, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
         (a)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
155.27(C)(2).
         (b)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided in accordance with §
155.07, then the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonable
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of §§
155.40 through
155.46.
         (c)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the
Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect, in accordance with §
155.41(B), a floodproofing certificate.
         (d)   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall
be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Administrator and shall be open
for public inspection.
      (6)   Right of entry.
         (a)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Administrator has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any
condition or ordinance violation which makes such building, structure or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Administrator may enter such
building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or
perform any duty imposed upon the Administrator by this chapter.
         (b)   If such structures or premises are occupied, he or she shall
first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure
or premises are unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request
entry.
         (c)   If entry is refused, the Administrator shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
         (d)   When the Administrator shall have first obtained a proper
inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or
occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building,
structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Administrator for the
purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
       (7)   Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the
person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed.
      (8)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under
the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the
Administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving,
demolition, installation or replacement of the structure for which the permit
was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of
this chapter.
      (9)   Liability. Any officer, employee or member of the Floodplain
Administrator’s staff, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for
the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his or her duties, shall
not thereby render himself or herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer, employee or member because
of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter shall be defended by the Department of Law until the final termination
of the proceedings.
      (10)   Expiration of floodplain construction permit. A floodplain
construction permit, and all provisions contained therein, shall expire if the
holder of a floodplain construction permit has not commenced construction
within 180 calendar days from the date of its issuance by the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.27 APPEALS AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Nature of variances.
      (1)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create all exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants or the property owners.
      (2)   It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens
from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from
the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare.
The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be
met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that
must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
   (B)   Designation of Variance and Appeal Board. The City Council shall
establish an Appeal Board consisting of the City Council.
   (C)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.
      (1)   The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter and appeals of decisions or determinations
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the local circuit court, as provided in
state statutes.
   (D)    Appeals/variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Appeal Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other sections of this chapter and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance to the community of the services provided by the
proposed facility;
      (5)   Necessity that the facility be located on a waterfront, in the case
of functionally dependent facility;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems, streets and bridges.
   (E)   Conditions for variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. For the purpose of this division (E), MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford
relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For
example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the
City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or
even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation
which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the
integrity of the local ordinance.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the flood
hazard. In the instance of an historical structure, a determination shall be
made that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief and not
destroy the historic character and design of the structure.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant (as defined in this chapter); and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood height, additional threats to public safety, cause
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance (as defined in §
155.05), cause fraud or victimization of the public (as defined in §
155.05) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) upon request.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of division (D)(1)
through (D)(11) above are satisfied and that the structure or other development
is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a
public nuisance.
   (F)   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the City Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land;
and
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   (G)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures, as defined in §
155.05, upon determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
   (H)   No impact certification within the floodway. Variances shall not be
issued within any mapped or designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 155.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air condition equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding and, if within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
which is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
undertaken only if said nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been
provided, as set forth in §
155.07, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, mechanical equipment and ductwork elevated no lower
than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter
walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with
standards of division (C) below:
      (1)   In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is specified;
      (2)   In an A Zone, where no technical data has been produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation, as determined by this community. The Floodplain Administrator will
determine the method by which base flood elevations are determined. Methods
include, but are not limited to, detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses,
use of existing data available from other sources, use of historical data, best
supportable and reasonable judgment in the event no data can be produced. As a
part of the technical requirements for a state floodplain permit, as provided
in 401 KAR Chapter 4, Regulation 060, the applicant shall provide cross-
sections for determining floodway boundaries (and thereby base flood
elevations) at any proposed construction site where FEMA maps are not
available. All cross-sections shall be referenced to mean sea level and shall
have vertical error tolerances of no more than five-tenths of a foot. Cross-
section elevations shall be taken at those points which represent significant
breaks in slope and at points where hydraulic characteristics of the base
floodplain change. Each cross-section shall extend across the entire base
floodplain and shall be in the number and at the locations specified by the
cabinet. If necessary to ensure that significant flood damage will not occur,
the cabinet may require additional cross-sections or specific site elevations
which extend beyond those needed for making routine regulatory floodway
boundary calculations; and
      (3)   In all other zones, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, and verified by the Community Building Inspection
Department to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure
(including manufactured homes used for nonresidential purposes) shall be
elevated to conform with division (A) above or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities:
      (1)   Be floodproofed below an elevation one foot above the level of the
base flood elevation so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
      (3)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical equipment and
ductwork, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood
elevation;
      (4)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in §
155.25(B)(1)(c);
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in division (D) below;
and
      (6)   All new construction and substantial improvement with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials below an
elevation one foot above the base flood elevation and shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Opening sizes (FEMA Technical Bulletin
1-93) for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or
         (b)   Have a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (C)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures on columns, posts or pilings and the like that include
fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
      (1)   Opening sizes for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum
criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher
than the exterior foundation grade); and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions.
      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
      (3)   The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate room.
   (D)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   (a)   All new or substantially improved manufactured homes placed
on sites located within A, A1-30, AO, AH and AB on the community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) must meet all the requirements for new construction,
including elevation and anchoring.
         (b)   Locations include:
            1.   On individual lots or parcels;
            2.   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
            3.   In new manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
            4.   In substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions;
            5.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; or
            6.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site
upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result
of a flood.
         (c)   All manufactured homes must be:
            1.   Elevated on a permanent foundation;
            2.   Have its lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above
the level of the base flood elevation; and
            3.   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      (2)   Except manufactured homes that have incurred substantial damage as
a result of a flood, all manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in
an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that the
manufactured home is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, so that either the:
         (a)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower
than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or
         (b)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less
than 36 inches in height above the highest adjacent grade.
      (3)   (a)   All recreational vehicles placed on sites located within A,
A1-30, AO, AH and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) must
either:
            1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
            3.   Meet the permit requirements for new construction of this
chapter, including anchoring and elevation requirements for manufactured homes.
         (b)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
licensed and insured in accordance with state motor vehicle regulations, is on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   (E)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§
155.07 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris and
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply.
      (1)   The floodways shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other developments, unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation levels during occurrence of base flood
discharge.
      (2)   If this division (E) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements and other proposed new development shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.42 STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
155.07, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or
where base flood data has been provided without floodways, the following
provisions apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be
located within special flood hazard areas, unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering
certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard
hydraulic engineering principles.
   (B)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be
elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with §
155.07.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.43 STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING ZONES.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
155.07, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet, where a clearly
defined channel does not exist and the water path of flooding is unpredictable
und indeterminate; therefore, the following provisions apply.
    (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above either the base flood elevation or, in Zone AO, the flood depth specified
on the flood insurance rate map above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO,
if no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall:
      (1)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
either the base flood elevation or, in Zone AO, the flood depth specified on
the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade. In Zone AO, if
no flood depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade; and
      (2)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed either to the base flood elevation or above or, in Zone
AO, to or above the specified flood depth plus a minimum of one foot so that
any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required as stated in §
155.41(B).
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.44 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood and be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   In areas where base flood elevation and floodway data is not available
(Zone A or unmapped streams), base flood elevation and floodway data for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, shall be provided.
   (E)   All subdivision plans will include the elevation of proposed structure
(s) and lowest adjacent grade. If the site is filled above the base flood
elevation, the lowest floor and lowest adjacent grade elevations shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.45 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN ALL “A” ZONES.
   For all accessory structures in special flood hazard areas designated “A”
the following provisions shall apply:
   (A)   Structure must be non-habitable;
   (B)   Must be anchored to resist floatation forces;
   (C)   Will require flood openings/vents no more than one foot above grade,
total openings are to be one square inch per one square foot of floor area, at
least two openings required on opposite walls;
    (D)   Built of flood-resistant materials below a level feet above the base
flood elevation;
   (E)   Must elevate utilities above the base flood elevation;
   (F)   Can only be used for storage or parking; and
   (G)   Cannot be modified for a different use after permitting.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.46 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the SFHA (100-year floodplain). Construction of
new critical facilities shall not be permissible within the floodway; however,
they may be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated one foot or more above the level of the base flood
elevation at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Civil offense. If, at any time, development occurs which is not
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or
complying with the terms and conditions of a floodplain construction permit and
any approved modifications, such development shall constitute a civil offense.
      (2)   Notice of violation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a notice to the person responsible for the violation and/or the property owner,
stating the facts of the offense or violation, the section of this chapter and/
or of the permit violated, when it occurred, how the violation is to be
remedied to bring the development into conformity with this chapter or with the
approved permit, and within what period of time the remedy is to occur, which
period of time shall be reasonable and shall be determined by the nature of the
violation and whether or not it creates a nuisance or hazard. The remedy may
include an order to stop work on the development. The notice shall also state
that a citation may be forthcoming in the event that the requested remedies and
corrective actions are not taken, which citation will request a civil monetary
fine and shall state the maximum fine which could be imposed.
      (3)   Notice of citation. If, at any time, a duly authorized employee or
agent of the Floodplain Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a
person has caused development to occur which is not in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, including obtaining or complying with the terms and
conditions of a floodplain construction permit and any approved modifications
thereof, a duly authorized employee of the Floodplain Administrator may issue a
citation to the offender stating the violation, prior notices of violation
issued, how the violation is to be remedied to bring the development into
conformity with this chapter or with the approved permit, and within what
period of time the remedy is to occur, and what penalty or penalties are
recommended. When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation is
issued shall respond to the citation within seven days of the date the citation
is issued by either carrying out the remedies and corrections set forth in the
citation, paying the civil fine set forth in the citation or requesting a
hearing before the governing body. If the person to whom the citation is issued
does not respond to the citation within seven days, that person shall be deemed
to have waived the right to a hearing and the determination that a violation
occurred shall be considered final.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with granting of a variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor civil offense. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined no less than $100 or imprisoned for not more than ten days,
or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floodplain Administrator from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2009-006, passed 11-10-2009)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Short title
   
156.002   Effective date
   
156.003   Authority
   
156.004   Purpose, objectives and goals
   
156.005   Interpretation
   
156.006   Coordination or conflict with other laws or regulations
   
156.007   Jurisdiction
   
156.008   Application of regulations
   
156.009   Definitions
   
156.010   Enforcement
   
156.011   Schedule of fees
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.020   Review bodies; clarification as to jurisdiction
   
156.021   Exemption of agricultural use
Zoning Districts Generally
   
156.035   Establishment of districts
   
156.036   Official zoning map
   
156.037   Replacement of official zoning map
   
156.038   Interpretation of zoning district boundaries
   
156.039   Areas unassigned to a zoning district
Use Regulations
   
156.050   Generally
   
156.051   Use exceptions
   
156.052   Cellular antenna towers and telecommunications services standards
   
156.053   Access points
   
156.054   Junkyards or salvage yards
   
156.055   Manufactured and mobile home standards
   
156.056   Off-street and on-street parking and loading/unloading standards
   
156.057   Child day care centers
   
156.058   Planned unit development regulations
Zoning District Regulations
   
156.070   Zoning schedule
   
156.071   Residential Single Family (R-1)
   
156.072   Residential Two- to Three-Family (R-2)
   
156.073   Residential Multi-Family (R-3)
   
156.074   Mobile Home Park (MHP)
   
156.075   Central Commercial District (CC)
   
156.076   Commercial Restricted District (CR)
   
156.077   General Highway Commercial (HC)
   
156.078   General Industrial (I-1)
Non-Conforming Structures and Uses
   
156.090   Intent
   
156.091   Non-conforming structures
   
156.092   Non-conforming uses of land
   
156.093   Non-conforming use of structures or structures/premises
   
156.094   Non-conforming lots of record
   
156.095   Repairs and maintenance
Amendments
   
156.110   Zoning Code and zoning map amendments
   
156.111   Zoning text amendment procedures
   
156.112   Zoning map amendment procedures
Conditional Use Permits, Variances and Appeals
   
156.130   Generally
   
156.131   Conditional use permits
   
156.132   Variances
   
156.133   Zoning permits
   
156.134   Appeals
Sign Regulations
   
156.145   Intent
   
156.146   Scope
   
156.147   Exempt signs
   
156.148   Signs exempt from permit requirements
   
156.149   Permit requirements
   
156.150   Non-conforming signs
   
156.151   Illegal signs
   
156.152   General requirements
   
156.153   Prohibited signs in all zones
   
156.154   Signs requiring a conditional use permit in all zones
   
156.155   Signs permitted by specific zone
   
156.156   Advertising on interstate highways
   
156.157   Maintenance standards
   
156.158   Substitution clause
   
156.159   Definitions
 
   
156.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Use table
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Springfield, Kentucky”. This chapter may be referred to herein as “this
chapter”. The zoning map referred to herein is entitled “Zoning Map-
Springfield, Kentucky” or “the zoning map.” A copy of the text and map is on
file with both the City Clerk and the County Court Clerk.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.002 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the
City Council.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.003 AUTHORITY.
   KRS 100.201 gives legislative bodies and fiscal courts the authority to
enact permanent land use regulations, including zoning and other growth
management regulations, to promote public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the city. The Planning Commission and City Council have fulfilled
the regulations set forth as prerequisites to the adoption of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.004 PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND GOALS.
   This chapter sets forth regulations and restrictions upon the erection,
construction, alteration, repair or use of buildings, structures or land,
including height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other
structures, size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, density of
population, size and number of vehicular parking and loading, and location and
intensity of use of such buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry,
residence or other uses in order to, among other things:
   (A)   Promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
   (B)   Facilitate orderly and harmonious development and the visual or
historical character;
   (C)   Facilitate fire and police protection;
   (D)   Prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in the
circulation of people and commodities, and the loss of life, health or property
from fire, flood or other dangers;
   (E)   Protect airports, highways and other transportation facilities, public
facilities, schools, public grounds, historical districts, central business
districts, prime agricultural land and other natural resources;
   (F)   Regulate the use of water and wastewater treatment facilities;
   (G)   Improve soil quality; and
   (H)   Protect other specific areas of the city that need special protection
by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.005 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall be strictly construed and may not be extended by
implication except where the intention of the City Council must prevail. In
their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.006 COORDINATION OR CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS OR REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Whenever this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is
imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations
or resolutions or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
   (B)   Coordination with subdivision regulations. In all cases, the
provisions of the subdivision regulations and amendments thereto shall apply in
addition to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Conflict with subdivision regulations and other laws, regulations and
rules. This chapter does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing provisions of law, ordinance or resolution, or with
any rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall
be adopted or issued pursuant or relating to the use of buildings, or premises,
or with any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or
recorded plat; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the heights of
buildings or requires greater lot areas, larger yards, courts or other open
spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law,
ordinance or resolution, or by such rules, regulations or permits or by such
private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
   (D)   Conflict with this chapter, private covenants and deeds. In case of
conflict between this chapter or any part thereof, and the whole or part of any
existing or future ordinance of the city or the whole or part of any existing
or future private covenant or deeds, the most restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.007 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all land and structures within the corporate
limits of the city.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.008 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure or part
thereof shall be erected, moved or altered, unless for a use expressly
permitted by and in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
zoning district in which it is located, except that any structure damaged or
destroyed may be restored if such structure does not involve a non-conforming
use. Each zoning district is established to permit only those uses specifically
listed as permitted, except as hereinafter provided under the non-conforming
provisions, and is intended for the protection of those uses. No other uses
will be permitted.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.009 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used
herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section and
in KRS Chapter 100.
   (B)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in
the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number
include the singular; the word “herein” means in this chapter; and the word
“regulations” means in this chapter.
   (C)   A “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, corporation, limited liability company and an unincorporated
association such as a club; the present tense includes the future tense, the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; “shall” is always mandatory, the word “may” is permissive; a
“building” includes a “structure;” a “building” or “structure” includes any
part thereof; “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be
construed to include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to be used or
occupied”; the word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel”.
   (D)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESS. A point at which provisions are made for vehicular entrance to or
exit from a street, and to or from a lot or other street.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A residential living unit attached to or
detached and located in the rear yard area, constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease
on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other
rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure and containing
independent cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any structure other than the principal structure
detached therefrom, use of which is directly incidental and related to that of
the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same
lot as that of the principal structure. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE shall not include
mobile home, bus, travel trailer, RV, trailer, cooler, vehicle or freight
container.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use of the property.
      ACRE. Land area of 43,560 square feet.
      ADDITION. As a construction term, an extension or increase in floor area
or height of a building or structure.
      ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL. A case where an applicant alleges that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning regulation.
      ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. Any department, employee or advisory elected or
appointed body, which is authorized to administer the provisions of this
chapter, subdivision regulations and if delegated, any provision of any housing
or building regulation or any other land use control regulation.
      ADULT BATHHOUSE. An establishment or business which provides services of
baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, that is
not operated by a medical practitioner or a professional physical therapist
licensed by the Commonwealth and which establishment provides to its patrons an
opportunity for engaging in SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES as defined in this
chapter.
      ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An establishment or business wherein patrons
are afforded an opportunity to paint images on a body, which is wholly or
partially nude. For purposes of this chapter, the ADULT BODY-PAINTING STUDIO
shall not be deemed to include a tattoo parlor.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS as defined herein or an establishment with a segment or section devoted
to the sale or display of such material.
      ADULT CABARET. An establishment or business which features male and/or
female topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, burlesque shows, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainers.
      ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. A facility which provides part-time care, day or
night, but less than 24 hours, to at least four adults not related to the
operator or the facility by blood, marriage or adoption.
      ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments, including, but not limited to,
bookstores, motion picture theaters, mini motion picture theaters, bathhouses,
massage parlors, modeling studios, body painting studios, cabarets and video
stores as defined in this chapter; and provided that the ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS
remain 75 feet from any school, church, park, day care facility, another adult
establishment or residential zoned property.
      ADULT MASSAGE PARLORS. An establishment or business with or without
sleeping accommodations which provides the services of massage and body
manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and
all forms and methods of physiotherapy, not operated by a medical practitioner
or professional massage or physical therapist licensed by the Commonwealth and
which establishment provides for its patrons the opportunity to engage in
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY as defined in this chapter.
      ADULT MODELING STUDIOS. An establishment or business which provides the
services of modeling for the purpose of reproducing the human body wholly or
partially in the nude by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or
otherwise.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (INDOOR). An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS as defined herein for
observation by patrons therein.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER (OUTDOOR). A parcel of land from which
individuals may view a motion picture presented outdoors which presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL
AREAS as defined herein for observation by patrons therein.
      ADULT NOVELTY SHOPS. An establishment or business having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock and trade in novelty or other items which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on, or designed for,
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY as defined herein or stimulating such activity.
      ADULT VIDEO STORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade in videotapes, DVDs or other types
of digital media for sale or rent which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES OR ANATOMICAL AREAS as defined herein or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale, display or rental of such material.
      AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of a tract of land of at least five contiguous
acres for the production of agricultural or horticultural crops, including, but
not limited to, livestock, livestock products, poultry, poultry products,
grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard fruits, vegetables,
flowers or ornamental plants, including provision for dwellings for persons and
their families who are engaged in the above agricultural use on the tract, but
not including, residential building developments for sale or lease to the
public. See also CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION.
      ALLEY. A local public street used primarily for vehicular service access
to the backs or to the sides of properties which otherwise abut on streets.
      ALTERATION. As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of egress; or as an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the
moving from one location or position to another. As applied to a building or
structure in a historic district, landmark or landmark site, it shall also mean
any construction on or change to the exterior of a building, structure or site,
regardless of the requirement of permit from governmental agencies, including,
but not limited to, the changing of siding or roofing materials and changing,
eliminating or adding doors, door frames, windows, window frames, shutters,
steps, fences, railings, porches, balconies, signs or other ornamentation. As
applied to a watercourse, it shall mean changing the carrying capacity or
location of a stream, channel or waterway.
      ANTENNA, HEIGHT ABOVE GRADE OR GROUND. The vertical distance between the
highest point of the ANTENNA and the finished grade directly below this point.
      APARTMENT BUILDING. A multi-family dwelling in a building containing five
or more dwelling units.
      ARTERIAL. A public street that serves major centers of activity.
ARTERIALS have the highest traffic volumes, speed limits and right-of-way
widths, and are used for moving vehicles safely and efficiently and providing
direct connection between points of heavy traffic generation and neighborhoods
at moderate speeds. Typical average daily traffic counts on ARTERIAL streets
are 3,000 plus vehicles.
      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. An apartment or home-style housing unit
residence which provides assisted living to two or more adult persons and which
provides supportive services, such as cleaning, shopping, meals, laundry,
transportation, 24-hour supervision and organized activities, within the
residence or on the grounds of the residence.
      B1 SEAL. A seal indicating that a dwelling unit has been inspected and
found to be in compliance with the applicable standards for human habitation.
      B2 SEAL. A seal indicating that the dwelling unit has been inspected and
found not to be in compliance with the applicable codes, is a salvage unit
unfit for human habitation, and shall be sold only for use as a storage or
utility building.
      BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole, suspended between poles or affixed to a building at one or
more edges. National, state or municipal flags or the official flag of any
institution or business shall not be considered BANNERS.
      BASEMENT. Any portion of a building the average height of which is at
least one-half below grade plane.
      BILLBOARD or OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. An off-premises sign which directs
attention to businesses, products, services or establishments not usually
conducted on the premises on which the sign is located or other sign erected by
a company or individual for the purpose of selling advertising messages for
lease or rent or otherwise for profit. The term OUTDOOR ADVERTISING shall
include BILLBOARD SIGNS.
      BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling or part thereof, in which lodging
is provided by the owner or operator to more than three persons and where meals
are regularly prepared and served for compensation.
      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS. The Board of Adjustments of the city.
      BONA FIDE FARM. Must meet the definitional requirements of KRS 132.010(9)
or (10).
      BUFFER. An area within a property, generally adjacent to and parallel
with the property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or
created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences or berms, designed to limit sight
and sound from the site to adjacent properties.
      BUILDING. Any structure, but not a mobile home or trailer, used or
intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. All BUILDINGS shall
be required to be positioned within all building setback lines. When measuring
the distance required for the BUILDING setback lines, the outer most portion of
the structure shall be used.
      BUILDING CODE. Rules and regulations adopted by local legislative bodies
to regulate building and construction standards. These include, but are not
limited to, the Kentucky Building Code and the BOCA One- and Two-Family
Building Code, and the National Electrical Code.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. A distance measured from the highest point of the roof
for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; to the ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs (excludes chimney). BUILDING HEIGHT limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, sand domes not
intended for human occupancy; monuments; water towers; observation towers;
flagpoles; or chimneys.
      BUILDING INSPECTOR. A person appointed by the Mayor and whose
responsibility it is to inspect items required by the Building Codes and the
subdivision regulations.
      BUILDING OR WALL SIGN. A sign which is painted on the exterior wall of a
building, or attached to or placed flat against, or no more than 18 inches
from, an exterior wall of a building, but not extending above the roof line.
      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Inspector allowing a
property owner or their agent to construct, alter or remove a building,
structure and the like, or engage in similar activity which would alter the
character or the lot in question.
      CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWER. A tower constructed for, or an existing facility
that has been adapted for, the location of transmission or related equipment to
be used in the provision of cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services.
      CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. A retail telecommunications
services that uses radio signals transmitted through cell sites and mobile
switching stations.
      CENTERLINE. The center of the street established by survey, or when not
established, center of a paved roadway.
      CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. Document issued by the Historic
Preservation Board that gives approval of work to be completed on a landmark or
property in a historic district.
      CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A government meeting the requirements of the
National Historic Preservation Amendments Act of 1980 (Pub. Law No. 96-515) and
the implementing regulations of the U.S. Department of the Interior and the
State Historic Preservation Office (Kentucky Heritage Council) of the
Commonwealth.
      CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. A facility which provides full- or part-time care,
day or night, to at least seven children who are not the children,
grandchildren, children in legal custody, nieces or nephews of the operator.
      CITY LIMITS. The municipal or corporate limits of the city.
      COLLECTOR. A public street that functions to conduct traffic between
major arterial streets, minor activity centers and local streets, and provides
access to adjacent property. COLLECTOR streets may be further divided into
major and minor collectors.
      CO-LOCATION. Locating two or more transmission antennas or related
equipment on the same cellular antenna tower.
      COMMERCIAL ANIMAL KENNEL. An establishment where more than five dogs or
other domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred,
boarded, trained or sold.
      COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The adopted plan for the city that serves as a guide
for public and private actions and decisions to assure the development of
public and private property in the most appropriate relationships. Such PLAN
shall include all elements whether expressed in words, graphics or other forms.
      CONDITIONAL USE. A use which may be essential to or could promote the
public health, safety or welfare in one or more zones, but which would impair
the integrity and character of the zone in which it is located, or in adjoining
zones unless restrictions on location, size, extent and character of
performance are imposed in addition to those imposed in the zoning regulations.
Any CONDITIONAL USE must be pursuant to the CONDITIONAL USES listed in the use
table for the zoning district in question and may not be approved for that
zoning district if it is not so listed.
      CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. A legal authorization to undertake a conditional
use, issued by the Administrative Official pursuant to authorization by the
Board of Adjustments, consisting of two parts: a statement of the factual
determination by the Board of Adjustments which justifies the issuance of the
permit and a statement of the specific conditions which must be met in order
for the use to be permitted.
      CONDOMINIUM. A form of ownership with the following characteristics: the
unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for private use in
the development plan) is owned or rented by the occupant; and all or a portion
of the exterior open space and any community interior spaces are owned and
maintained in accordance with KRS 381.805 et seq. and in accordance with the
provisions for open spaces, roads or other development features as specified in
this chapter and the subdivision regulations.
      CONFINED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS. Any animal feedlot and associated
animal waste areas.
      CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS LANDFILL. A site properly permitted by
the Commonwealth on which non-hazardous materials from construction and
demolition debris projects are disposed.
      CORNER LOT. A lot that abuts on two intersecting streets at their
intersection.
      COUNTY CLERK. The County Clerk of the county.
      CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A local street with only one end open to vehicular
traffic and the other end terminated by a permanent vehicular turnaround.
      DEDICATED STREET. A street designated by plat or written deed to be used
for public purposes.
      DEMOLITION. Any act that destroys in whole or in part a landmark,
building, structure, building or structure in a historic district, physical
feature or other site destruction.
      DENSITY. A measure of the intensity of the use of a piece of land
expressed or can be calculated in dwelling units, families or housing
structures per acre.
      DESIGN. The arrangement of land for lots, rights-of-way, easements,
setback lines and improvements to include alignment, grade, length and width of
those elements.
      DESIGN STANDARDS. Standards that set forth specific improvement or
rehabilitation requirements.
      DEVELOPER. An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company (LLC) or other legal entity or agent thereof, which undertakes the
activities covered by the subdivision regulations. Inasmuch as the subdivision
plan drawings are merely a necessary means to the end of assuring development,
the term DEVELOPER includes “subdivider,” “owner,” “builder,” and the like,
although the persons and their precise interests may vary at different project
stages.
      DEVELOPMENT. Land being subdivided by a developer in accordance with the
subdivision regulations; the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any use or
change in use of any buildings or land; any extension, landfill or land
disturbance, clearing or other human-induced movement of land.
      DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Written and/or graphic material for the provision of a
development, including any or all of the following: location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of development,
streets, ways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface water, access
points, plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing human-made and
natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the applicant.
      DIRECTIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE CONTROL SIGN. An on-premises sign that is
erected, constructed and maintained for the sole purpose of directing traffic
in off-street parking areas. See also MOTOR VEHICLE CONTROL SIGN.
      DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that serves solely to direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or parking within a premises or to provide related
instructions or facility information but that contains no advertising other
than the name and logo of the business on the premises, including entrance and
exit signs.
      DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT. A building
or portion thereof where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption and where a significant portion of the consumption takes place or
is designed to take place outside the confines of the building. Such use often
includes an intercom or speaker system, a menu board and an outside service
window. The terms DRIVE-IN and DRIVE-THROUGH shall be considered
interchangeable.
      DRIVEWAY. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles
and allowing access from a street to a building or other structure or facility.
      DUPLEX. A building containing two dwelling units on a single lot with
separate entrances.
      DWELLING. A building or structure designed or used for permanent human
habitation.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building designed for or
occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence
not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. See MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit other than
a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only. See SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLING.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached residential building containing two
dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.
      DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms connected together, constituting a
separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental
or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and containing independent
cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities
      EASEMENT. The right, not ownership of the land, to cross property with
facilities, such as, but not limited to, sewer, water and transmission lines,
or the right distinct from the ownership of the land to reserve and hold an
area for drainage, access or other specified purposes.
      ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include
signs illuminated by an exterior floodlight source.
      ENGINEER. A qualified person registered and currently licensed to
practice civil engineering by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors in the Commonwealth.
      ENTRANCE SIGN. A permanent on-premise sign identifying a vehicular
entrance.
      FACADE. The portion of an exterior elevation on the building extending
from grade to top of the parapet.
      FAMILY. A person living alone, or any of the following groups living
together as a single non-profit housekeeping unit sharing common living,
sleeping, cooking and eating facilities: any number of people related by blood,
marriage, domestic partnership, adoption, guardianship or other duly-authorized
custodial relationship; two unrelated people; or two unrelated people and any
children related to any of them.
      FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
      FINAL ACTION. Any final adjudication of the application for any zoning
map amendment, variance, conditional use permit or appeal from any
administrative official before the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustments,
or appeal from the decision of the Planning Commission or Board of Adjustments
to the City Council, or the highest state or federal court to which any appeals
shall be taken.
      FINAL PLAT. The record plat of a subdivision prepared by a registered
land surveyor in accordance with the minimum standards of practice for land
surveyors in the state established by the State Board of Licensure for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, and meet the minimum standards of
the subdivision regulations.
      FLAG. Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or
other official designated symbol of any institution or business.
      FLAG LOT. An irregularly shaped lot where access is provided from a
public street frontage through a narrow, unobstructed strip (or “panhandle”),
which is part of the lot. The building site within a FLAG LOT does not
immediately abut a public street but is located at the terminus of the access
strip described herein. Building setback lines are to be shown the appropriate
distance from the terminus of the access strip. No building shall be placed in
the access strip. Within the city corporate limits, FLAG LOTS shall only be
used in those locations where, due to geometric, topographic and other physical
features, it would be impractical to extend a publicly dedicated street to
serve lots located in said areas, as determined by the Planning Commission.
Outside the city corporate limits, one FLAG LOT shall be permitted every 500
feet between access strips or “panhandles”, and shall have a minimum of a 50-
foot access strip or “panhandle.” Before any FLAG LOT can be further
subdivided, the developer shall build and dedicate the access strip into a
public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter.
      FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
water, the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source, and mudslides, which are caused or precipitated by accumulations of
water on or underground.
      FLOODPLAIN. Any land designated as floodplain on the flood insurance maps
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
      FOURPLEX. A building containing four dwelling units.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. Any on-premise sign supported by structures or
supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are
independent from any building or other structure.
      FRONT YARD. A space extending the full width of the lot between any
building and the front lot, and measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the front lot line. In case of corner or through lots, FRONT
YARDS shall be provided on all frontages.
      FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with
and measured a specific distance from the street right-of-way line. No
buildings shall be placed in the space between the FRONT YARD SETBACK LINES and
the right-of-way. Lots that front on more than one street or right-of-way must
have a FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE and a principal FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE.
      FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a public street or otherwise
approved street and ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall
not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot.
      GAS STATION. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at
retail. (Uses permissible at a GAS STATION do not include major mechanical and
body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of
automobiles not in operating condition or other work involving noise, glare,
fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found
in GAS STATIONS. A GAS STATION is not a repair garage nor a body shop.)
      GRADE. The inclination with the horizontal, of a road, unimproved land
and the like, which is generally expressed by stating the vertical rise or fall
as a percentage of the horizontal distance.
      GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
      GROSS FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, including interior balconies and mezzanines, but
excluding exterior balconies. All horizontal dimensions are to be measured by
the exterior faces of walls, including the walls of the roofed porches having
more than one wall. The floor area of a building shall include the floor area
of accessory buildings on the same lot.
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The County Health Department.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any business activity, profession or trade carried on by
a member(s) of the family residing on the premises, conducted in whole or in
part inside the dwelling unit or accessory structure and is clearly subordinate
to the residential use of the dwelling unit. Any use of the yard or accessory
structures shall be incidental to the use of the dwelling for the HOME
OCCUPATION. Such use shall not alter the character thereof by reason of noise,
odor, traffic generation or otherwise change the character of the principal
structure or the surrounding area. The following activities are specifically
excluded from this definition:
      (1)   Day trading and investing, if limited to the benefit of family
members, and not involving any compensation for these activities or advice;
      (2)   Telecommuting as an employee or contract employee of an
organization based outside the dwelling unit; and
      (3)   Private social events (e.g., Tupperware, Avon, Amway parties)
provided they do not occur more than three times per calendar year.
      HOUSEHOLD. A single housekeeping unit with common access to and use of
all living and eating areas within the dwelling unit.
      HOUSING OR BUILDING REGULATION. Kentucky Building Code, Plumbing Code and
any other building or structural code promulgated by the Commonwealth or by its
political subdivisions.
      HUD CODE. The Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards
for construction, design and performance of manufactured housing as set forth
in the 24 C.F.R. Parts 3280, 3282 and 3283, and 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. and
as mandated in the United States and as administered by the United States
Department for Housing and Urban Development.
      HUD LABEL. A label affixed by a manufacturer to a new manufactured home
after a third-party inspector as required under the HUD Act has approved it.
Also referred to as an “A Seal”.
      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any sign that carries only the name of the firm,
major enterprise or principal product offered for sale on the premises, or a
combination of these.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Physical changes made to raw land, and structures placed on
or under the land surface, to make the land more usable for human activities.
Typical IMPROVEMENTS in these regulations would be grading, street pavement,
curbs, gutters, drainage ditches, storm and sanitary sewers, utility lines of
all types, street name signs, property number signs, trees and the like.
      IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. Engineering and land surveying drawings that indicate
the proposed manner or layout of specific design features and infrastructure
improvements for a subdivision. Written and graphic material for the provision
of a development, including, but not limited to, the following: location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use, density of
development, streets, roadways, parking facilities, signs, drainage of surface
water, access points, plan for screening or buffering, utilities, existing
human-made and natural conditions, and all other conditions agreed to by the
applicant.
      JUNKYARD. A lot, land or structure, or part thereof used primarily for
the collecting, storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and/or for the sale of parts
thereof.
      LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed as a LAND SURVEYOR by the State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
      LANDMARK. A building, structure or site having a special historical,
architectural, cultural or aesthetic value, meeting one or more of the criteria
set forth in this chapter, and designed by the City Council.
      LANDMARK SITE. The land on which a landmark and related buildings and
structures are located and the land that provides the grounds, the premises or
the setting for the landmark.
      LANDOWNER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land to be
included in a development.
      LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.
      LOADING/UNLOADING AREA. An off-street space or berth used for the loading
or unloading of vehicles.
      LOCAL STREET. Public streets providing vehicular access and services to
abutting property. A LOCAL STREET has a directional flow served by one lane in
each direction and allows on-street parking. The layout of a LOCAL STREET
should discourage through traffic. Traffic volume should not exceed 300 ADT
count per day.
      LOT. A portion of subdivision or other parcel of land occupied by or to
be occupied by only one principal building and its accessory buildings. LOTS
are the basic unit of a subdivision plan or the smallest division of land owned
by a person. LOT is used interchangeably with the term “tract”.
      LOT AREA. The size of a lot measured within the lot lines and expressed
in terms of acres or square feet.
      LOT COVERAGE. The portion of the lot that is covered by buildings,
structures, patios, walkways, travel ways, sidewalks and parking areas. LOT
COVERAGE does not include uncovered, semi-pervious decks, playground areas with
no structural element or outdoor pools. The percent of LOT COVERAGE shall be
determined by dividing the total covered area by the gross area of the lot.
      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines
measured along the median between two side lot lines.
      LOT FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. A property line which abuts a fully controlled access
street and which permanently has no access to that street shall be deemed not
to have frontage for the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner
lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated under YARDS in
this chapter.
      LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or public
way.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
Office of the County Clerk or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds,
the description of which has been so recorded prior to enactment of amendment
of this chapter which rendered such lot or parcel a non-conforming lot.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side property lines
measured at the front setback line. LOT WIDTH is measured along front setback
line, except for the LOT WIDTH of curve or cul-de-sac lots shall be measured
along the chord distance at the front setback between side property lines.
      MAJOR COLLECTOR. A public street that carries the majority of traffic
entering arterial streets. For MAJOR COLLECTORS, the concept of service to
abutting land should be subordinate to the provision of travel for major
traffic movements. Generally, MAJOR COLLECTORS are state-maintained roads. The
MAJOR COLLECTOR street should carry an average daily traffic count between
1,000 to 3,000 trips per day.
      MAJOR CONSTRUCTION OF SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Construction of the following
improvements, including, but not limited to, new streets, including improvement
or widening of existing streets; stormwater management facilities; water supply
system installation; and fire hydrant installation.
      MAJOR STREET PLAN. The official map of the city showing the existing and
proposed public streets.
      MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Division of land not classified as a minor subdivision
and into three lots or more from the parent tract, and/or where there is a need
for major construction of site improvements. A preliminary plat, improvements
plan and final plat are required for this type of subdivision.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family residential dwelling unit fabricated
as defined by KRS 227.550 and constructed in accordance with the Federal Act on
or after June 15, 1976, in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation
and assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with transport
features removed, connected to all required utilities and including plumbing,
heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, and bearing
a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards, as defined in this section.
      MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS. Standards for the
construction, design and performance of a manufactured home as set forth in the
24 C.F.R. Parts 3280, 3282 and 3283, and 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. and as
mandated in the United States and as administered by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, commonly referred to as the HUD
CODE.
      MAYOR. The chief elected official of the city.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATOR. An entity licensed by the state pursuant to
the state statutes and 915 KAR 1:030 to plant, grow, cultivate, raise, harvest,
trim, store, test, package, label, transfer, transport, sell medicinal cannabis
seed, seedlings, medicinal plant, medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis
product to other license cannabis business in the state.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY.
      (a)   An entity licensed by the state pursuant to state statutes and 915
KAR 1.070 to perform retail sales of medicinal cannabis to registered qualified
patient or visiting qualified patient as defined by the state statutes and
corresponding regulations.
         (b)   In zones where MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARIES are a permitted
use, such dispensary must meet all of the following conditions:
            1.   Shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any elementary,
secondary or parochial school or regular and frequent site of after school
activities, playground, public park or daycare center;
            2.   Shall not be located within one mile of another cannabis
dispensary as measured from the property lines;
            3.   Shall not be located adjacent to any residential structure or
zone; and
            4.   Shall not co-locate with a medical cannabis practitioner.
         (c)   In zones where medical cannabis businesses other than
dispensaries are a permitted or conditional use, such facilities shall not be
located within or adjacent to any residential structure or zone.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR. An entity licensed by the state pursuant to
the state statutes and 915 KAR 1:040 to process and/or packages raw medicinal
cannabis plants material or plants into approved forms of medical cannabis
under the state statutes and regulations.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS PRODUCER. An entity licensed by the state pursuant to
the state statutes and 915 KAR 1.050 which operates as both a cannabis
cultivator and processor.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITIES. An entity licensed by the
state pursuant to the state statutes and 915 KAR 1.110
      MINIMUM LOT AREA OR SIZE. The smallest lot area established by this
chapter on which a use or structure may be located in a particular zoning
district.
      MINOR COLLECTOR. A public street that primarily serves residential or
commercial development. Roadways within this classification are intended to
convey traffic to an adjoining major collector or arterial street. Traffic
volume should not exceed 1,000 average daily trips count per day.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. Division of land into two lots or less from the parent
tract for residential use; provided that there is no need for major
construction of site improvements, including any new street or other public
right-of-way or provision for a public area or public facility, and that the
subdivision conforms to the setback line requirements and other requirements of
the applicable zoning district, and conveys the right-of-way necessary for road
widening and maintenance of city streets or county roads, where the granting of
such right-of-way can be given without undue hardship.
      MOBILE HOME. A structure manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, which was
not required to be constructed in accordance with the Federal Act, which is
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or, when created
on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent
foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
These homes bear a numbered Class A or B seal issued by the State Department of
Housing, Building and Construction, Office of the State Fire Marshal.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land prepared and approved by the Planning
Commission for the placement, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, of
two or more spaces for mobile or manufactured homes, according to applicable
zoning regulations.
      MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. The part of a mobile home park
which is planned and improved for the placement of the stand, driveway, parking
area and related yard intended for the exclusive use of the dwelling occupant.
      MODIFICATION. See ALTERATION.
      MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit constructed on-site in accordance with the
state or municipal code and composed of components substantially assembled in a
manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on
a permanent foundation.
      MONUMENT. An object (concrete, iron pin or pipe) set in the ground to
mark the boundaries of real estate or to mark a survey station.
      MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign supported primarily by solid
structural features other than support poles.
      MOTOR VEHICLE CONTROL SIGN. An on-premise sign that is erected,
constructed and maintained for the purpose of directing traffic in off-street
parking areas. See also DIRECTIONAL SIGN.
      MULCH OPERATION. Any use involving the grinding, shredding, storing,
stockpiling or recycling of natural materials, such as trees, leaves or bark,
into a usable product for landscaping or other purposes.
      MULTI-BUILDING DEVELOPMENT. Construction of two or more buildings on a
single tract of land that will not be divided into smaller parcels.
      MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling unit within a building containing five
or more dwelling units. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
      NEW CONSTRUCTION. The act of making an addition to an existing building
or structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory building or
structure.
      NON-CONFORMING LOT. A lot, the area, dimensions or locations of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter and the
subdivision regulations, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the regulations.
      NON-CONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE. An activity or a building, sign,
structure or a portion thereof which lawfully existed before the adoption or
amendment of the zoning regulation, but which does not conform to all the
regulations contained in the zoning regulation which pertain to the zoning
district in which it is located.
      OFF-PREMISE SIGN. Any sign that identifies, advertises or promotes goods,
services, individual and firm products, a person, place, activity, event, idea
or facility which is not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where
such sign is located.
      OFF-STREET PARKING. A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is
directly accessible to an access aisle and that is not located on a dedicated
street right-of-way.
      ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign other than a temporary sign, which identifies,
advertises or promotes goods, services, individual and firm products, a person,
place, activity, event, idea or facility on which is available on the premises
where the sign is located. ON-PREMISE SIGNS do not include signs erected by the
outdoor or billboard advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor
business.
      OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
      ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE. Any work that corrects any
deterioration or damage to a building or structure in order to restore it to
its condition prior to the deterioration or damage.
      OUTDOOR OR BILLBOARD ADVERTISING SIGN. An off-premises sign which directs
attention to businesses, products, services or establishments not usually
conducted on the premises on which the sign is located or other sign erected by
a company or individual for the purpose of selling advertising messages for
lease or rent or otherwise for profit. The term OUTDOOR ADVERTISING shall
include BILLBOARD SIGNS.
      OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
propriety interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations.
      PARKING AREA. Any public or private unobstructed land area that has
access to a street and which is designed and used for parking motor vehicles.
The term includes parking lots, structures, garages, travelways and private
driveways.
      PARKING LOT. An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and
improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. This term does not
include areas for demolished, wrecked, junked or for sale motor vehicles or
where motor vehicle parts are located.
      PARKING SPACE. The area for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area. As used in this chapter, it is a numerical
designation used to determine the size of parking areas.
      PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A permanent masonry, concrete or other footing
approved by the Building Inspector to which a building, structure or
manufactured home may be affixed.
      PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to the zoning district.
      PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c).
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). An area of minimum contiguous size, as
specified by this chapter, to be planned, developed, operated and maintained as
a single entity containing multiple principal buildings to accommodate
residential or commercial uses, or both, and appurtenant common areas and other
uses incidental to the predominant uses, and of common ownership on one lot.
Commonly referred to as cluster developments.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
      PLAT. A map of subdivision showing the boundaries and location of
individual properties, easements, streets and other required information and
prepared by a licensed land surveyor.
      POLE SIGN. Any freestanding sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole
or other support so the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above
grade.
      PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map or plan of proposed land subdivision containing
the information and materials specified in the subdivision regulations.
      PREMISES. A general term meaning part or all of any lot or part of all of
any building or structure or group of buildings or structures located thereon.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A structure or building, including covered porches or
any part of a permitted structure above the foundation, in which the principal
use of the lot on which is located or conducted. Any dwelling shall be deemed
the principal building on the lot on which it is situated. See PRINCIPAL
STRUCTURE.
      PRINCIPAL FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot,
parallel with and measured a specific distance from the street right-of-way
line. A PRINCIPAL FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE establishes the direction a principal
structure must face on a lot with multiple road frontages. No buildings shall
be placed in the space between the PRINCIPAL FRONT YARD SETBACK LINES and the
right-of-way.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A structure or building, including covered porches
or any part of a permitted structure above the foundation, in which the
principal use of the lot on which is located or conducted. Any dwelling shall
be deemed the principal building on the lot on which it is situated. See
PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The primary or predominant use of any lot.
      PRIVATE STREET. A means of access to a public street. A PRIVATE STREET is
owned and maintained by the property owners. No future resubdivision can occur
on a PRIVATE STREET.
      PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which projects from
and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.
      PROPERTY LINE. A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or
public way.
      PUBLIC FACILITY. Any use of land whether publicly- or privately-owned for
transportation, utilities or communications, or for the benefit of the general
public, including, but not limited to, libraries, streets, schools, fire or
police stations, county buildings, municipal buildings, recreational centers,
including parks and cemeteries.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A publicly-owned strip of land occupied or intended
to be occupied by a public street or road, and any associated utilities.
      PUBLIC STREET. A roadway set aside for vehicular traffic regardless of
size or designation but excluding private easements, rights-of-ways and
driveways. The word PUBLIC STREET is used interchangeably with the term “road,”
“highway,” “thoroughfare,” “avenue,” “drive,” “circle,” “parkway,” “place,”
“court” or similar term.
      REAR YARD. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the
principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
      REAR YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with
and measured a specific distance from the rear property line. No buildings
shall be placed in the space between the REAR YARD SETBACK LINES and the rear
property line.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for transient dwelling purposes,
including, but not limited to, a travel trailer, pick-up coach, motor home or
camping trailer.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A parcel of land available to the public in
which two or more recreational vehicle spaces are occupied or intended for
occupancy by recreational vehicles for transient dwelling purposes and includes
any service building, structure, enclosure or other facility used as a part of
the park.
      RECYCLING CENTER OR PLANT. A lot or parcel of land, upon which used
materials are separated and processed for shipment for reuse in new products. A
facility in which recyclables, such as newspapers, magazines, books and other
paper products, glass, metal cans and other products, are recycled, reprocessed
and treated to return such products to a condition in which they again may be
used in new products. A RECYCLING CENTER OR PLANT does not include junkyards.
      RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A residence operated and maintained by a
sponsoring private, non-profit or governmental agency to provide services in a
homelike setting for persons with disabilities, as defined in KRS 100.982.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the serving of
food and beverages primarily to individual diners or small groups of diners for
immediate consumption.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary sewer main, shade trees, drainage facilities or
for another special use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting
purposes shall mean that every RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such RIGHT-OF-WAY and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots
or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains and drainage facilities, shade trees or the owner
of the property on which such RIGHT-OF-WAY is established shall dedicate any
other use involving maintenance by a public agency to public use.
      ROADWAY OR TRAVELWAY. The portion of a street or parking lot intended for
vehicular traffic.
      ROOF LINE. The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette.
      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof
of a building, supported by the roof structure.
      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE. To repair or refurbish a sign, structure or
building, or any part thereof, but not including, expansion or total
replacement.
      SALE or LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of SALE, LEASE, devise,
intestate succession or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, LEASE, devise,
intestate succession or other written instrument.
      SCREENING. A method of visually or audibly shielding or obscuring an
adjacent or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or
densely planted vegetation.
      SEPTIC TANK. A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of
sewerage.
      SETBACK LINE. The required distance between every structure and the lot
lines of the lot on which it is located, measured perpendicular to the building
(at the eave overhang) and related front, side or rear property line, exclusive
of uncovered first floor porch, steps and HVAC equipment (HVAC equipment must,
however, be located a minimum of 30 inches from the property line), and in
which no building may be located.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL (RESIDENTIAL). A dwelling, or portion thereof, which
has guest rooms or suites used, rented, leased, hired out or otherwise assigned
for tenancy or occupancy for less than 30 consecutive days in duration. This
term does not include hotel or motel rooms.
      SIDE YARD. A yard extending along the side lot from the front yard to the
rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest portion of the
principal building. In the case of through lots, SIDE YARDS shall extend from
the rear lot lines to the front lot line.
      SIDE YARD SETBACK LINE. A line in the interior of a lot, parallel with
and measured a specific distance from the side property line. No buildings
shall be placed in the space between the SIDE
YARD SETBACK LINES and the side property line.
      SIDEWALK. A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at
the side of a street within the right-of-way.
      SIGN. Any device, display or structure, other than a building or
landscaping, which is readily visible from public property and is used
primarily for visual communication for the purpose of, or having the effect of,
bringing the subject matter on the device, display or structure, to the
attention of persons off the premises on which the SIGN is displayed. The
foregoing definition includes, but is not limited to, numerals, pictorial
representations, emblems, trademarks, flags, banners, streamers, pennants,
inscriptions and patterns, and shall include a structure erected or used in
connection with the display of any such device and all lighting or other
attachments used in connection therewith.
      SIGN AREA. The area enclosed by one rectangle, the sides of which make
contact with the extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding the supporting
structure does not form part of the sign proper or of the display. The SIGN
AREA composed of characters or words attached directly to a large, uniform
building wall surface shall be the smallest rectangle which encloses the whole
group.
      SIGN FACE. The total surface area of a sign facing in one direction and
visible from the street such sign is intended to face.
      SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the top most part of the
sign or sign structure to the average grade level at the base of the sign.
      SIGN PROJECTION. The distance by which a sign extends over public
property or beyond the building line.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached building designed for, or occupied
exclusively by one family as a residence or habitation.
      SINKHOLE. A pit in the ground caused by the dissolving or collapse of
underlying rock layers, generally limestone. Some SINKHOLES result from
enlargement of joints or crevices, the overlaying soil slumping into the hollow
thus created. Others are formed by collapse of cave roofs.
      SITE PLAN. A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a
parcel of land as required by the regulations involved. Its purpose is to show
how the intended use relates to the major landscape features and surrounding
area.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse, sludge or other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting
from industrial, commercial, residential, agricultural operations or community
uses.
      SPECIAL WASTES. Wastes of high volume and low hazard which include, but
are not limited to, mining wastes, utility wastes (fly ash, bottom ash,
scrubber sludge), sludge from water treatment facilities and wastewater
treatment facilities, cement kiln dust, gas and oil drillings, mud, and oil
production brines. This definition includes the definition of SPECIAL WASTE in
KRS 224.868, as amended.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Areas including less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anal region or female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Activities involving human genitals in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast; flagellation or torture in the context
of sexual relationship; masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating
or infliction of pain; erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an
animal by a human being; or human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal
or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in this definition.
      STORAGE BUILDING. Any building or structure used to provide storage area
for a residential, commercial or industrial structure, and which meets the
definition of accessory structure.
      STORY. The part of a building between the surface of one floor and the
floor or roof immediately above. For the purpose of measuring maximum building
height in stories, a maximum of 20 feet of height shall be considered a STORY.
      STORY ABOVE GRADE. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely
above grade except that a basement shall be considered as a STORY ABOVE GRADE
when the finished surface of the floor-above the basement is more than six feet
above grade plan, more than six feet above the finished ground level for more
than 50% of the total building perimeter or more than 12 feet above the
finished grade level at any point.
      STREET. Any vehicular roadway.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among
other things, STRUCTURES include any building, accessory building, mobile home,
walls, fences, signs, billboards, poster panels, towers, porches, swimming or
other recreational or commercial pools, and retaining walls, gas or liquid
storage tanks, fences and other human-made facilities or infrastructure. The
term shall include poles and appurtenances thereto used for the provision of
public utilities.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person who having an interest in land causes it, directly
or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or directly or indirectly,
sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease or develop, or advertises
for sale, lease or develops any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a
subdivision; or engages directly or through an agent in the business of
selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or develops a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision;
or directly or indirectly is controlled by, or under direct or indirect common
control with any of the foregoing. The term SUBDIVIDER includes “developer,”
“builder” and the like, although the persons and their precise interest may
vary at different project stages.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or
building developments, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel
of land; provided that a division of land for agricultural use and not
involving a new street shall not be deemed a SUBDIVISION. The term includes
resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process
of SUBDIVISION or to the land subdivided; any division or redivision of land
into parcels of less than one acre occurring within 12 months following a
division of the same land shall be deemed a SUBDIVISION within the meaning of
this definition.
      SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of
a subdivider or developer in selling, leasing or developing, or offering to
sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a
subdivision, except any attorney-at-law whose representation of another person
consists solely of rendering legal services.
      SURVEY. The process of precisely ascertaining the area, dimensions and
location of a tract of land.
      TEMPORARY BUILDING. A temporary building used for the storage of
construction materials and equipment incidental to on-site permitted
construction or for temporary storage incidental to that of a principal
building.
      TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION UNIT. Any transportable facility built on its own
chassis used for offices or storage and which is located on a construction
site. No TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION UNIT shall be used for sleeping or residential
purposes in whole or in part.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign or advertising display intended to be displayed
for a period of less than 30 days per calendar year except that construction
project signs may remain for the duration of the construction.
      TINY HOME. A structure intended to be a principal residence for humans
which is differentiated from any other principal residence only by being
diminutive in overall area but is otherwise fully equipped with sleeping,
kitchen and bathroom facilities.
      TOTAL FLOOR AREA. The area of all floors of a building, including
finished attics and basements.
      TOWNHOUSE or TOWNHOME. An attached or semi-detached single-family
dwelling with one or two side walls parting to the adjacent dwelling. A
TOWNHOUSE or TOWNHOME building includes at least three and no more than eight
dwelling units, may be one or more stories and may include a basement.
      TRANSMISSION TOWER. A structure principally intended for the location of
wireless transmission and/or receiving antennas.
      TRANSMISSION TOWER ACCESSORY FACILITY. A detached subordinance structure
or building that is incidental and related to the transmission tower function,
but not including broadcast studios or offices.
      TRAVELWAY or ROADWAY. The portion of a street or parking lot intended for
vehicular traffic.
      TRIPLEX. A building containing three individual dwelling units.
      UNIFORM APPLICATION. An application for a certificate of convenience and
necessity issued under KRS 278.020 submitted by a utility to the Public Service
Commission to construct an antenna tower for cellular telecommunication
services or personal communications service in a jurisdiction, that has adopted
planning and zoning regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 100.
      USABLE FLOOR SPACE. The area of all floors that may be used as living,
working or storage areas.
      USE. The purpose or activity for which land, building or structure, or
combination thereof, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained.
      UTILITY. Any person, except a city, who owns, controls or operates, or
manages any facility used or to be used for or in connection with: the
generation, production, transmission or distribution of electricity to or for
the public, for compensation, for lights, heat, power or other uses; the
production, manufacturing, storage, distribution, sale or furnishing of natural
or manufactured gas or a mixture of the same, to or for the public, for
compensation, for lights, heat, power or other uses; the transporting or
conveying of gas, crude oil or other fluid substance by pipeline to or for the
public, for compensation; the diverting, developing, pumping, impounding,
distributing or furnishing of water to or for the public, for compensation; the
transmission or conveyance over wire, in air or otherwise, of any message by
telephone or telegraph for the public, for compensation; or the treatment of
sewerage for the public, for compensation.
      VARIANCE. A departure from strict conformance with the dimensional terms
of these regulations pertaining to height, width or location of structures, and
the size of yards and open spaces, which may be approved by the Board of
Adjustments, or under certain circumstances by the Planning Commission.
      VEHICLE USE AREA. Any area occupied in whole or in part by motorized
vehicles, including, but not limited to, parking lots, parking stalls,
driveways, service areas and roadways.
      WALL OR BUILDING SIGN. A sign which is painted on the exterior wall of a
building, or attached to or placed flat against, or no more than 18 inches
from, an exterior wall of a building, but not extending above the roof line.
      WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any place where solid waste is managed,
processed or disposed of by incineration, landfilling or any other method. A
WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY does not include a container located on property where
solid waste is generated and which is used solely for the purpose of collection
and temporary storage of that solid waste prior to off-site disposal.
      WASTE TRANSFER STATION. Any facility including loading docks, parking
areas and other similar areas, where shipments of solid waste are held, stored
or transferred during the normal course of transportation.
      YARD. The open space surrounding the principal building on any lot,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of that building from the ground to
the sky except where specifically permitted by this chapter. YARDS are further
defined as follows.
         (a)   YARD, FRONT. The portion of the yard extending the full width of
the lot and measured between the front lot line and a parallel line tangent to
the nearest part of the principal building, which line shall be designated as
the FRONT YARD line.
         (b)   YARD, REAR. The portion of the yard extending the full width of
the lot and measured between the rear lot line and a parallel line tangent to
the nearest part of the principal building.
         (c)   YARD, SIDE. Those portions of the yard extending from the front
yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and parallel
lines tangent to the nearest parts of the principal building.
      ZERO LOT LINE. The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that
one side of the building rests directly on a property line.
      ZONE OR ZONING DISTRICT. Any area or section of the city for which a
classification under this chapter or land use regulations governing apply
uniformly, The terms ZONE and DISTRICT are used interchangeably.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.010 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, also known as the Administrative
Official of the city or Planning Commission, or any other person authorized by
the City Council or Planning Commission. Such enforcement personnel shall have
the power to:
      (1)   Make inspections of any premises necessary to carry out the
enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   Issue citations for violations of this chapter in accordance with
the provisions of KRS 100.991 and the procedures set forth in KRS 431.015; and
      (3)   Bring action or cause action to be brought in court of appropriate
jurisdiction for any and all relief as provided in KRS Chapter 100.
   (B)   Other remedies. In such case any building is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this regulation, the Enforcement Officer or any
other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who
would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies may institute
an injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
the occupancy of such buildings, structure or land.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.011 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   All advertising and recording costs incurred are to be paid by the applicant
prior to issuance of approval or permit.
Item Description Fee
Item Description                            Fee
Administratively approvable plat review     $25
Amendment, zoning map or text (zone change) $300
Bond release                                $200
Conditional use permit application review   $100
Plat
   Final review                          $150
   Preliminary review                    $300
Sign approval                               $25
Variance                                    $50
 
Fees for Zoning Permits
Accessory buildings and structures (sheds, pools, patios) $25
Additions                                                 $50
Commercial/industrial                                     $.02/sq. ft.
                                                         $50 minimum
                                                         $500 maximum
New residence                                             $100
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.020 REVIEW BODIES; CLARIFICATION AS TO JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Planning Commission and Administrative Official.
      (1)   Planning Commission.
         (a)   Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the Planning
Commission in regard to this chapter are established by KRS Chapter 100 and
include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Hold public hearings in accordance with the state statutes and
make a recommendation to the City Council in regard to zoning text or map
amendments, including the designation of planned unit developments (PUDs);
            2.   Review and take final action on detailed development plans;
            3.   Review and make a recommendation to the City Council in regard
to the designation of local historic districts and landmarks; and
            4.   If for any reason the Board of Zoning Adjustment is
unavailable to take final action on variances and conditional use permits, the
Planning Commission may do so in accord with KRS Chapter 100.
         (b)   Membership. The Planning Commission shall consist of a minimum
of six citizen members appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
City Council. Should the Mayor fail to appoint within 60 days following a
vacancy, the Planning Commission shall appoint a new member to fill the
vacancy.
         (c)   Term of office. The term of office shall be four years ending on
June 30 of the designated year. The term of all present members shall be
staggered as existed at the time of the original adoption of this chapter. The
Planning Commission shall otherwise be organized and operated in accordance
with KRS 100.133 through 100.182.
         (d)   Jurisdiction. The area of jurisdiction of the Planning
Commission, insofar as this chapter is concerned, shall include all land within
the corporate boundaries of the city.
      (2)   Administrative Official.
         (a)   Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the Administrative
Official, or designee, in regard to this chapter, shall include the following:
            1.   Make written interpretations of this chapter;
            2.   Serve as the Administrative Official pursuant to KRS 100.271;
            3.   Approve certain preliminary plats deemed administratively
approvable, including retracement surveys;
            4.   Approve minor amendments to a PUD District;
            5.   Approve minor amendments to detailed development plans;
            6.   Review building permits and certificates of occupancy for
conformance with this chapter;
            7.   Review/approval/issuance of zoning permits, and approval of
proposed signage and fencing; and
            8.   Any other duties as assigned by the Planning Commission or
City Council as allowed by law.
         (b)   Appointment. The Planning Commission, upon approval by the
Mayor, shall designate and appoint an Administrative Official, also known as an
Enforcement Officer, who may be a member of the Planning Commission, who shall
be charged with and provided with the authority to enforce the ordinances,
regulations and orders of the Planning Commission and to issue zoning permits
and certificates of occupancy. The Administrative Official/Enforcement Officer,
in the performance of his or her duties and function, may enter upon any land
and make examinations and surveys that do not occasion damage or injury to
private property. The Administrative Official/Enforcement Officer may perform
other functions for the city such as Building Inspector.
   (B)   Board of Adjustments.
      (1)   Duties and responsibilities. The Board of Adjustments shall have
powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in KRS Chapter 100 and
including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Hear and decide administrative appeals where it is alleged by
the appellants that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit,
decision, determination or refusal made by any administrative official in
carrying out or enforcing any provision of this chapter;
         (b)   To make interpretations of the official zoning map;
         (c)   To make final action on conditional uses;
         (d)   To take final action on variances; and
         (e)   To administer the non-conforming use regulations per KRS
100.253.
      (2)   Membership. The Board of Adjustments shall consist of five citizen
members appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council.
The Board of Adjustments membership may include not more than two members of
the Planning Commission. The Mayor and/or City Council may expand the Board
membership to seven members but at no time should the Board have less than
three members nor more than seven, nor shall the Board have an even number of
members.
      (3)   Term of office. The term of office shall be four years ending on
June 30 of the designated year. The term of all present members shall be
staggered so that no more than two members terms shall expire within one year.
The Board of Adjustments shall otherwise be organized and operated in
accordance with KRS 100.217 through 100.271.
      (4)   Jurisdiction. The area of jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustments
shall include all land within the corporate boundaries of the city. The Board
may only make those initial discretionary interpretations and decisions and
allow only those departures from literal conformance with the zoning
regulations which are specifically delegated to the Board of Adjustments.
   (C)   Building Inspector. The Building Inspector applies the provisions of
the Kentucky Housing and Building Code (KHBC) and select provisions of this
chapter relating to specific documents. The duties of the Building Inspector in
regard to this chapter shall include the following:
      (1)   To enforce any applicable Building Code adopted by the City
Council;
      (2)   To ensure building permit compliance with this chapter; and
      (3)   To take final action on all building permits and certificates of
occupancy.
   (D)   Legislative body - City Council. The powers, duties and
responsibilities of the City Council in regard to this chapter shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   To take final action on any text amendment of this chapter or
amendment of the official zoning map, including designation of planned unit
developments (PUDs);
      (2)   To take final action on the designation of local historic districts
or individual historic landmarks; and
      (3)   To concur in the appointment of Board membership as defined in this
section of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.021 EXEMPTION OF AGRICULTURAL USE.
   Land which is a bona fide farm and utilized for agricultural use as defined
herein shall not require a zoning permit or be subject to zoning restrictions
under this chapter except that:
   (A)   Setback lines may be enforced to protect existing or proposed streets
and highways; and
   (B)   Buildings in designated floodways or floodplains may be fully
regulated.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY
§ 156.035 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the area of jurisdiction of this chapter is
hereby divided into zoning districts which shall be designated as set forth
below, and the district names in effect immediately prior to the effective date
of this chapter, if any, are hereby converted as follows:
Zoning District Designation
Zoning District                           Designation
Central Commercial District               CC
Commercial Restricted District            CR
General Highway Commercial District       HC
General Industrial District               I-1
Mobile Home Park District                 MHP
Multi-Family Residential District         R-3
One- to Three-Family Residential District R-2
Single-Family Residential District        R-1
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.036 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the
official zoning map of the city, which, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. This map shall be permanently located in the Office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the
following words: “This is to certify that this is the official zoning map
referred to in this chapter” together with the date of the adoption of this
chapter.
   (C)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and KRS Chapter
100, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the
official zoning map when it is periodically reviewed as required, such changes
shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has
been approved by the City Council, with an entry on the official zoning map as
follows: “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following
(change) changes were made in the official zoning map: (brief description of
nature of change),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the City Clerk. No amendment to this chapter which involves matter portrayed on
the official zoning map shall become effective until after such change and
entry has been made on said map.
   (D)   No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or
matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this
chapter. An unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall
be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided under §§
156.110 through
156.112 and provisions of state law.
   (E)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning
map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map
which shall be located in the Office of the City Clerk shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings
and other structures in the city.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see 156.999
§ 156.037 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map
which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning
map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official
zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the
original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new
official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested
by the City Clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:
“This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the
official zoning map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of
the zoning ordinance of the City of Springfield, Kentucky.”
   (B)   Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining
shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit the
power of the Planning Commission or City Council to amend and/or readopt as
provided in KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.038 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The following rules shall be used to interpret the exact location of the
zoning district boundaries shown on the zoning map.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following a street, highway,
alley or railroad shall follow the centerline of the street, highway, alley or
railroad and said centerline shall be construed as the boundary of the
district. Vacated rights-of-way shall not affect the original zoning.
   (B)   Where a zoning district boundary approximately follows a platted lot
or property line, that line is the boundary or the district.
   (C)   Where a zoning district boundary follows a stream or the shore of a
body of water, that stream or shoreline is the boundary of the district, and in
the event of natural change in the shoreline, the boundary shall be construed
as moving with the actual shoreline.
   (D)   Where a boundary approximately follows the centerlines of rivers,
lakes or other bodies of water, they shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to features indicated
in the divisions above shall so be construed; distances not specifically
indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the
map, if an accurate legal description cannot be determined. Where boundary
lines are established by zoning map amendment, the legal description used for
that zoning map amendment shall control.
   (F)   Where the lot in question is divided into two or more districts, the
entire area may be used in conformity with and is subject to the regulations
established for the most restrictive district in which any portion of the lot
is located.
   (G)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following political boundaries
shall be construed as following such boundaries.
   (H)   Where a zoning district boundary does not clearly follow any of the
features mentioned above, its exact location on the ground shall be determined
by measurement according to the map scale.
   (I)   In any case where the exact location of a boundary is unclear, and the
above stated rules do not indicate the exact locations of the zoning district
boundaries, then said boundaries shall be determined by the Administrative
Official and may be subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning Adjustments. The
Administrative Official may also apply to the Board of Zoning Adjustments for
an original interpretation.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.039 AREAS UNASSIGNED TO A ZONING DISTRICT.
   Any area hereafter annexed into the city shall remain in the same district
as legally existed before annexation unless the district is specifically
changed by ordinance according to the requirements of the relevant provisions
of the state statutes pertaining to amendments. If the property lies in unzoned
territory, until annexation proceedings take place, the area is considered an
extension of the largest contiguous district. If the classification of such an
area is questionable, the Administrative Official may, upon approval by the
Planning Commission, refuse to issue zoning or other permits until the area is
assigned to a zoning district.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
USE REGULATIONS
§ 156.050 GENERALLY.
   The following general regulations will apply to all zoning districts.
   (A)   Uses.
Appendix A lists the uses allowed within zoning districts.
      (1)   Permitted uses (P). A “P” indicates that a use category is allowed
by right in the respective zoning district. These permitted uses are subject to
all other applicable regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   Conditional uses (C). A “C” indicates that a use category is
allowed only if reviewed and approved as a conditional use in accordance with
the conditional use permit procedures of §
156.131. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of
this chapter and may have specific conditions set forth by the Board of
Adjustments.
      (3)   Prohibited uses. A blank or empty cell indicates that a use type is
not allowed in the respective zoning district, unless it is otherwise expressly
allowed by other regulations of this chapter. Any use not allowed or not listed
is deemed prohibited and detrimental to the development of the district.
      (4)   New or unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use type
that is not listed in the use table, the Zoning Administrator shall be
authorized to make a similar use interpretation based on the criteria set forth
below. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed use does not
fit any of the use descriptions of
Appendix A, no similar use interpretation shall be made. The Zoning
Administrator shall make a determination as to the use for the application that
has been made.
         (a)   The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in
relationship to the stated characteristics of each use category;
         (b)   The relative amount of the area of floor space and equipment
devoted to the activity;
         (c)   Relative amounts of sales from each activity;
         (d)   The customer type for each activity, retail or wholesale;
         (e)   The relative number of employees in each activity;
         (f)   Hours of operation;
         (g)   Building and site arrangement;
         (h)   Vehicles used with the activity;
         (i)   The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use;
         (j)   How the use advertises itself;
         (k)   Parking needs;
         (l)   Noise level, odor, dust, vibrations or smoke generated; and
         (m)   Utility use.
      (5)   Developments with multiple permitted uses. When all principal uses
of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is
assigned to that use category. When the principal uses of a development fall
within different use categories, then each use is subject to all applicable
regulations for that category.
      (6)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses are customarily incidental and
necessary to any permitted use and are allowed by right in conjunction with a
principal use unless otherwise stated in the regulations. Accessory structures
shall not include any business, trade or industry, or any access driveway or
walkway thereto, unless clearly incidental to the permitted use. Also, unless
otherwise stated, accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the
principal uses.
      (7)   Home occupations. Home occupations shall be permitted on a limited
basis in the residential districts. Permitted home occupations in these
districts are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A and may include academic tutoring, music lessons, catering,
childcare (with less than eight children attending), sewing/alterations/
tailoring/embroidery, hair salon/cosmetologist/barber and limited art/
photography studio. Permitted home occupations shall meet the standards of the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (B)   General development requirements and standards.
      (1)   Development plan. A development plan is intended to demonstrate the
character and objectives of the proposed development in adequate detail for the
Planning Commission to evaluate the effect of the proposed development on the
community and to determine what provisions, if any, shall be altered for the
protection and promotion of the general public health, safety and welfare. As a
condition to the granting of any zoning map amendment, the Planning Commission
is authorized to require the submission of a development plan. The development
plan shall be filed in accordance with the provisions and requirements of §§
156.110 through
156.112. Where agreed upon, this development plan shall be followed and shall
be binding on all parties.
      (2)   Water supply and sanitary sewage systems. All uses within the
corporate limits of the city shall be served by the public sanitary sewage
system, unless otherwise specified by the city. All uses within the corporate
limits of the city must have water supply either from an accessible water main,
or if no water main is reasonably accessible, then from a source approved by
the County Health Officer. All applications for building permit or certificate
of occupancy submitted to the Building Inspector shall be accompanied by the
County Health Officer’s certificate approving proposed and completed water and
sewage facilities.
      (3)   Principal and accessory buildings and structures. Unless a plat
and/or development plan has been approved for multi-building development, only
one principal building and accessory structures customarily incidental to any
permitted use shall be allowed per permitted lot. No accessory building shall
be used for residential purposes, except for necessary tenant dwellings
required for agricultural production on agriculturally exempt lots or those
qualifying as accessory dwelling units or tiny home hereunder.
      (4)   Lot area.
         (a)   Minimum lot area. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter,
lots served by a sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot area of 7,500 square
feet, and lots not served by sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot area of
30,000 square feet.
         (b)   Minimum lot area above 100-year flood level required. No lot
shall be created or developed which does not have at least 5,000 square feet of
lot area above the 100-year frequency flood level.
      (5)   Lot width. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, lots served
by sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet, and lots not
served by sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot width of ten feet.
      (6)   Yards.
         (a)   Application of yards to one building only. No part of a yard
required for any building may be included as fulfilling the yard requirements
for an adjacent building.
         (b)   Use of yards for accessory buildings. No accessory buildings are
permitted in front or side yards. They are permitted only in the rear yards
according to the dimensions and area regulations set forth in the specific
zoning district regulations of this chapter.
         (c)   Rear dwelling prohibited. No building in the rear of a main
building on the same lot may be erected for residential purposes, except as
approved by the Board of Adjustments, those qualifying as an accessory dwelling
unit or tiny home hereunder, or in a multi-family residential district.
      (7)   Building line setbacks.
         (a)   Distance greater than minimum required. Building setback lines
as established by this subchapter may be greater than the minimums set forth.
         (b)   Front yard setback line. Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the minimum front yard setback line shall be one-half the width of the
street right-of-way, and in no case shall this distance be less than 30 feet.
Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum 100-foot front yard setback
line. A waiver from strict enforcement of this front yard setback may be
granted by the Zoning Administrator where the majority of existing development
on the same block face is set back less than the required setback. In such
case, the front yard setback may be the average setback line for that block
face.
         (c)   Rear yard setback line. Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the minimum rear yard setback line shall be no less than 25 feet.
         (d)   Side yard setback line. Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, the minimum side yard setback line shall be no less than eight feet.
         (e)   Additional setbacks for corner lots. Corner lots shall be
required to provide a front yard along any lot line abutting a street. Unless
the plat is expressly marked as to the street the dwelling will front, a rear
yard shall be substituted for any side yard not abutting a street. Corner lots
shall be required to provide a side yard abutting a street of at least 30 feet.
         (f)   Additional setbacks adjacent to parkways or other highways. Lots
that abut or are adjacent to a parkway or other fully controlled access
highways which allow no direct access shall have a minimum building setback
line from the right-of-way of said highway of 25 feet. This building line shall
be the same whether considered as front, side or rear setback.
      (8)   Building height.
         (a)   Maximum building height. Unless otherwise specified in this
chapter, no building shall exceed 45 feet in height.
         (b)   Height exceptions. Building height regulations apply to
buildings occupied regularly by persons or their activities. They do not apply
to structures or portions of buildings, such as church spires, belfries,
cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments; water towers;
observation towers; flagpoles; or chimneys. The Board of Adjustments shall
interpret whether or not height regulations apply upon application by the
Administrative Official in doubtful cases. The Kentucky Airport Zoning and
Federal Aviation Agency height regulations in the vicinity of an airport shall
take precedence over all other height regulations.
      (9)   Access and visibility. All lots shall have access to a public
street and shall comply with the access and visibility requirements set forth
in the subdivision regulations. The Planning Commission shall approve access to
buildings in a planned unit development. Furthermore, in all but the Central
Commercial District, no obstructions to vision between a height of two and one-
half feet and ten feet above the imaginary plane defined by the following three
points of intersection are permitted: at the intersection of any two street
rights-of-way, of streets and railways, or of a straight line intersecting
those two rights-of-way at points thirty feet from the intersection.
      (10)   Accessory buildings and structures.
         (a)   General. Construction or installation of accessory buildings and
structures, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit and shall be subject to the following regulations.
Accessory buildings and structures shall not include mobile homes, buses,
travel trailers, recreational vehicles, trailers, coolers, vehicles or freight
containers. No accessory structure that is not designated to breakaway on
impact shall be permitted in the right-of-way. Such structures include, but are
not limited to, rock or brick mailbox structures. Any accessory structure may
be connected to the principal building by a breezeway or other similar
structure but shall not be considered as an attached accessory building,
carport or similar structure. Said breezeway shall not project nearer to the
side lot line than the minimum side yard required for the principal building.
         (b)   Setbacks. Accessory structures shall be not located in the front
yard and side yard and shall not extend beyond the principal structure.
Accessory structures shall be located behind and to the rear of the principal
structure. Accessory structures on corner lots adjoining residential uses or
districts shall not extend beyond the front of the principal structure or be
nearer to the side street than the depth of the required front setback for the
principal structure along such street.
         (c)   Height. The height of accessory structures shall not exceed the
height of the principal structure. This restriction does not apply to radio
towers, silos, flag poles or other structures which are not regularly occupied
by human beings. If in doubt as to applicability, the Board of Adjustments
shall interpret whether the structure in question is subject to height
restrictions.
         (d)   Size. The maximum size of accessory structures shall be 50% of
gross floor area of principal structure
         (e)   Fencing.
            1.   Height. 
               a.   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, fencing shall
be permitted and shall conform to height restrictions. Fencing less than four
feet in height shall be permitted along all property lines. Fencing that is
less than eight feet in height shall be permitted along rear and side property
lines and from the rear property line to the rear of the principal structure.
Fencing greater than eight feet in height shall be permitted with the prior
approval of the Board of Adjustments or the Planning Commission. No fence may
be located in a public roadway or the right-of-way thereto without advance
written permission from the city.
               b.   For all commercial or industrial zones, fencing of eight
feet or less is allowed in the front yard if neither solid nor opaque.
            2.   Materials. Fencing or screening constructed in front or side
yards abutting a public street must be constructed of materials not eliminating
or impeding view of the principal building from the public street and requires
Planning Commission approval for location, height, material and construction.
Chain link or wire fences shall not be permitted in the front yard of
residential zones.
            3.   Setbacks. Fences may be located as close as zero feet from all
adjoining property lines; however, care should be exercised in determining the
true and accurate location of said property boundary lines in advance of fence
placement.
         (f)   Patios and private pools.
            1.   Patios. All patios must be at least five feet from any
property line, right-of-way or easement.
            2.   Private pools. The following regulations apply to all private
pool installations.
               a.   Before construction can begin, owner must apply for a pool
permit from the city, and submit all necessary form.
               b.   Owner must erect and maintain an adequate enclosure
surrounding the pool area. The enclosure, including gates, shall not be less
than six feet above the underlying ground. All gates shall be self-closing and
self-latching with childproof latches placed at least four feet above the
underlying ground.
               c.   Electrical permits issued by a state- and county-approved
inspector shall be required for electrical work and shall be issued only to
properly licensed electrical contractors. Electrical inspector must make a
rough-in and final inspections.
               d.   Owner must not alter the flow of water into adjacent
properties during construction or operation of the pool.
               e.   Owner must get sign-off from Water and Sewer Authority,
assuring that the pool is not draining into the sewer.
               f.   Before the pool may be used, an approved zoning permit must
be obtained.
               g.   Owner must call Kentucky Underground Protection, Inc. two
working days before you dig (1-800-752-6007).
               h.   Accessory fee structure applies. See fee schedule in §
156.011.
         (g)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures or constructs,
including patios and wheelchair or handicap-access ramps but excluding
unelevated driveways, must be at least five feet from the property line. Non-
elevated driveways can run along the property line with zero lot line setback.
   (C)   Sinkholes. Sinkholes and other similar depressions and the area within
50 feet horizontally from the rim of said sinkhole or that area subject to
periodic flooding, whichever is greater, shall be preserved in its natural
state for the purpose of providing drainage of the surrounding area. No
building, street or any other improvement shall be made within the given area
around a sinkhole. The Planning Commission shall have the power to increase the
area around the sinkhole if drainage conditions warrant such action. The
sinkhole may be punched or otherwise altered to improve drainage. The Planning
Commission or its Administrative Official is hereby empowered to require
appropriate survey work to identify such features, of any applicant seeking
approval to divide, develop or rezone property in the county where it is
reasonably anticipated that such problems occur.
   (D)   Accessory dwelling units (ADU).
      (1)   A residential lot may have one primary dwelling unit and one
accessory dwelling unit (ADU).
      (2)   An ADU may not be conveyed separately from the primary dwelling
unit unless the lot parameters comply with all applicable subdivision
regulations.
      (3)   ADUs shall not be more than 750 square feet nor less than 200
square feet; ADUs shall have no more than two bedrooms.
      (4)   All setback requirements that apply to the principal dwelling unit
also apply to the ADU.
      (5)   The minimum distance between the principal dwelling unit and the
ADU must be at least 15 feet.
      (6)   ADUs must be placed on a permanent foundation.
      (7)   ADUs shall comply with the requirements of any applicable housing
codes, building codes and parking regulations, unless specifically noted in
this section.
      (8)   At least one off-street parking space must be provided for the ADU
in addition to the parking required for the main dwelling unit.
      (9)   ADUs shall comply with all other requirements for dwelling units
contained in this chapter unless specifically stated in this section.
      (10)   Any other appropriate or more stringent conditions deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission or the Board of Adjustments to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and character of the neighborhood may be
imposed.
      (11)   ADUs shall be considered residences, not accessory structures.
      (12)   Application for a permit for an ADU shall be made to BOZA in
accordance with established conditional use permit procedures. All general
zoning permit application procedures, such as those found in §§
156.110 through
156.112, are also applicable.
   (E)   Tiny homes as primary dwelling units.
      (1)   Tiny homes as primary dwelling units are permitted only in R-
1 Zones. There may be a maximum of two tiny homes present on one lot.
Otherwise, tiny homes must comply with all the requirements of ADUs set forth
in division (D) above.
      (2)   A tiny home may be constructed or installed as the only dwelling on
a lot with all applicable appropriate permits.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.051 USE EXCEPTIONS.
   Several types of structures and uses which may or may not be listed as
permitted uses in any district are, nevertheless, not prohibited from any
district. These structures and uses are as follows.
   (A)   No building permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy
required.
      (1)   Local public utility distributing and collecting structures such as
pipes and transmission lines, transformers, meters and the like. Large utility
structures such as substations are permitted only as conditional uses. For
cellular antenna towers, see §
156.052;
      (2)   Public streets and all appurtenances necessary for traffic
direction and safety;
      (3)   Private drives, private parking areas and the parking of vehicles
incidental to the principal use on the same premises;
      (4)   Real estate signs located on the premises being advertised for rent
or sale, not to exceed a total of ten square feet in sign area;
      (5)   Signs not over four square feet in area identifying permitted home
occupation or short-term rental on the same premises;
      (6)   Horticulture and landscaping of any premises;
      (7)   Agriculture;
      (8)   Uncovered patios on ground level; and
      (9)   Handicap-accessible ramps.
   (B)   Zoning permit required; no building permit or certificate of occupancy
required. Advertising sign or structure: all such signs shall meet the
standards set forth within the individual districts as established in §§
156.145 through
156.159, except as provided for by division (A)(4) and (A)(5) above.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.052 CELLULAR ANTENNA TOWERS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the
safest and most efficient integration of cellular antenna towers for cellular
telecommunications services or personal communication services within the
community, to provide for such facilities in coordination with the
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan and to allow for such facilities with
the intention of furthering the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   General. Cellular antenna towers for cellular telecommunications
services or personal communication services may be allowed in any zone after
the Planning Commission reviews it in accordance with the following procedures
to ascertain agreement with the adopted Comprehensive Plan and the regulations
contained within the chapter, and after being granted a certificate of
necessity and convenience by the Public Service Commission.
   (C)   Applicability. Every utility, or a company that is engaged in the
business of providing the required infrastructure to a utility that proposes to
construct an antenna tower for cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall submit a copy of the utility’s completed uniform
application to the Planning Commission within five consecutive days of applying
to the Public Service Commission for a certificate of necessity and
convenience.
   (D)   Application requirements. Applications for the construction of
cellular antenna towers or cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications sendees shall include the following:
      (1)   All information that the application is required to submit to the
Public Service Commission, per the requirements of the uniform application;
      (2)   A copy of the applicant’s FCC license, or if the applicant is not
an FCC license holder, a copy of at least one letter of commitment from an FCC
license holder to locate at least one antenna on the applicant’s tower;
      (3)   Unless co-locating, certification, supported by evidence, that
colocation of the proposed facility with an existing approved tower or facility
cannot be accommodated. The applicant’s certification shall include a listing
of all existing towers and facilities within a two-mile radius of the proposed
tower location, a description of each existing site, and discussion of the
ability or inability to collocate on each existing site, according to the
following:
         (a)   No existing towers or facilities are located within two-mile
radius of the proposed tower location;
         (b)   Existing towers or facilities are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant’s engineering requirements;
         (c)   Existing towers or facilities do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant’s proposed antenna(s) or related equipment;
         (d)   The applicant’s planned equipment would cause frequency
interference with other existing or planned equipment of the tower or facility
or the existing or planned equipment of the tower or facility would cause
frequency interference with the applicant’s planned equipment, and which cannot
be reasonably prevented; and
         (e)   Unwillingness of the owner of the existing tower or facility to
entertain a collation proposal.
      (4)   Unless collocating, certification, supported by evidence, that the
proposed site is the only appropriate site for the location of the facility,
the applicant’s certification shall include a listing of all potential sites
within a two-mile radius of the proposed tower location, a description of each
potential site and a discussion of the ability or inability of the site to host
such a facility, according to the following:
         (a)   Unwillingness of the site owner(s) to entertain such a facility;
         (b)   Topographic limitations on the site;
         (c)   Adjacent impediments that would obstruct adequate transmission;
         (d)   Physical site constraints that would preclude the construction
of such a facility;
         (e)   A statement demonstrating that the proposal is in agreement with
the adopted Comprehensive Plan and is in conformity with this section;
         (f)   A development plan, drawn to scale not smaller than one-inch
equals 100 feet, showing:
            1.   The total area of the site in question;
            2.   All public and private rights-of-way and easement lines
located on or adjacent to the subject property which are proposed to be
continued, created, enlarged, relocated or abandoned;
            3.   Existing topography and approximate delineation of any
topographical changes shown by contour with intervals not to exceed five feet;
            4.   Location, height, arrangement and identification of all non-
residential buildings, structures and uses on the subject property and, where
applicable, location and arrangement of all lots with lot dimensions;
            5.   Location and arrangement of all common open space areas and
methods of ownership and operation and maintenance of such lands shall be
identified;
            6.   Landscaping features, including identification of planting
areas and the location, type and height of walls and fences;
            7.   Location of all signs, indicating their orientation, size and
height;
            8.   All utility lines and easements for water distribution
systems, including line sizes, easement widths, pipe type, hydrant and valves
location, and other appurtenances, for sanitary sewer system, including pipe
sizes, easement widths, gradients, pipe types, invert elevations, manhole
locations and types, all lift or pumping stations location, types, sizes and
capacity, and process of any necessary treatment facilities and other
appurtenances, and for storm sewer and natural drainage system, including pipe
and culvert sizes, gradients, location of open drainage courses, easement
widths, inlets and catch basin location and size, and retention and/or
sedimentation basin location and sizes, and for other utilities, such as
electric, telephone and the like, including the type of service and easement
widths;
            9.   Location of all off-street parking, loading and/or unloading,
and driveway areas, including typical cross sections, type of surfacing,
dimensions, number and arrangement of off-street parking and loading, and/or
unloading spaces;
            10.   Circulation system, pedestrian walkways, including alignment,
grades, surface type and width, and streets, including alignment, grades,
surface type, pavement and right-of-way width, geometric details, and typical
cross sections; and
            11.   Provisions of control of erosion and storm drainage, hillside
slippage and sedimentation, indicating the temporary and permanent control
practices and measures which will be
implemented during all phases of clearing, grading and construction.
   (E)   Application process. Applications for the construction of cellular
antenna towers or cellular telecommunications services or personal
communications services shall be processed as follows.
      (1)   New sites.
         (a)   At least one public hearing on the proposal shall be held, at
which hearing interested parties and citizens shall have the opportunity to be
heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least
once, but may be published two or more times, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county; provided that one publication occurs not less than
seven calendar days nor more than 21 days before the occurrence of such
hearing.
         (b)   Notice of such hearing shall be posted conspicuously on the
property in question for 14 consecutive days immediately prior to the hearing.
Said posting shall consist of one or more signs, constructed of durable
material, and clearly depicting the following information: (name of utility)
proposes to construct a telecommunications (tower or monopole) on this site
(four-inch high lettering); date, place and time of public hearing (one-inch
high lettering); and address, including telephone number of the Planning
Commission where additional information regarding the hearing may be obtained.
         (c)   Notice of the hearing shall be given at least 14 days in advance
of the hearing, by first class mail, with certification by the Planning
Commission secretary, or other officer of the Planning Commission, that the
notice was mailed to an owner of every parcel of property within 500 feet of
the base of the proposed tower or monopole. It shall be the duty of the
applicant proposing the facility to furnish the Planning Commission with the
names and addresses of said property owners. Records maintained by the PVA may
be relied upon consecutively to determine the identity and address of said
owner. In the event such property is in a condominium or cooperative forms of
ownership, then the person notified by mail shall be the president or
chairperson owned by the condominium or cooperative owners. A joint notice may
be mailed to two or more co-owners of an adjoining property who are listed in
the PVA’s records as having the same address.
         (d)   Upon holding such hearing, the Planning Commission shall, within
60 days commencing from the date that the application is received by the
Planning Commission, or within a date specified in a written agreement between
the Planning Commission and the applicant, make its final decision to approve
or disapprove the uniform application. The Planning Commission shall submit to
the Public Service Commission, along with their action, the basis for their
decision. If the Planning Commission fails to issue a final decision within 60
days, and if there is no written agreement between the Planning Commission and
the utility to a specific date for the Planning Commission to issue a decision,
it is presumed that the Planning Commission has approved the utility’s uniform
application.
      (2)   Previously approved site.
         (a)   For facilities located on previously approved sites, the
Planning Commission’s Administrative Officer shall review the application for
its conformity with these regulations and all regulations contained with the
chapter.
         (b)   If the Planning Commission’s Administrative Officer determines
that the application is in conformity with these regulations and all
regulations contained within the chapter, an administrative approval may be
granted.
         (c)   If the Planning Commission’s Administrative Official determines
that the application is not in conformity with these regulations and all
regulations contained within this chapter, a public hearing, pursuant to this
section, shall be scheduled.
   (F)   Design standards. At the time of the application submittal, the
applicant shall provide information demonstrating compliance with the following
requirements. Where the Planning Commission or its Administrative Official
finds that the circumstances or conditions relating to the particular
application are such that one or more of the requirements listed below are not
necessary or desirable for the protection of surrounding property or the public
health, safety and general welfare, and that such special conditions or
circumstances make one or more said requirements unreasonable, the Planning
Commission or its Administrative Official may modify or waive such requirement,
either permanently or on a temporary basis. The applicant shall request any
such modification or waiver, and the applicant shall submit a written
justification for each requested modification or waiver.
      (1)   All structures, except fences, shall be located at least 50 feet
from the property line or lease line of any residentially zoned property.
      (2)   A cellular antenna tower or alternative antenna tower structure may
be constructed to a maximum height of 200 feet. This also applies to any tower
taller than 15 feet constructed on the top of another building or structure,
with the height being the overall height of the building/structure and tower
together, measured from the grade to the highest point. The Planning Commission
may allow antennas greater than 200 feet in height upon review of the
applicant’s justification that the additional height meets the criteria
identified in this section.
      (3)   When any cellular antenna tower or alternative antenna tower
structure is taller than the distance from its base to the nearest property
line or lease line, the applicant shall furnish the Planning Commission with a
certification from an engineer registered in the Commonwealth that the tower
will withstand winds of 70 mph, in accordance with the current ANSI/EIA/TIA
standards.
      (4)   Cellular antenna towers shall not be illuminated, except in
accordance with other state and federal regulations.
      (5)   The site shall be unstaffed. Personnel may periodically visit the
site for maintenance, equipment modification or repairs. To accommodate such
visits, ingress/egress shall only be from approved access points.
      (6)   A minimum of one off-street parking space per provider shall be
provided on the site.
      (7)   A chain link (80% open) or solid fences made from wood or other
materials (less than 50% open) shall be used to enclose the site. Such fences
shall not be less than four feet in height nor more than eight feet in height.
The use of woven wire, barbed wire or sharp pointed fences shall be prohibited.
Such fences shall be located within the front, side or rear yard.
      (8)   Screening shall be required when the site in question abuts
residentially zoned property. Screening shall be provided by evergreen trees
planted in a staggered pattern at a maximum distance of 15 feet on center. The
screening shall be placed in an area between the property line, or lease line,
and a ten-foot setback.
      (9)   Any site to be purchased or leased for the installation of a
cellular antenna tower or alternative antenna tower and ancillary facilities
shall comply with the minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district in
which the facility is to be located provided that such area shall not be
required to exceed one-half acre.
      (10)   Surfacing of all driveways and off-street parking areas shall be
of either concrete or asphalt and shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
      (11)   There shall be no signs permitted, except those displaying
emergency information, owner contact information, warning or safety
instructions, or signs which are required by a federal, state or local agency.
Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area.
      (12)   All new cellular antenna towers shall be designed and constructed
to accommodate a minimum of three service providers.
      (13)   All option and site lease agreements shall contain non-exclusive
co-location clauses.
   (G)   Criteria. Evaluation of the proposal shall be based upon the following
criteria:
      (1)   Agreement with the various elements of the Comprehensive Plan and
where applicable, any other adopted plan or regulation;
      (2)   Extent to which the proposal is consistent with the purposes of
these regulations;
      (3)   Adequacy of the proposed site, considering such factors as the
sufficiency of the size of the site to comply with the established criteria,
the configuration of the site and the extent to which the site is formed by
logical boundaries (such as, topography, natural features, streets,
relationship of adjacent uses and the like);
      (4)   Extent to which the proposal responds to the impact of the proposed
development on adjacent land uses, especially in terms of visual impacts;
      (5)   Extent to which the proposed cellular antenna tower is camouflaged
(e.g., use of “stealth technology”); and
      (6)   Extent to which the proposed facility is integrated with existing
structures (e.g., buildings, structures and the like).
   (H)   Amendments. Any amendments to plans, except for minor adjustments as
determined by the Planning Commission or its Administrative Official, shall be
made in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section, subject to
the same limitations and requirements as those under which such plans were
originally approved,
   (I)   Guarantee. To ensure the removal of all improvements at any abandoned
telecommunications facility, any applicant filing a request under these
regulations shall, at the time of the submittal, deposit with the Planning
Commission, and to the benefit of the Planning Commission, a letter of credit,
performance bond or other security acceptable to the Planning Commission in the
amount equal to the cost of the demolition and removal of the facility. An
applicant having multiple telecommunications facilities within the Planning
Commission’s jurisdiction may deposit a single guarantee in the amount equal to
the cost of the demolition and removal of the one facility it owns which would
cost the most to demolish and remove until such time as the number of multiple
facilities exceeds four such facilities, the applicant shall increase the
amount on deposit to an amount equal to the cost of the most costly demolition
and removal plus 25% of the cost of demolition and removal of the applicant’s
other existing facilities. Any guarantee submitted shall be irrevocable and
shall provide for the Planning Commission to collect the full amount of the
guarantee if the applicant fails to maintain the guarantee.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see § 
154.999
§ 156.053 ACCESS POINTS.
   It is desirable that access points to the arterial streets serving all
zoning districts shall be located no more frequently than once every quarter
mile. Topography and traffic volumes shall determine the exact locations. Heavy
arterial traffic volumes demand greater access spacing. Along any arterial
street where subdivided land and its minor streets are not sufficiently
developed to permit acceptably spaced access points, the Planning Commission
may approve the platting of temporary access points and may require that
temporary access points shall be eliminated by the developer when minor streets
or marginal access streets are extended to the approved permanent access
points. Such requirements shall be listed as special conditions on the recorded
final plat. Access points shall also meet federal and state standards where
applicable.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.054 JUNKYARDS OR SALVAGE YARDS.
   Junkyards are not designated as permitted uses in any district and are
consequently non-conforming uses in all districts. They shall conform with §§
156.090 through
156.095 prescribing regulations for non-conforming uses. The Administrative
Official shall ensure that all existing junkyards maintain valid permits to
operate issued by the Kentucky Department of Highways, as required by KRS
177.905 through 177.990, and shall ensure that all screening required by the
Department of Highways is maintained as long as the junkyards remain in
operation.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.055 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide the
minimum standards to safeguard the health, welfare and safety of the citizens
of the city by establishing standards for the placement of manufactured and
modular homes on individual lots or subdivision development lots in the city
and distinguishing between manufactured and modular homes and mobile homes.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   A manufactured or mobile home as defined in KRS 227.550, which does
not bear a seal certifying that it was manufactured in accordance with the
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act and not bearing
either a Class A or B Seal issued by the Kentucky Department of Housing,
Building and Construction, Office of the State Fire Marshal is not acceptable
for residential occupation.
      (2)   Establishment, location and use of manufactured homes as scattered
site residences shall be permitted in agriculturally exempt areas and
residential zones permitting installation of a single-family dwelling unit
applying generally to such residential use in the district, subject to the
following additional requirements:
         (a)   Permanent foundation system shall be anchored in accordance with
the state standards set forth in KRS 227.570;
         (b)   Exterior material shall be material customarily used on site-
built dwellings, such as board siding, plywood or presswood siding, vinyl,
stucco, brick, non-reflective aluminum and the like, and shall be compatible
with the conventionally built residential structures in the neighborhood;
         (c)   Roofing material shall be of wood, tile, composition shingles or
other materials compatible with the conventionally built residential structures
in the neighborhood that shall be installed on a surface appropriately pitched
for the materials used;
         (d)   Exterior covering material extending to the ground or the top of
the foundation shall be used. Skirting materials shall be used and be
compatible with the conventionally built residential structures in the
neighborhood;
         (e)   Structural additions or alterations shall be subject to the same
regulations and requirements and procedures, including any applicable zoning
permit or state building permit that must be complied with to obtain such a
permit for additions or alterations to a conventionally built house;
         (f)   Manufactured homes in a manufactured home communities or mobile
homes in mobile home parks shall conform to the requirements as prescribed in
902 KAR 15:010 for manufactured and mobile home communities; and
         (g)   Manufactured homes not conforming to the requirements of this
section shall be permitted in the MHP District designed only for permitting
mobile homes.
   (C)   Permitted placement of mobile homes.
      (1)   Class A and B mobile homes may be placed in manufactured home
community or mobile home park as a permitted residential unit type and in
accordance with this chapter and the subdivision regulations.
      (2)   Class A and B mobile homes may also be placed in the Agricultural
District for use as a tenant dwelling with the issuance of a conditional use
permit by the Board of Adjustments and in accordance with this chapter and the
subdivision regulations.
      (3)   Manufactured homes with no HUD Code seal and mobile homes with no
Class A or B seal are not permitted in any zoning district or in mobile home
parks. Those which at the time of the adoption of this chapter are located
within the jurisdiction are non-conforming uses, subject to the same
requirements as any other non-conforming use.
   (D)   Permits.
      (1)   If building permits are required for other single-family
residential dwellings, building permits for manufactured homes shall be issued,
providing that the other requirements for the zoning district are met, upon
presentation of certification either by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development or the Kentucky Department of Housing, Building and
Construction, Office of the State Fire Marshal, that the home has been
constructed in accordance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act. Inspection shall be limited to the foundation of any accessory
additions, such as porches, basements, or other added or altered structures.
      (2)   If building permits are required for other single-family
residential dwellings, building permits for Class A and Class B mobile homes
shall be issued where permitted upon receipt of certification that they are
Class A or Class B mobile homes and after compliance with all the other
provisions of this chapter and the subdivision regulations. Inspection shall be
limited to the foundation and other on-site improvements, if any.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.056 OFF-STREET AND ON-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Off-street parking requirements.
      (1)   General. Off-street parking shall be provided with vehicular access
to the public right-of-way and shall conform to the regulations set forth in
this section. The off-street parking requirements and ingress/egress shall not,
except for single-family residences, be used in the computation of parking
spaces. Off-street parking is not required in the Central Commercial District;
however, off-street parking is required in all other zoning districts to ensure
on-street parking does not result from normal use of the property. If off-
street parking capacity is exceeded and street parking is generated more often
than six times during a six-month period, this will be deemed to result from
normal use of the property and additional off-street parking shall be required.
      (2)   Existing parking space. Existing off-street parking space provided
for any building or use at the time of the enactment of this chapter shall not
thereafter be reduced unless it exceeds the requirements of this chapter. Any
existing building or use not providing off-street parking space in conformance
with this chapter shall, at the time of any structural alteration of the
building or expansion of the use, provide the required parking.
      (3)   Minimum parking space dimensions. The minimum dimensions of off-
street parking shall be a minimum of ten feet in width by 20 feet in length.
Additional area shall be required in order to provide vehicle maneuvering
space, access and egress, and for purposes of rough computation, an off-street
parking space with ingress/egress and maneuvering space is considered to be 400
square feet.
      (4)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces. If three or more off-
street parking spaces are required by the table below, the owner shall have
individual spaces marked and so designed, maintained and regulated as to
prevent the need for parking or maneuvering incidental to parking to take place
on any street, walk or public alleyway. The design for all off-street parking
shall be such that any pace may be utilized by one vehicle without having to
move another. The following table sets forth the minimum number of off-street
parking spaces for specific uses. The gross floor area of warehouses, storage
space, employee workshop areas or accessory structures shall not be utilized in
the computation of parking space requirements. Where more than one use occupies
a building, the total of the combined standards shall be required:
Use Minimum Parking Area or Parking Space(s)
Use                                     Minimum Parking Area or Parking Space
                                        (s)
   Highway Commercial or Institutional
Assisted living and residential care    2 spaces for every 3 beds or 0.66
facility                                spaces per bed
Churches, Sunday School and other place 1 space per five seats at maximum
of religious assembly                   capacity
                                        1 space per each 420 square feet gross
Day care or child care center           floor area (GFA), exclusive of kitchen
                                        and bathroom
                                        1 space per each 400 square feet of
                                        gross floor area of the principal
                                        structure (GFA) up to 10,000 square
                                        feet of GFA; thereafter, 1 space for
General commercial or retail use not    every 200 square feet of the GFA plus 1
specified                               space for every truck or delivery/
                                        transport vehicle operated by the
                                        business (note: the computation of GFA
                                        shall not include warehouses, storage
                                        space, employee workshop areas or
                                        accessory structures)
                                        1 space per four beds or each 4 beds in
Hospital, medical clinic, sanitarium    use, whichever is greater, plus 1 space
and nursing home                        for every 1,000 square feet of gross
                                        floor area (GFA)
Hotel or motel                          1 space per room offered for overnight
                                        accommodations
Professional office                     1 space per 200 square feet of gross
                                        floor area (GFA)
School, elementary and middle           1 space per classroom
                                        4 spaces per classroom or 1 space per
                                        every 6 seats in auditorium, gym, arena
School, high school and post secondary  or stadium at maximum capacity,
                                        whichever is greater; maximum 300
                                        spaces
Theaters, auditorium, stadium or other  1 space for each 5 seats at maximum
place of public assembly                capacity
   Industrial
                                        1 space per employee at maximum
General manufacturing or industrial use capacity on a single shift plus 1 space
                                        for every truck or delivery/transport
                                        vehicle operated by the facility
   Residential
Bed and breakfast, short-term rental    1 space per room/unit offered for
(residential), rooming and boarding     overnight accommodations plus 2 spaces
house                                   per dwelling unit
Home occupation                         1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                        gross floor area (GFA)
Residential structure                   2 spaces per dwelling unit
   Uses not elsewhere specified
Unspecified use                         1 space per 300 square feet of gross
                                        floor area (GFA)
 
      (5)   Minimum setback. Parking areas shall be located no closer than five
feet from any property line.
      (6)   Space arrangement and layout. Off-street parking shall be located
on the same property as the permitted use, unless the Planning Commission
authorizes the use of other properties. Combined uses shall provide parking
equal to the sum of the individual uses. The required parking area for the
permitted use shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner; however,
consolidated uses of a parking area by various properties may be granted a
variance of the parking space requirement if the multiple uses served by the
consolidated parking area generate parking demands at non-overlapping times of
a 24-hour day.
      (7)   Off-street parking on adjacent property. If off-street parking
cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the permitted use is
conducted, the Board of Adjustments may permit off-street parking and loading
on adjacent property; provided that such space is within 400 feet of an
entrance to the permitted use. This off-street parking area shall be deemed as
required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter
be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. The Planning Commission or Board
of Zoning Adjustments may require a plat, deed or any other proof necessary to
show that the required loading/unloading space, if located off the premises it
serves, is controlled by and available to the applicant.
   (B)   Off-street loading/unloading requirements.
      (1)   General. All buildings and uses which generate regular trucking/
delivery/transport traffic shall provide sufficient off-street loading/
unloading space on premises such that no unloading/loading activity will be
generated on the required off-street parking spaces or on any street. Areas
which are specified as loading/unloading zones in compliance with city
ordinances may be used to satisfy this requirement. Permitted uses shall
provide off-street loading/unloading areas and adequate ingress/egress. No
building shall be designed, erected, altered, used or occupied unless the
required off-street loading/unloading requirements are satisfied. Off-street
loading/unloading areas shall be located on the same property as the permitted
use and structure it serves and shall be paved.
      (2)   Minimum setback. Loading/unloading areas shall be located no closer
than five feet from any property line.
      (3)   Minimum size of off-street loading/unloading spaces. Loading/
unloading berths shall be a minimum of ten feet in width, 35 feet in length and
15 feet in height.
      (4)   Minimum number of off-street loading/unloading. The following
listing sets forth minimum number of off-street loading/unloading berths:
Gross Floor Area of Permitted Structures/ Minimum Off-Street Loading/Unloading
Buildings (Square Feet)                   Berths
Gross Floor Area of Permitted      Minimum Off-Street Loading/Unloading
Structures/Buildings (Square Feet) Berths
Less than 40,000                   1
40,001 - 100,000                   2
100,001 - 160,000                  3
160,001 - 240,000                  4
240,001 - 320,000                  5
320,001 - 400,000                  6
Greater than 400,000               1 per additional 100,000 square feet GFA
 
      (5)   Off-street loading/unloading on adjacent property. If off-street
loading/unloading cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the
permitted use is conducted, the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning
Adjustments may permit off-street parking and loading on adjacent property;
provided that such space is within 400 feet of an entrance to the permitted
use. This off-street loading/unloading area shall be deemed as required open
space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or
encroached upon in any manner. The Board of Zoning Adjustments or Planning
Commission may require a plat, deed or any other proof necessary to show that
the required loading/unloading space, if located off the premises it serves, is
controlled by and available to the applicant.
   (C)   On-street parking and loading/unloading. The on-street parking of
vehicles 20 feet or longer in length on public streets shall be prohibited in a
residential district, except for limited delivery, maintenance, construction or
other loading/unloading purposes.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.057 CHILD DAY CARE CENTERS.
   (A)   Generally. A child day care center, whether home-based or located in a
separate structure and properly licensed by the state agency presently charged
with regulating childcare facilities in the Commonwealth, may be approved as a
conditional use in Residential (R-l, R-2, R-3) or Commercial Restricted (CR)
Zoning Districts subject to certain exceptions and specific use standards
identified here. In zoning districts where a child day care center is already a
permitted use, it shall be subject to the specific use standards prospectively
from the date of adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. A child day care center does not include public or private
schools or facilities operated in connection with shopping centers or other
principal uses where children are cared for temporarily while parents,
guardians or custodians are occupied on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity. A child day care center does not include the provision of childcare,
nursery, guidance or supervision by religious organizations only while
religious services are being conducted. A child day care center does not
include kindergarten programs operated as a part of a public educational
system.
   (C)   Specific use standards. Child day care centers, nurseries,
kindergartens or any facility or operation providing child care, guidance or
supervision for which a license is required from the state agency presently
having jurisdiction to regulate the provision of child care, with the exception
of religious organizations providing child care, guidance or supervision only
while religious services are being conducted or to kindergarten programs
operated as a part of a public educational system, require compliance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The lot shall contain a minimum open space area as required by the
Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services or such other agency of the
Commonwealth having authority to regulate facilities providing childcare;
      (2)   A solid wall or adequate security fence not less than six feet high
is maintained along all interior lot lines which separate play areas from
adjacent properties and parking areas. Outdoor play areas shall be contiguous
with the building so children can safely walk from the building to the play
area. Outdoor play area which lies within or adjoins a residential district
shall be buffered by landscaping or a solid privacy fence;
      (3)   The Board of Adjustments, if applicable, may set hours or otherwise
limit outdoor play times for any facility located within a residential district
or adjacent to a residential structure;
      (4)   A letter from the Fire Marshal and the Kentucky Cabinet for
Families and Children, or their successor agency certifying that the use
complies with the requirements of that agency. This documentation must be
supplied to the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the Building Inspector;
      (5)   Adequate and safe on-site parking, loading and unloading areas and
driveways providing for safe ingress and egress with backing into the street
specifically prohibited;
      (6)   If the proposed use will be located within or adjacent to any
residential district, then the structure shall remain or shall be constructed
so that the exterior design and ornamentation is residential in character and
compatible with the immediate neighborhood, so that there is no evidence from
the street that the use is other than residential (except for the sign);
      (7)   In Residential Zones (R-1, R-2 and R-3) child day cares as home
occupations shall be limited to three to six children and shall require a
conditional use permit under §
156.071(C); and
      (8)   All buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located. Signage shall be limited as
outlined by the applicable use category for each zoning district and as
provided in §§
156.145 through
156.159.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.058 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   A planned-development project may be allowed in those zoning districts where
it is designated as a permitted use under the zoning district regulations. (A
minimum of three acres is required for a planned-development project). A
planned-development project may depart from literal conformance with individual
lot dimension and area regulations. A planned-development project may be under
single or divided ownership. All planned-development projects shall be subject
to the following regulations.
   (A)   Procedure. When a planned-development project is proposed, the
procedure for subdivision approval as set forth in the subdivision regulations
shall be followed in its entirety even though the ownership of land may not be
divided. A preliminary plat and final plat, both approved by the Planning
Commission shall be required for every planned-development project. The
Planning Commission may establish a schedule of reasonable fees to be charged
for plat review. The project shall be developed according to the approved final
plat. Zoning permits and certificates of occupancy shall be required for each
building according to this chapter.
   (B)   Uses and densities. The uses of premises and development densities in
a planned-development project shall conform with the permitted uses and
densities of the zoning district in which it is located.
   (C)   Standards. In any planned-development project, although it is
permissible to depart from literal conformance with the individual lot
dimension and area regulations, there shall be no diminution of total-
equivalent-lot-area, parking area and loading/unloading area requirement that
would be necessary for the equivalent amount of individual lot development with
one exception; the Planning Commission may allow reductions in these
requirements if the developer can satisfactorily prove that large-scale
development may permit such reductions without destroying the intent of these
regulations.
   (D)   Special conditions. The Planning Commission shall attach reasonable
special conditions to ensure that there shall be no departure from the intent
of this chapter. The planned-development project shall conform with all such
conditions. Because a planned-development project is inherently more complex
than individual-lot development and because each such project must be tailored
to the topography and neighboring uses, the standards for such projects cannot
be inflexible. The Planning Commission shall attach special conditions based on
all of the following standards in addition to imposing the standards for total
area, parking area and loading/unloading area defined in division (C) above.
The Planning Commission may also attach any other reasonable special
conditions.
      (1)   It is desirable that access points to all arterial streets shall be
located no more frequently than one every eighth to quarter mile. The Planning
Commission may approve the platting of temporary access points.
      (2)   Wherever there is an abrupt change in uses, such as, residential to
commercial, it is desirable that a buffer area of open space or protective
planting be placed between them which will protect each use from the
undesirable effects on the other.
      (3)   Parking and other areas used by the public at night shall be
adequately lighted, and private areas shall be adequately protected from such
lighting and any other lighting from public areas. Public streets may also
require protection from excessive glare of lighted areas.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 156.070 ZONING SCHEDULE.
   (A)   To facilitate public understanding of this chapter and for the better
administration thereof, the regulations limiting the bulk and arrangement of
buildings are set forth in the annexed schedule for each of the districts and
established by §§
156.035 through
156.039 and
156.050 through
156.058. Such schedule is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
chapter hereinafter referred to as the schedule, and may be amended in the same
manner as any other part of this chapter.
   (B)   Wherever in such schedule there appear the words “same as in (symbol
of district) above” such words shall be construed to include the specific
limitations set forth in the same column for the district thus referred to.
Otherwise, all limitations as to percentage of area, permissible height,
required yard and minimum sizes thereof, and other requirements shall be those
set forth in such schedule, which for each district named shall be read across
the schedule from left to right.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.071 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE FAMILY (R-1).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Single-Family Residential District (R-1) is
intended to provide opportunities for single-family residential development.
Occupancy in these districts is limited to one family per residential unit. No
accessory apartments shall be allowed in these districts. The R-1 District
shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth §
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A. Any use and structure not listed in the use table shall be
prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Administrative Official.
   (C)   Permitted residential unit types. The following residential unit types
shall be permitted in the R-1 District:
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings; and
      (2)   Manufactured or modular homes in compliance with §
156.055.
   (D)   R-1 property development standards. Development in the R-l District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter.
Sections 156.050 through 156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all
zoning districts.
Accessory structure rear and side yard setbacks  8 feet
(minimum)
Building height (maximum)                        30 feet or 2 stories
Lot area (minimum)                               8,000 square feet
Lot coverage (maximum)                           35%
Lot width (minimum)                              70 feet
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback                         25 feet
   Rear yard setback                          20 feet
   Side yard setback                          10 feet; 2 side yards required
 
   (E)   Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056.
   (G)   Child day care as home occupation. Any child day care operated as a
home occupation in a residential district shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Operated by and employs only persons residing on the premises;
      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants;
      (3)   No more than one conditional use permit shall be granted per
premises;
      (4)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation;
      (5)   There may be limited sales on the premises in connection with such
home occupation;
      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would be expected in residential neighborhood;
      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interferences,
outside the dwelling unit;
      (8) Additional parking or other items may be required as a condition
granted by the Board of Adjustments; and
      (9)   Such home occupation shall serve no more than three to six children
if in a residential zone.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.072 RESIDENTIAL TWO- TO THREE-FAMILY (R-2).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Two- or Three-Family Residential District (R-
2) is intended to provide opportunities for two-family and three-family
residential development, including duplexes or twinhomes, triplexes,
condominiums and townhouse developments of up to two units in a single
building. The R-2 District shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth under §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A.
   (C)   Permitted residential unit types. The following residential unit types
shall be permitted in the R-2 District:
      (1)   Duplexes or twinhomes;
      (2)   Triplexes, apartment buildings, townhomes or condominiums
containing three units per building;
      (3)   Single-family detached dwellings; and
      (4)   Manufactured or modular homes in compliance with §
156.055.
   (D)   R-2 property development standards. Development in the R-2 District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter.
Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Accessory structure                 
   Rear and side yard setbacks  5 feet
(minimum)
                                   30 feet or 2 stories may be increased to
                                   50 feet; provided each side yard is
Building height (maximum)          increased by the same amount over the
                                   required yard minimum that the building
                                   is increased over the maximum R-
                                   l building height of 30 feet
Lot area (minimum)
   Single-Family Residential    6,500 square feet
   Two-Family Residential       8,800 square feet
   Three-Family Residential     11,800 square feet
Lot coverage (maximum)             35%
Lot width (minimum)
   Single-family                60 feet
   Two-family                   75 feet
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback           25 feet
   Rear yard setback            15 feet
   Side yard setback            10 feet; 2 side yards required
 
   (E)   Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.073 RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY (R-3).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Multi-Family Residential District (R-3) is
intended to provide opportunities for townhouse and multi-family developments
with greater than four units in a single building. The R-3 District shall be
served by public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A.
   (C)   Permitted residential unit types. The following residential unit types
shall be permitted in the R-3 District:
      (1)   Townhomes or condominiums containing four to eight units per
building;
      (2)   Four-plexes or apartments containing greater than four units per
building;
      (3)   Residential unit types permitted in R-2 District utilizing the R-
2 standards; and
      (4)   Residential unit types permitted in R-1 District utilizing the R-
1 standards.
   (D)   R-3 property development standards. Development in the R-3 District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter.
Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Accessory structure                     
   Rear and side yard setbacks      5 feet
(minimum)
                                       40 feet or 3 stories may be increased to
                                       50 feet; provided each side yard is
Building height (maximum)              increased by the same amount over the
                                       required yard minimum that the building
                                       is increased over the maximum R-
                                       1 building height of 30 feet
Lot area (minimum)
   Single-Family Residential        6,500 square feet
   Two-Family Residential           8,800 square feet
   Three-Family Residential         11,800 square feet
   Four-Family Residential          16,000 square feet
                                       16,000 square feet for first 4 units
   Multi-Family Residential (5+ unitplus an additional 35% for each
                                       additional unit
Lot coverage (maximum)                 35%
Lot width (minimum)                    75 feet
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback               25 feet
   Rear yard setback                15 feet
   Side yard setback                10 feet; 2 side yards required
 
   (E)   Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.074 MOBILE HOME PARK (MHP).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the Mobile Home Park District is to
allow for the placement of mobile homes in the city in designated parks. All
mobile home parks shall conform to all applicable local, state and federal
rules, regulations and laws. The Mobile Home Park District shall be served by
public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A. Any use and structure not listed in the use table shall be
prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustments.
   (C)   MHP property development standards.
      (1)   General. Development in the MHP District shall comply with the
property development standards set forth in this chapter. Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts. Only one
individual mobile home unit and accessory buildings customarily incidental to
the individual mobile home unit shall be allowed per individual lot within in
the mobile home park.
   Accessory Structure Standards
Rear and side yard setbacks (minimum) (note: if
an accessory structure is less than 25 square
feet in area or within 15 feet of the individual 5 feet
mobile home unit, the structure shall be
considered to be a part of the unit)
   Individual Mobile Home Lot Standards
Lot area (minimum)                               4,000 square feet
Lot coverage (maximum)                           50%
Lot width (minimum)
   1-way street                               14 feet
   1-way street with parking on 1 side        23 feet
   1-way street with parking on both sides    32 feet
   2-way street                               18 feet
   2-way street with parking on 1 side        27 feet
   2-way street with parking on both sides    36 feet
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback                         20 feet
   Rear yard setback                          10 feet
   Side yard setback                          10 feet; 2 side yards required
   Mobile Home Park Standards
Park area (minimum)                              1 acre (43,560 square feet)
Park density (minimum)                           10 mobile home lots per acre
 
      (2)   Multi-phase park development. A mobile home park may be developed
in phases or stages as long as the developer complies with the overall approved
plan for the entire park development and the initial phase or stage has a
minimum of two mobile home lots developed for use.
      (3)   Foundation requirements. Individual mobile home lots shall have a
concrete pad or other foundation satisfactory to the Planning Commission. Each
pad shall be sufficient size to accommodate the mobile home unit to be situated
thereon. Individual lot pads or foundations shall be a minimum of ten feet from
lot lines.
      (4)   Internal street system. All mobile home parks shall be provided
with convenient and safe internal vehicular access. Entrances shall be adequate
to accommodate traffic and parking and shall meet all specifications and
requirements of this chapter and the subdivision regulations. Entrances shall
be approved by the city. All internal streets shall have a right-of-way of not
less than 50 feet and pavement width of not less than 22 feet. Each park shall
have at least one street which gives access to a public street. Such access
streets in either a single mobile home park or adjoining parks shall not be
less than 100 feet apart no less than 125 feet from an intersection of two or
more public streets. All streets within the park shall be paved and well
lighted as specified in the subdivision regulations. No street within the
mobile home park shall be closer than five feet from any property line.
      (5)   Utilities.
         (a)   Water system. All mobile home parks and individual mobile home
lots shall be served by water system meeting the standards specified by local
and state regulations, and each mobile home lot shall be properly connected to
the water system. The mobile home park and lots shall be served by a completely
looped water distribution system adequate to serve the park, and each
individual mobile home lot shall be connected. The mobile home park shall be
served by fire hydrants spaced a maximum of 600 feet apart.
         (b)   Sanitary sewer system. All mobile home parks and individual
mobile home lots shall be served by a public sanitary sewer system. The mobile
home park and lots shall be served by a complete collection system, including
lateral collection for each individual mobile home lot and if necessary, lift
or pumping stations. Where a public sanitary system is not readily accessible,
mobile home parks and individual mobile home lots shall be served by an
individual sanitary sewer system approved by the appropriate agency. Septic
systems are prohibited.
         (c)   Electric and telephone. All mobile home parks and individual
mobile home lots shall be served by underground electrical and telephone
utilities, unless waived by the Planning Commission through a public hearing
process and demonstration of extreme hardship by the developer.
      (6)   Off-street parking requirements.
         (a)   General requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided with
vehicular access to the public right-of-way in the MHP District and shall
conform to the regulations set forth in this section. Off-street parking shall
be located on the same property as the permitted use, unless the Planning
Commission authorizes the use of other properties. The off-street parking
requirements and ingress/egress shall not, except for single-family residences,
be used in the computation of parking spaces. The required parking area for the
permitted use shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. Combined
uses shall provide parking equal to the sum of the individual uses. All off-
street parking shall be paved.
         (b)   Minimum parking area. The minimum dimensions of off-street
parking shall be ten by 20 feet, or 200 square feet.
         (c)   Minimum parking spaces. The minimum number of off-street parking
spaces for individual mobile home lots shall be two spaces.
      (7)   On-street parking and loading/unloading. The on-street parking of
vehicles 20 feet or longer in length on public streets shall be prohibited in a
residential district, except for delivery, maintenance, construction or other
loading/unloading purposes.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.075 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (CC).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Central Commercial District is intended to
provide for the continued vitality of the downtown area and the maintenance and
re-use of existing historic structures. There shall be only one contiguous CC
District within the corporate limits of the city. This District hosts the
majority of the city’s government and professional offices and many of its
historic structures nestled among older residences. This District shall be
served by public sanitary sewer. The future goal for this District remains to
support commercial activities in a concentrated area with an emphasis on
specialty or boutique retail establishments, banks, places of amusement and
assembly, restaurants, offices, parking lots and gas or motor vehicle stations.
This planning goal should entice the public to the downtown area of the city
and, simultaneously, enable the public to participate in many types of
commercial activities at one time without depending upon motor transportation
for mobility.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth in §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A. Any use and structure not listed in the use table shall be
prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustments.
   (C)   Permitted residential unit types. In mixed use buildings, ground floor
residential uses are prohibited, and residential and non-residential uses shall
not be permitted on the same floor unless served by separate entrances.
   (D)   CC property development standards. Development in the CC District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter.
Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Accessory structure rear and side yard setbacks  None
(minimum)
Building height (maximum)                        50 feet or 3 stories
Lot area (minimum)                               None
Lot coverage (maximum)                           100%
Lot width (minimum)                              40 feet with sanitary sewer;
                                                 60 feet without sanitary sewer
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback                         None
   Rear yard setback                          None
   Side yard setback                          None
 
   (E)   Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056.
   (G)   Prohibited uses. Any use and structure not listed in the use table
shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Board of Zoning
Adjustments. Any use which in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Adjustments
would be detrimental to the character of the historic downtown and the
development of this District as a commercial center will be prohibited.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see 
156.999
§ 156.076 COMMERCIAL RESTRICTED DISTRICT (CR).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Commercial Restricted District is intended to
provide retail and service uses, not exceeding 5,000 square feet in building
area, to serve the adjoining neighboring residential and mixed use areas. The
Commercial Restricted District also may provide selected retail and service
uses serving the entire community, but it is not intended to serve as the
regional retail service area of the city. These districts are located adjacent
to the CC Zoning District and in selected residential and mixed use
neighborhoods, on highways leading from the CC District and near or adjacent to
the CC District. Special restrictions must be imposed on new commercial
development or land use in this District to prevent unnecessary adverse impact
on non-conforming residential land use within the District. This District shall
be served by public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A. Permitted and conditional uses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet
in building area.
   (C)   Permitted residential unit types. Multi-family residential unit types
permitted in R-3 District and utilizing the R-3 property development standards
shall be permitted in the CR District.
   (D)   CR property development standards. Development in the CR District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter
(see §
156.076(C) for R-3 Multi-Family Residential). Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Accessory structure rear and side yard 5 feet
setbacks (minimum)
Building height (maximum)              40 feet or 4 stories
Lot area (minimum)                     30,000 square feet
Lot coverage (maximum)                 65%
Lot width (minimum)                    40 feet with sanitary sewer;
                                       60 feet without sanitary sewer
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback               40 feet with sanitary sewer;
                                       60 feet without sanitary sewer
   Rear yard setback                15 feet minimum; 30 feet if abutting
                                       residential zoning district
   Side yard setback                15 feet minimum; 30 feet if abutting
                                       residential zoning district
 
   (E) Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056.
   (G)   Prohibited uses. Any use and structure not listed in the use table
shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Board of Zoning
Adjustments.
   (H)   Buffering.
      (1)   General. All CR development abutting a residential district or use
shall be required to provide a buffer as deemed appropriate and approved by the
Planning Commission in order to protect the residential area from unreasonable
disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, light, noises or views
incompatible with residential areas.
      (2)   Height. All buffers shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and
shall not exceed ten feet if human-made; natural/horticultural buffers may
exceed ten feet in height if approved by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Design. The design and materials of buffering shall be compatible
with adjacent residential areas and sufficient to minimize adverse impacts of
the commercial development. The Planning Commission shall review and approval
the design and materials of buffering.
   (I)   Child day care as conditional use. A child day care center subject to
certain exceptions and specific use standards identified at §
156.057, and any further conditions the Board of Zoning Adjustments may impose.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see 
156.999
§ 156.077 GENERAL HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (HC).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The General Highway Commercial District (HC) is
intended to encourage the establishment of an intensive commercial use area
designed to meet the needs of a community or regional market area and typically
oriented to customers who travel by motor vehicles. This District primarily
provides retail and wholesale trade dependent upon vehicular traffic to supply
both merchandise and customers and has large space uses, such as department
stores, fast food restaurants, service stations and specialty stores. This
District shall have direct access to arterial or collector roads, and areas
adjacent to residential districts shall be adequately buffered. The HC District
shall be served by public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A.
   (C)   Residential unit types. Multi-family residential unit types can be a
conditional use in the HC District if approval is granted by the Board of
Zoning Adjustments; however, such units shall be developed utilizing the R-
3 property development standards if a conditional use permit is granted.
   (D)   HC property development standards. Development in the HC District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter.
Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Accessory structure rear and side yard 5 feet
setbacks (minimum)
Building height (maximum)              40 feet or 3 stories
Lot area (minimum)                     30,000 square feet
Lot coverage (maximum)                 65%
Lot width (minimum)                    50 feet
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback               40 feet with sanitary sewer;
                                       60 feet without sanitary sewer
   Rear yard setback                15 feet minimum; 30 feet if abutting
                                       residential zoning district
   Side yard setback                15 feet minimum; 30 feet if abutting
                                       residential zoning district
 
   (E)   Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056. Additionally, all parking and adjacent areas utilized by the public at
night shall be adequately lighted and nearby private areas shall be protected
from such lighting. Likewise, public streets shall be protected from such
glare.
   (G)   Buffering.
      (1)   General. All HC development abutting a residential district or use
shall be required to provide a buffer as deemed appropriate and approved by the
Planning Commission in order to protect the residential area from unreasonable
disturbance by movement of people or vehicles, light, noises or views
incompatible with residential areas.
      (2)   Height. All buffers shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and
shall not exceed 20 feet.
      (3)   Design. The design and materials of buffering shall be compatible
with adjacent residential areas and sufficient to minimize adverse impacts of
the commercial development. The Planning Commission shall review and approval
the design and materials of buffering.
   (H)   Prohibited uses. Any use and structure not listed in the use table
shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Board of Zoning
Adjustments. No use allowed in this HC District shall be dangerous, offensive
or detrimental to the present or intended character of the district or vicinity
by reason of the emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, flare, odors,
vibrations or fire hazard.
   (I)   Light industrial uses. Light industrial uses, when permitted as a
conditional use in this HC District, are subject to the following restrictions
or conditions:
      (1)   Industrial activities shall be located inside a building;
      (2)   Hours of operation may be limited;
      (3)   Noise generated on site by industrial activities shall not be
discernable or audible off the property on which the conditional use is
located;
      (4)   Lighting on site shall be that customarily associated with
commercial uses otherwise allowed in the HC Zone;
      (5)   No noxious or obnoxious odor shall be generated by the industrial
activity that will be discernable or detectable off the property on which the
conditional use is located;
      (6)   Building size, for newly constructed buildings used for industrial
activities permitted by conditional use in this zone shall be limited to 20,000
square feet in total (whether one or more buildings are involved). Industrial
activities seeking to expand beyond this size limitation shall locate in
otherwise properly zoned industrial areas; and
      (7)   Any other condition or conditions that the Board of Adjustments
feels is necessary to allow the use to blend in with its unique surroundings.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.078 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (I-1).
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the General Industrial District (I-
1) is to provide appropriate locations for manufacturing and assembly plants,
including heavy industrial uses, warehousing and uses not otherwise permitted
in other districts. A heavy industrial use is a use ordinarily requiring
buildings and open area for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, extraction,
heavy repairing, dismantling, warehousing and storage or disposal of equipment,
raw materials, manufacturing products or wastes. This District shall be served
by public sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Uses. General use regulations are set forth §§
156.050 through
156.056, and a listing of permitted, accessory and conditional uses and
structures in this District are set forth in the use table in
Appendix A.
   (C)   I-1 property development standards. Development in the I-1 District
shall comply with the property development standards set forth in this chapter.
Sections
156.050 through
156.056 sets forth general use regulations for all zoning districts.
Accessory structure rear and side yard setbacks  5 feet
(minimum)
Building height (maximum)                        None
Lot area (minimum)                               43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Lot coverage (maximum)                           90%
Lot width (minimum)                              100 feet
Setbacks and yards (minimum)
   Front yard setback                         None
   Rear yard setback                          None
   Side yard setback                          None
 
   (D)   Signage. All signage shall comply with the provisions of §§
156.145 through
156.159.
   (E)   Off-street parking and loading/unloading. All off-street parking and
loading/unloading areas shall comply with the provisions of §
156.056.
   (F)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Building enclosures. Every use permitted in the I-1 District shall
be operated in its entirety within a completely enclosed building. The Planning
Commission may exempt uses from total enclosure (thus permitting outdoor
display storage or processing) and require an area screened from view at the
nearest district boundary as a conditional use in this District.
      (2)   Landscaping. All I-1 lots shall have a ten-foot wide landscaping
strip along all property lines abutting a public street, and all required yards
shall be graded to ensure proper drainage and shall either be open landscaped
and grassed areas or be left in a natural state, if acceptable to the Planning
Commission. If said area is to be landscaped, it shall be landscaped
attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs or other plantings, according to the
initial submitted plans which were first approved. Landscaping shall not
interfere with or block views of buildings or the identification of such
buildings. The Planning Commission shall approve all landscaping plans.
      (3)   Buffering. All I-1 development abutting a residential or business
district or use shall be required to provide a buffer in order to protect the
residential area from unreasonable disturbance by movement of people or
vehicles, light, noises or views incompatible with residential areas. Principal
and accessory buildings and structures shall have a minimum setback of 80 feet
from any adjacent residential or business district or use, and buffering shall
be a minimum of eight feet in height but not exceed ten feet in height, if the
buffer is human-made; natural/horticultural buffers may exceed this height if
approved by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall approve all
buffering plans.
      (4)   Noise. Industrial noise shall be muffled so as not to become
objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency or shrillness.
      (5)   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination,
except for overhead street lighting and warning, or traffic signals shall
direct light away from adjoining zoning districts and shall minimize
disturbance of adjacent properties and interference with traffic.
      (6)   Internal circulation and ingress/egress. Lots shall include
sufficient internal circulation and ingress/egress to minimize traffic
congestion. Ingress and egress shall have minimum 12-foot wide lanes and
minimum radius of curve at the pavement edge of 36 feet.
      (7)   Odorous matter. No emission of odorous matter shall be allowed in
excess of ambient air quality standards as set forth by the regulations adopted
by the Kentucky Department for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection,
Division of Air Pollution, Bowling Green Air Quality Region.
      (8)   Humidity, heat or glare. Any activity producing humidity, in the
form of steam or moist air or producing heat or glare, shall be carried on in
such a manner that the steam, humidity, heat or glare is not perceptible at or
beyond any residential or commercial district boundary. Detailed plans for the
elimination of humidity, heat or glare may be required before the issuance of a
building permit.
      (9)   Vibration. Vibrations shall be measured at the lot line. No
vibration is permitted which is discernible to the human sense of feeling for
three minutes or more duration in any one hour.
      (10)   Emissions and open burning. No emission of particulate matter,
sulfur compound, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, nitrogen oxide and open burning
shall be allowed in excess of regulations adopted by the Kentucky Department
for Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Air Pollution,
Bowling Green Air Quality Region.
      (11)   Radiation. All sources of ionizing radiation shall be registered
or licensed by the Kentucky State Department of Health and operated in
accordance with their regulations.
      (12)   Electrical radiation. Any electrical radiation shall not adversely
affect, at any point on or beyond the lot line, any equipment other than those
of the creation of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from electrical
radiation by appropriate mutual scheduling of operations is permitted.
      (13)   Storage. Storage of material, supplies and products on the
property outside the building constructed thereon is permitted to the side and
rear of the property providing that storage of materials, products, supplies
and products are within an area screened from view at the nearest district
boundary, adjacent properties, public streets or highways.
      (14)   Fire and explosive hazards. Storage, utilization or manufacture of
solid materials which requires free burning and intense burning may be allowed
if permitted in an industrial district; provided that said materials or
products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within completely enclosed
buildings having incombustible walls and protected throughout by an automatic
fire extinguishing system. The bulk storage of flammable liquids or materials
which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall not be permitted in
above-ground storage facilities, with the exception of fuel tanks or drums
connected to heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the fuel
tanks and drums. Where a permitted use requires the storage of flammable
liquids or materials that produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases,
storage facilities shall have the following minimum setback from all boundary
lines:
         (a)   Liquid petroleum gases.
 
Underground Storage Capacity (Gallons) Minimum Setback (Feet
Less than 500                          10
501 - 2,000                            25
Over 2,000                             50
 
         (b)   Flammable liquids.
 
Underground Storage Capacity (Gallons) Minimum Setback (Feet)
Less than 500                          6
501 - 2,000                            10
2,001 - 5,000                          20
5,001 - 15,000                         30
15,001 - 20,000                        40
20,001 - 35,000                        50
 
         (c)   Explosives.
 
Capacity (Pounds) Minimum Setback (Feet)
Less than 5       70
6 - 10            90
11 - 20           110
21 - 25           125
Greater than 25   Not permitted without prior approval from the Planning
                  Commission
 
      (15)   Waste. No waste material or refuse shall be dumped upon or
permitted to remain upon any part of the property outside of the buildings
constructed thereon. All sewage and industrial waste shall be treated and
disposed of in such manner so as to comply with the standards of the
appropriate authority. All plans for waste disposal facilities shall be
required before the issuance of any building permit. All waste shall be
disposed of in accordance with the regulations of the Kentucky Department of
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Division of Waste Management.
      (16)   Mining and reclamation. All methods of operation, construction of
roads, backfilling, grading, blasting, water impoundments, treatment facilities
and reclamation must be in conformance with the regulations adopted by the
Department of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Surface Mining Reclamation and Environment (KRS Chapter 352). Any excavation or
processing operations shall be subject to the regulations of the Kentucky Water
Pollution Control Commission.
      (17)   Blasting and explosives. All blasting and the use of explosives
must be conducted in accordance with the regulations set forth by the
Department of Mines and Minerals, Division of Explosives and Blasting (KRS
Chapter 351).
   (G)   Prohibited uses. Any use and structure not listed in the use table
shall be prohibited, unless otherwise determined by the Board of Zoning
Adjustments. Any use which in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Adjustments
would be detrimental to the character of the city and/or the development of
this District as a commercial center will be prohibited.
   (H)   Dimensional variations. In the event that an industrial use that
existed at the time of the passage of this chapter is destroyed, the Board of
Adjustments may allow dimensional variations from this chapter to conform to
those dimensions which existed for the use of the premises prior to its
destruction upon a finding by the Board of Adjustments that such variance will
not be detrimental to neighboring properties or safe traffic flow.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 156.090 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may be
later adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendments. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these non-conformities
to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is
further the intent of this chapter that non-conformities shall not be enlarged
upon or expanded, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.091 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yard, its
location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.
   (A)   No non-conforming structure may be enlarged, moved or structurally
altered in a way which increases its non-conformity, but any structure or
portion thereof may be altered to decrease its non-conformity.
   (B)   Should such non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of such
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of 55% or more of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, exclusive of foundations, it shall
not be repaired or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   Should such non-conforming structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
   (D)   No non-conforming structure may be re-established after it has been
discontinued for 24 consecutive months or more except when government action
impedes access to the premises. A vacated premises or building of non-operative
status shall be evidence of a discontinued use.
   (E)   No non-conforming structure may be changed to any other use except one
which is a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to residential
structures in industrial districts.
   (G)   When a non-conforming structure is superseded by a permitted use, the
structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district,
and the non-conforming use may not thereafter by resumed.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.092 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where at the time of passage of this chapter or amendments, lawful use of
land exists which would not be permitted in the zoning district under the terms
of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued as it remains otherwise lawful
subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No nonconforming use, except single-family residential uses in the
Agriculture and Single-Family Residential Districts, shall be enlarged,
increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (B)   No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (C)   If any non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for 24
consecutive months or more, except where government action impedes access to
the premises, any subsequent use of land shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such non-conforming uses of land.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.093 NON-CONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES OR STRUCTURES/PREMISES.
   Where at the time of passage of this chapter or amendments, lawful use
involving individual structures, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists which would not be permitted in the zoning district under the terms of
this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   No structure, or structure and premises in combination, devoted to a
non-conforming use shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a
use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
   (B)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the zoning district, and the non-conforming use may not
thereafter be resumed.
   (C)   If any non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, ceases for 24 consecutive months or more, except when government
action impedes access to the premises, any subsequent use of the structure, or
structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
Vacated premises or building of non-operative status shall be evidence of a
discontinued use.
   (D)   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-
conforming status of the land. Destruction for the purposes of this division
(D) is defined as damage to an extent of more than 55% or more of its
replacement cost, exclusive of foundation, at time of destruction.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.094 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   Single lot. In any zoning district in which single-family dwellings
were permitted as of the adoption of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall
apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or
both, that are generally applicable in the zoning district; provided that yard
dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both
of the lot shall conform to these regulations for the district in which such
lot is located. If the non-conforming lot is converted to another use, the
protected status granted hereunder terminates, variance of yard requirements
shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustments.
   (B)   Variance required. The owner of a non-conforming lot of record at the
time of the adoption of this chapter may submit an application to the Board of
Adjustments for a variance from the terms of this chapter in accordance with
the provisions of §
156.132.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.095 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Ordinary repair. On any non-conforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a non-conforming use, any change that does not require a
building permit is considered ordinary maintenance and shall not affect the
non-conforming status.
   (B)   Unsafe buildings. If a non-conforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful
due to the lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any building
official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not
thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
   (C)   Mobile homes. Any mobile home that was properly permitted prior to the
adoption of this chapter, but now considered a non-conforming use, may be
replaced by a newer model, affixed with an A or B Seal, without affecting its
non-conforming status but must meet other requirements of all local, state and
federal rules, requirements and restrictions.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
AMENDMENTS
§ 156.110 ZONING CODE AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.
   This chapter and the zoning map may be amended or repealed but only in
accordance with the procedures set forth in KRS Chapter 100 and in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.111 ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   The procedure for amendments to this chapter shall be the same as the
adoption of the original zoning ordinance and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
   (A)   Origination of zoning text amendment. A proposal to amend the text of
this chapter may originate with the Planning Commission or City Council. The
Planning Commission must hold at least one public hearing after proper notice
is given.
   (B)   Public notice. The Planning Commission shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city and county at least seven days and no more than
21 days before the public hearing in accordance KRS Chapter 424.
   (C)   Public hearing and Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission
shall hold at least one public hearing and make a recommendation as to the text
of the amendment and whether the amendment shall be approved or disapproved and
shall state the reasons for its recommendation. In the case of a proposed text
amendment originating with the City Council, the Planning Commission shall make
its recommendation within 60 days of the date of its receipt of the proposed
text amendment.
   (D)   Legislative body action. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation on the proposed zoning text amendment to the City Council, and
City Council shall take final action on the zoning map amendment and shall
approve or disapprove the zoning map amendment pursuant to KRS Chapter 100.
Approval of the zoning ordinance text amendment shall take an affirmative vote
of a majority of the City Council.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.112 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   The procedures for zoning map amendments shall be the same as defined in KRS
Chapter 100 and in addition, as follows.
   (A)   Origination of zoning map amendment. A proposal for a zoning map
amendment may originate with the Planning Commission, the City Council or an
owner of the property in question. Regardless of the origin of the proposed
amendment, a pre-application conference must be conducted and a written
application must be filed with the Planning Commission as set forth in this
chapter.
   (B)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing an application for a
zoning map amendment, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Commission’s
Administrative Official to discuss the proposed amendment, requirements,
procedures and issues related to the proposed zoning map amendment. This pre-
application conference is intended to alleviate potential problems and
conflicts by recognition, and consideration of existing conditions, necessary
facilities, Comprehensive Plan recommendations and other issues related to the
proposed amendment. The pre-application conference shall be held no less than
five working days and no more than three months prior to the filing of a zoning
map amendment application. The Planning Commission shall not accept a zoning
map amendment application if a pre-application conference has not been
conducted.
   (C)   Zoning map amendment application. An application for a zoning map
amendment must be filed with the Planning Commission and must include the
following information and documentation:
      (1)   Application signed by an owner or the owner’s agent;
      (2)   Plat and site plan of the property in question, prepared by
licensed land surveyor, including the following information:
         (a)   Names of owner(s) and applicant(s);
         (b)   Scale and north arrow;
         (c)   Bearing and distances;
         (d)   Lot dimensions and setbacks;
         (e)   Locating distance to nearest road or railroad centerlines or
rights-of-way;
         (f)   Address of property or intersecting street on each side;
         (g)   Rights-of-way of road and pavement width;
         (h)   Adjacent property, showing property lines and names of adjacent
property owner(s);
         (i)   Acreage of property;
         (j)   Vicinity map;
         (k)   Surveyor’s stamp and certification;
         (l)   Floodplain area(s) and FEMA   certification;
         (m)   Exterior dimensions and use of all existing and proposed
structures; and
         (n)   Any and all other information necessary for determining
conformance with the zoning ordinance.
      (3)   Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from the County
Property Valuation Administrator’s records, including name(s), mailing
addresses, PVA number and property street address;
      (4)   Certificate from the County Health Department approving the
proposed water and sewerage facilities;
      (5)   Fifteen copies of a development plan prepared and signed by a
licensed land surveyor and/or registered professional engineer dependent upon
development content. A development plan shall meet the following requirements
and contain the information listed below:
         (a)   Shall be drawn on durable, dimensionally stable media of a size
no larger than 24" x 36". More than one sheet may be used. Sheets shall be
numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used, and each shall be labeled
“Development Plan;”
         (b)   Shall be drawn at a convenient and standard scale;
         (c)   Shall have a title block containing the following information:
            1.   Name of the development, if applicable;
            2.   Name and mailing address of the property owner(s);
            3.   Name and mailing address of the developer(s), if different
from owner(s);
            4.   Name and mailing address of the professional land surveyor, if
applicable, and name of the firm that performed the survey, if applicable;
            5.   Name and mailing address of the professional engineer;
            6.   Date of preparation; and
            7.   All other pertinent data and information.
         (d)   Graphic and written scale;
         (e)   North arrow;
         (f)   Vicinity map of sufficient detail to locate land being
subdivided and showing major streets and other durable physical features;
         (g)   Topographic map shall show the following.
            1.   Topographic contour lines must be depicted with sufficient
accuracy to permit the planning of drainage, streets and other proposed
improvements. The plans must include two-foot contours on land less than 5%
gradient and five-foot contours on land more than 5% gradient. The contour
lines are not to be more than 100 feet apart horizontally and shall extend for
at least 40 feet beyond the boundary lines of the proposed development.
Contours shall relate to the United States Geological Survey (USGS) of the area
and shall relate to the nearest benchmark. All contours shall be marked in feet
above sea level. The benchmark shall be clearly shown or identified.
            2.   Size, top of frame and invert elevations for all culverts,
manholes or catch basins and flow line elevations for all brooks at 100-foot
stations. This data for at least 40 feet beyond the boundary lines of the
proposed development.
            3.   Sinkholes shall be clearly labeled and their low point clearly
marked.
            4.   All existing watercourses, inland wetlands, floodplains and
flowage easements.
            5.   Present wooded areas indicated by foliage line.
         (h)   Names, locations, record sources and current zoning designation
of adjoining subdivisions and locations, record sources, current zoning
designation and names of owners of adjoining property along with intersecting
property lines;
         (i)   Total calculated area of subject land computed either to the
nearest hundredth of an acre or nearest square foot;
         (j)   Layout of proposed tracts of land, including dimensions of lots,
lot lines, lot numbers and minimum building setback lines. Tracts shall be laid
out according to sound planning principles;
         (k)   All existing and proposed structures;
         (l)   Direction and length of each line as follows:
            1.   Bearings shown in degrees, minutes, and seconds and distances
shown to hundredths of a foot; or
            2.   A geometrically-curved line identified with a beginning point,
terminus point and with sufficient curve data to define the curve.
         (m)   Cemetery or grave site, if discernible or of notice during the
performance of the field survey or the required research;
         (n)   Accurate location, description and material of all monuments;
and
         (o)   Layout of existing and proposed streets and utilities on and
adjacent to the subject property.
      (6)   Other applications for variances or conditional uses; and
      (7)   For zoning map amendments originated by the Planning Commission,
City Council or other governmental agency or entity, a filing fee shall not be
required.
   (D)   Administrative Official review and findings. Upon the filing of a
zoning map amendment application, the Administrative Official shall review the
application, make whatever studies the Planning Commission deems necessary and
report findings at the public hearing. In addition, the Planning Commission may
require an applicant to submit further information subsequent to the filing of
an application if necessary to make a recommendation.
   (E)   Public notice. The Planning Commission shall give notice of the public
hearing in accordance with the provisions of KRS Chapters 100 and 424 and as
set forth in this chapter:
      (1)   Published notice. The Planning Commission shall publish a notice in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city and county at least seven and no
more than 21 days before the public hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
      (2)   Mailed notice.
         (a)   Map amendments originating with the owner. Notice of the
required public hearing shall be sent by first class mail to owners of property
adjacent to the subject land at least 14 days prior to the public hearing.
         (b)   Map amendments originating with the Planning Commission or City
Council. Per KRS Chapter 100, when a map amendment originates with the Planning
Commission or City Council, notice of required public hearing shall be sent by
first class mail to an owner of every parcel of property for which the
classification is proposed to be changed at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing.
      (3)   Posted notice. The Planning Commission shall post a notice of the
public hearing conspicuously on the property for 14 consecutive days
immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
   (F)   Public hearing and Planning Commission action.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and
make findings of fact and a recommendation of approval or disapproval of the
proposed map amendment to the City Council. The Planning Commission must find
that the zoning map amendment is in agreement with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan, or in the absence of such a finding, that one or more of the following
apply and such finding shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the
Planning Commission:
         (a)   That the existing zoning classification given to the property is
inappropriate and that the proposed zoning classification is appropriate; and
         (b)   That there have been major changes of an economic, physical or
social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the
adopted Comprehensive Plan and which have substantially altered the basic
character of such area.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall forward its findings of fact and
recommendations in writing, including a summary of the evidence and testimony
presented by the proponents and opponents of the proposed amendment, to the
City Council.
   (G)   Legislative body action. Upon receipt of the findings of fact and
recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall take
consider the zoning map amendment pursuant to KRS Chapter 100 requirements.
   (H) Land use certification recordation. The Planning Commission secretary
shall file a land use certificate in the County Court Clerk’s office for all
zoning map amendments within 30 days of the date upon which the legislative
body takes final action on the zoning map amendment. The land use certificate
shall be completed and recorded in conformance with the KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES AND APPEALS
§ 156.130 GENERALLY.
   The Board of Adjustments shall have the power to hear and decide on
applications for conditional use permits, variances and appeals in accordance
with the procedures set forth in KRS Chapter 100 and in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.131 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   The owner of the subject property or an agent of the owner, bearing a
written power of attorney granting authority for this purpose, may apply for a
conditional permit.
   (A)   Application. An application for a conditional use permit must be filed
with the Board of Adjustments. The application must be accompanied by the
following information and documentation:
      (1)   Application signed by an owner or the owner’s agent;
      (2)   Plat and site plan of the property to which the conditional use
permit will apply, prepared by a licensed land surveyor and containing the
following information:
         (a)   Names of owner(s) and applicant(s);
         (b)   Scale and north arrow;
         (c)   Bearing and distances;
         (d)   Lot dimensions and setbacks;
         (e)   Locating distance to nearest road or railroad centerlines or
rights-of-way;
         (f)   Address of property or intersecting street on each side;
         (g)   Rights-of-way of road and pavement width;
         (h)   Adjacent property, showing property lines and names of adjacent
property owner(s);
         (i)   Acreage of property;
         (j)   Vicinity map;
         (k)   Surveyor’s stamp and certification;
         (l)   Floodplain area(s) and FEMA certification;
         (m)   Exterior dimensions and use of all existing and proposed
structures; and
         (n)   Any and all other information necessary for determining
conformance with this chapter.
      (3)   Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from County Property
Valuation Administrator’s records, including name(s), mailing addresses, PVA
number and property street address;
      (4)   Certificate from the County Health Department approving the
proposed water and sewerage facilities; and
      (5)   Non-refundable fee.
   (B)   Staff review and findings. Upon the filing of a conditional use permit
application, the Board of Adjustments staff shall review the application, make
whatever studies the Board of Adjustments deems necessary and report findings
at the public hearing. In addition, the Planning Commission may require an
applicant to submit further information subsequent to the filing of an
application if necessary to make a recommendation.
   (C)   Public notice.
      (1)   Published notice. The Board of Adjustments shall publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and county a public notice at
least seven days and not more than 21 days before the public hearing in
accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
      (2)   Mailed notice. The Board of Adjustments shall send notice of the
required public hearing by first class mail to owners of real property that are
adjacent to the land that is subject to the conditional use permit application
at least 14 days prior to the public hearing.
      (3)   Posted notice. The Board of Adjustments shall post a notice of the
public hearing conspicuously on the property for 14 consecutive days
immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
   (D)   Board of Adjustments action. Within 30 days of the receipt of a
conditional use permit application, the Board of Adjustments shall hold at
least one public hearing. The Board of Adjustments may approve, modify or deny
any application. If it approves such permit, it may attach necessary conditions
such as time limitations, requirements that one or more things be done before
the request can be initiated, or conditions of a continuing nature. Any such
conditions shall be recorded in the Board of Adjustments’ minutes and on the
conditional use permit, along with a reference to the specific section of the
zoning ordinance listing the conditional use under consideration.
   (E)   Land use certification recordation. The Board of Adjustments secretary
shall file a land use certificate in the County Court Clerk’s Office for all
conditional use permits within 30 days of the date upon which the Board of
Adjustments takes final action to adopt the conditional use permit. The land
use certificate shall be completed and recorded in conformance with the KRS
Chapter 100.
   (F)   Revocation of conditional use permits. The Board of Adjustments shall
have the power, after notifying the permit holder and holding a public hearing,
to revoke conditional use permits for non-compliance with the conditions
therein or if the property owner violates any requirements of any local, state
or federal regulations. Furthermore, the Board of Adjustments shall have a
right of action to compel offending structures or uses removed at the cost of
the violator and may have judgment in person for such cost.
   (G)   Time limit. In any case where a conditional use permit has not been
exercised within the time limit set by the Board of Adjustments, or within one
year, if no specific time limit has been set, such conditional use permit shall
not revert to its original designation unless there has been a public hearing.
EXERCISED, as set out in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for
the construction of the main building or other improvements have been let, or
in the absence of contracts, that the main building or other improvement is
under construction to a substantial degree, or that prerequisite conditions
involving substantial investment is under contract, in development, or
completed. When construction is not a part of the use, “exercised” shall mean
that the use is in operation in compliance with the conditions as designated in
the permit.
   (H)   Annual review. The Administrative Official shall review all
conditional use permits, except those for which all conditions have been
satisfied, at least once annually, to determine if the conditions in the permit
are being met. The Administrative Official shall review any conditional use
permit, except those for which all conditions have been satisfied, on the
request of the Board of Adjustments to determine if the use of the conditions
in the permit are being met and to determine if the land violates any laws or
regulations.
      (1)   Inspection and report. The Administrative Official shall have the
power to inspect the land or structure where the conditional use is located in
order to ascertain that the landowner is complying with all the conditions that
are listed on the conditional use permit. If the property owner is not
complying with all of the conditions listed on the conditional use permit, the
Administrative Official shall report the fact in writing to the chairperson of
the Board of Adjustments. The report shall state specifically the manner in
which the landowner is not complying with the conditions on the conditional use
permit, and a copy of the report shall be furnished to the property owner at
the same time that it is furnished to the chairperson of the Board of
Adjustments.
      (2)   Public hearing. The Board of Adjustments shall hold a hearing on
the report within 30 days, and a notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be furnished to the property owner at least one week prior to the
hearing. If the Board of Adjustments finds that the facts alleged in the report
of the Administrative Official are true and that the property owner has taken
no steps to comply with them between the date of the report and the date of the
hearing, the Board of Adjustments may authorize the Administrative Official to
revoke the conditional use permit and take the necessary legal action to cause
the termination of the activity on the land which the conditional use permit
authorizes.
   (I)   Conditional uses as permitted uses. Once the Board of Adjustments has
completed a conditional use permit and all the conditions required are of such
type that they can be completely and permanently satisfied, the Administrative
Official, upon request of the applicant, may, if the facts warrant, make a
determination that the conditions have been satisfied, and enter the facts
which indicate that the conditions have been satisfied and the conclusion in
the margin of the copy of the conditional use permit which is on file.
Thereafter said use, if it continues to meet the other requirements of this
chapter, will be treated as a permitted use.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.132 VARIANCES.
   The owner of the subject property or an agent of the owner, bearing a
written power of attorney granting authority for this purpose, may apply for a
variance.
   (A)   Permitted variances. The Board of Adjustments shall have the authority
to hear and decide on applications for variances from the terms of this chapter
as defined and permitted in KRS Chapter 100, but only in the following
situations and provided that such relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and
purpose of this chapter. The Board of Adjustments shall deny any request for a
variance arising from circumstances that are the result of a willful violation
of the chapter by the applicant subsequent to the adoption of the chapter from
which relief is sought.
      (1)   Where, by reasons of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, which at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, was a lot of record;
      (2)   Where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a piece of property, the
strict application of dimensional requirements would cause practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such
property. Financial disadvantage to the property owner is no proof of hardship
within the purpose of this chapter; or
      (3)   Where it is shown that the land in question cannot be subdivided
and that more open space is created, a lower density can be established,
traffic problems are lessened and a better relationship between the land and
buildings is created by not subdividing the land and where a multi-building
development will retain the neighborhood character and not violate this
chapter.
   (B)   Prohibited variances. The following variances shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued to allow the extension of a non-
conforming use;
      (2)   Variances shall not be permitted to increase the density of a use
above that permitted by the applicable zoning district;
      (3)   Variances shall not be permitted to allow a use prohibited by this
chapter;
      (4)   Variances shall not be permitted which arise from circumstances
that are the result of willful violations of the chapter; and
      (5)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodways.
   (C)   Application. An application for a variance must be filed with the
Board of Adjustments. The application must be accompanied by the following
information and documentation:
      (1)   Application signed by an owner or the owner’s agent;
      (2)   Boundary survey and site plan of the property to which the variance
will apply, prepared by a licensed land surveyor and containing the following
information:
         (a)   Names of owner(s) and applicant(s);
         (b)   Scale and north arrow;
         (c)   Bearing and distances;
         (d)   Lot dimensions, setbacks and   coverage;
         (e)   Locating distance to nearest road or railroad centerlines or
rights-of-way;
         (f)   Address of property or intersecting street on each side;
         (g)   Rights-of-way of road and pavement width;
         (h)   Adjacent property, showing property lines and names of adjacent
property owner(s);
         (i)   Acreage of property;
         (j)   Vicinity map;
         (k)   Surveyor’s stamp and certification;
         (l)   Floodplain area(s) and FEMA   certification;
         (m)   Exterior dimensions and use of all existing and proposed
structures; and
         (n)   Any and all other information necessary for determining
conformance with the chapter.
      (3)   Listing of adjoining property owners obtained from County Property
Valuation Administrator’s records, including name(s), mailing addresses, PVA
number and property street address;
      (4)   Certificate from the County Health Department approving the
proposed water and sewerage facilities; and
      (5)   Non-refundable fee.
   (D)   Staff review and findings. Upon the filing of a variance application,
the Board of Adjustments staff shall review the application, make whatever
studies the Board of Adjustments deems necessary and report findings at the
public hearing. In addition, the Board of Adjustments may require an applicant
to submit further information subsequent to the filing of an application if
necessary to make a recommendation.
   (E)   Public notice.
      (1)   Published notice. The Board of Adjustments shall publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and county a public notice at
least seven days and not more than 21 days before the public hearing in
accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
      (2)   Mailed notice. The Board of Adjustments shall send notice of the
required public hearing by first class mail to owners of real property that are
adjacent to the land that is subject to the variance application at least 14
days prior to the public hearing.
      (3)   Posted notice. The Board of Adjustments shall post a notice of the
public hearing conspicuously on the property for 14 consecutive days
immediately prior to the hearing and as set forth in KRS Chapter 100.
   (F)   Board of Adjustments’ findings and action.
      (1)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a variance application, the Board
of Adjustments shall hold at least one public hearing. The Board of Adjustments
may approve, modify or deny any application. The Board of Adjustments may grant
a variance if it concludes that unnecessary hardship would result from the
strict application of this chapter. The Board of Adjustments shall determine
and express in writing, all of the following findings that:
         (a)   The requested variance arises from special circumstances which
do not generally apply to land in the general vicinity or the same zone;
         (b)   The strict application of the provisions of the chapter would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land or would create an
unnecessary hardship on the applicant;
         (c)   The circumstances are the result of the applicant taken
subsequent to the adoption of the chapter from which relief is sought; and
         (d)   The requested variance will not adversely affect the public
health, safety or welfare, will not alter the character of the general
vicinity, will not cause a hazard or a nuisance to the public, and will not
allow unreasonable circumvention of the requirements of the chapter.
      (2)   In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustments may attach thereto
such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the
proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in the furtherance
of the purposes of this chapter.
   (G)   Land use certification recordation. The Board of Adjustments secretary
shall file a land use certificate in the County Court Clerk’s office for all
conditional use permits within 30 days of the date upon which the Board of
Adjustments takes final action to grant the variance. The land use certificate
shall be completed and recorded in conformance with the KRS Chapter 100.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.133 ZONING PERMITS.
   The zoning permit ensures that the contemplated use is in accord with those
permitted in that district and that all dimensional and other requirements of
this chapter are met. A zoning permit is not the same as a building permit
although it may be obtained at the same time and from the same person. It shall
be unlawful to commence construction or alteration of any structure until the
Administrative Official has issued a zoning permit authorizing such work except
as specified.
   (A)   Exceptions. No zoning permit shall be required in the following cases:
      (1)   Recurring maintenance work regardless of cost;
      (2)   Installation of required improvements according to an approved
preliminary subdivision plat or planned-development plat;
      (3)   Local public utility distributing and collecting structures such as
pipes and transmission lines, transformers, meters and the like. Large utility
structures such as substations are permitted only as conditional uses;
      (4)   Public streets and all appurtenances necessary for traffic
direction and safety;
      (5)   Private drives, private parking areas and the parking of vehicles
incidental to the principal use on the same premises;
      (6)   Exempt signs as outlined in §§
156.145 through
156.159;
      (7)   Horticulture and landscaping of any premises;
      (8)   Agriculture; or
      (9)   Handicap-accessible ramps which are preempted by state and federal
laws.
   (B)   Fees. The Planning Commission may establish a schedule of reasonable
fees to be charged for the issuance of zoning permits.
   (C)   Zoning permit procedure.
      (1)   Application. The applicant shall submit a plan along with the
application showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the outside
dimensions of all structures to be constructed or altered and all existing
structures, the use of all structures, yard depths and any other information
necessary for determining conformance with the chapter. The Administrative
Official and/or the Board of Zoning Adjustments reserves the right to require
additional information necessary to make said determination, including, but not
limited to, survey drawn to scale, as-built survey, copies of deeds and/or plot
plans. The Water and Sewer Commission’s certificate approving proposed water
and sewage facilities must accompany applications for a zoning permit.
      (2)   Issuance. If the proposed construction or alteration conforms with
all applicable provisions of the chapter and all other applicable ordinances,
regulations and codes, the Administrative Official shall issue a zoning permit
authorizing such construction or alteration. If the proposed construction or
alteration fails to conform, the Administrative Official shall refuse to issue
a zoning permit and shall deliver written notice to the applicant stating the
reason for the refusal. The Administrative Official shall act upon applications
for zoning permits within two weeks from the date of their submission. In
instances where the proposed construction or alteration does not fully conform
to all applicable provisions of the chapter and all other applicable
ordinances, regulations and codes, the Administrative Official at the request
of the applicant and at the Administrative Official’s sole discretion can issue
a zoning permit authorizing partial construction, providing the Administrative
Official follows guidelines previously approved by the Planning Commission for
such action. In addition, the Planning Commission in order to promote and
protect the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city, may require
issuance of a zoning permit for partial construction in some instances. In both
of the above instances, it is the responsibility of the applicant to conform to
all regulations in order for any zoning permit to remain valid.
      (3)   Duration. A zoning permit shall become void 12 months from the date
of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the
construction or alteration authorized therein. A zoning permit may be renewed
without fee upon review by the Administrative Official before it becomes void.
The renewal request shall be submitted in writing.
      (4)   Permanent file. The Administrative Official shall keep a permanent
file of all applications with accompanying plans and all permits issued.
   (D)   Floodplains. The Administrative Official may approve a zoning permit
but shall advise the applicant when the site on which the applicant wants to
build is within the 100-year floodplain, as determined by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers. All applicable floodplain regulations and requirements
must be completed. All buildings or structures in a designated floodway or
floodplain which tend to increase flood heights or obstruct the flow of flood
waters shall be regulated by the Planning Commission, and therefore, require
the review and approval of the County Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.134 APPEALS.
   Any person, or entity claiming to be injuriously affected or aggrieved by an
official action, order, requirement, interpretation, grant, refusal or decision
of the Administrative Official may take appeals to the Board of Adjustments.
   (A)   Time limitation. Such appeal shall be made within 30 days of the
grievance by filing a notice of appeal with the Board of Adjustments,
specifying the grounds therefore and giving notice of such appeal to any and
all parties of record.
   (B)   Administrative Official action. The Administrative Official shall
transmit to the Board of Adjustments all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed was taken and shall be treated as and be the
respondent in such further proceedings.
   (C)   Public notice.
      (1)   Published notice. The Board of Adjustments shall fix a reasonable
time for hearing the appeal and give public notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city and county at least seven days and not more than 21
days before the public hearing in accordance with KRS Chapter 424.
      (2)   Mailed notice. The Board of Adjustments shall send notice of the
required public hearing by first class mail to the appellant and the
Administrative Official at least one week prior to the hearing.
   (D)   Public hearing. The Board shall hold one public hearing within 60 days
and shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal. The affected
party may appear at the hearing in person or by an attorney. At the public
hearing on the appeal held by the Board of Adjustments, any interested person
may appear and enter his or her appearance, and all shall be given an
opportunity to be heard.
   (E)   Findings requirements. The Board of Adjustments review on appeal shall
be limited to a determination of whether the decision being appealed was not
based upon substantial evidence; and arbitrary and capricious. The Board of
Adjustments shall affirm the decision that is being appealed unless one or both
of the factors set forth above exists. The Board of Adjustments shall not
substitute its judgment for the judgment of the Administrative Official.
   (F)   Limits of authority. The Board shall act only within the strict limits
of its authority as defined in the chapter. The Board has no authority to vary
the use regulations or other regulations not specifically delegated to it. The
Board shall not hold hearings on applications or appeals seeking decisions that
the Board is not authorized to make.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 156.145 INTENT.
   This subchapter provides content-neutral sign standards that allow
legitimate signage for agricultural, residential, professional office, business
and industrial activities while promoting signs that:
   (A)   Reduce intrusions and protect property values;
   (B)   Minimize undue distractions to the motoring public;
   (C)   Protect the tourist industry by promoting a pleasing community image;
and
   (D)   Enhance and strengthen economic stability.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.146 SCOPE.
   These provisions apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration,
location and maintenance of all new and existing signs within the city limits.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.147 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter and
are, therefore, exempt from the requirement to obtain a sign permit:
   (A)   Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the property upon which
they are located;
   (B)   Government signs that are placed by government officers in the
performance of their professional/elected duties;
   (C)   Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or
construction companies in the performance of their professional duties;
   (D)   Vehicle signage when painted directly on a vehicle or attached
magnetically;
   (E)   Temporary signage of three square feet or smaller placed on or after
April 15 and removed by the last day of May. Temporary signage of three square
feet or smaller placed on or after the first day of October and removed by
November 15;
   (F)   Temporary signs for a new business for up to 30 consecutive days from
the first day of business. Exempt signage shall only be displayed on the
property where the new business is located;
   (G)   Signage placed by realtors in the performance of their professional
duties; and
   (H)   Window signage.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.148 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following signs shall not require a permit:
   (A)   Incidental signs;
   (B)   Historic markers; and
   (C)   Change of copy on any sign where the framework or other structural
elements are not altered.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.149 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No sign regulated by this chapter (except those specifically exempted
in §§ 156.147 and 156.148) shall be displayed, erected, relocated or altered
unless all necessary permits have been issued by the Planning Commission.
Applicants shall submit an application form to the department before any permit
may be issued.
   (B)   Property owner shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historical Preservation Commission (HPC) for signage proposed on a historical
structure recognized by the National Register of Historic Places or the HPC.
Applications are available online at the HPC website or by contacting the HPC
directly. If the HPC fails to provide an application to the property owner
within ten days of the property owner’s request, then this requirement for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be waived.
   (C)   Signs shall only be erected or constructed in compliance with the
approved permit.
   (D)   Applicants shall obtain a building permit for the footer of
freestanding and monument signs. Applicants shall also obtain an electrical
permit for signs that require electrical service. Final inspections for
building permits and electrical permits require a minimum notice of 24 hours to
the city’s Building Inspector and/or State Electrical Inspector.
   (E)   Signs permitted as an accessory to a legal, non-conforming use shall
be subject to the regulations of the zone in which the non-conforming use is
located.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.150 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   A legal, non-conforming sign may continue in existence as long as it
is properly maintained in good condition.
   (B)   These provisions shall not prevent the repair or restoration to a safe
condition of any sign, but a non-conforming sign shall not be:
      (1)   Changed to another non-conforming sign except where only the face
or copy is changed;
      (2)   Structurally altered so as to increase the degree of non-conformity
of the sign;
      (3)   Expanded or enlarged;
      (4)   Reestablished after its removal; or
      (5)   Moved to a new location on the building or lot.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.151 ILLEGAL SIGNS.
   All illegal signs shall be subject to immediate enforcement action as
outlined in §
156.999.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.152 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All signs in all zones shall meet the following requirements.
   (A)   Illuminated signs shall be located in a fashion which prevents all
direct rays of light from shining beyond the property lines of the lot on which
the sign is located.
   (B)   No light, sign or other advertising device shall be designed or
erected to imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device or
use any words, phrases, symbols or characters implying the existence of danger,
or the need to stop or maneuver the vehicle.
   (C)   No sign shall be attached to or painted on the surface of any tree,
utility pole or street light.
   (D)   Projecting signs shall have at least seven feet of clearance above a
road or sidewalk;
   (E)   Neon or other lighted tubing signs shall not be permitted except where
such lighting is used behind solid lettering to produce a “halo” effect, or
where it is used indirectly. Neon lighting shall not be used to outline
buildings, structures or ornamental features;
   (F)   No sign, except for government signs, shall be located within the
sight triangle of any intersection. Refer to design standards of the
subdivision regulations;
   (G)   No sign shall be placed in or project into the public or private
street right-of-way, except as specifically permitted herein;
   (H)   Freestanding, monument and projecting face sign area shall be computed
as follows:
      (1)   Double-faced signs shall have only one face counted in calculating
the area;
      (2)   Sign with more than two faces shall have the area calculated by
summing the area of all sign faces and dividing by two;
      (3)   The area enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet shall be
calculated to determine the area;
      (4)   The perimeter of the measurable area shall not include
embellishments (e.g., pole covers, framing, or decorative roofing); provided
there is no written copy on such embellishments; and
      (5)   Maximum height shall be measured from the finished grade at the
center of the sign and shall include the sign’s base.
   (I)   Every sign, including those for which a permit is not required, shall
be maintained in good condition at all times.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.153 PROHIBITED SIGNS IN ALL ZONES.
   The following signs and/or sign features shall be prohibited in all zones:
   (A)   Mobile signs;
   (B)   Roof signs that extend higher than the top of the roof;
   (C)   Rotating or moving signs;
   (D)   Abandoned signs;
   (E)   Streamers, pennants and tag signs or similar signs or devices except
when attached to a permitted temporary sign;
   (F)   Any sign which emits any noise or odor;
   (G)   Freestanding signs which overhang any part of a building;
   (H)   Flashing or blinking signs;
   (I)   Billboards with an electronic message display system;
   (J)   Signs in a public right-of-way; and
   (K)   Handbills.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.154 SIGNS REQUIRING A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT IN ALL ZONES.
   (A)   Signs painted directly on a building require a conditional use permit
in all zones.
   (B)   Only the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall have the authority to
approve sign variances or conditional use permits for signs unless the request
is made to the Planning Commission in conjunction with a development plan.
Applications for these signs shall be submitted and processed as outlined in §§
156.130 and
156.131.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.155 SIGNS PERMITTED BY SPECIFIC ZONE.
   Any sign not specifically permitted shall be prohibited.
   (A)   Mobile Home Park (MHP) Zone.
      (1)   One freestanding sign per park entrance. Sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area, eight feet in height and shall have a minimum setback of
20 feet from any street.
      (2)   One nameplate wall sign per mobile home that shall not exceed one
square foot in area.
   (B)   Low-Density Residential Zone (R-1).
      (1)   Residence. 
         (a)   One nameplate wall sign not exceeding one square foot in area;
         (b)   One wall sign not exceeding one square foot in area; and
         (c)   Every parcel shall be entitled to one sign not exceeding 36
square inches in area to be placed in any of the following locations:
            1.   On the front of every building, residence or structure;
            2.   One each side of an authorized U.S. Postal Service mailbox;
and
            3.   On one post which measures no more than 48 inches in height
and four inches in width.
      (2)   Home occupation. One wall sign not exceeding six square feet in
area.
      (3)   Subdivision. One freestanding sign per entrance into the
subdivision not to exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.
      (4)   Buildings used for religious or educational activities.
         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height;
         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet in area;
         (c)   One bulletin board that shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
and eight feet in height; and
         (d)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square feet in area
nor require sign permits.
      (5)   All other conditional uses.
         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height;
         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet in area; and
         (c)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square feet in area
nor require sign permits.
   (C)   High-Density Residential Zones (R-2 and R-3).
      (1)   Single-family residence. All single-family homes within these zones
shall comply with the signage regulations for Low-Density Residential Zones
regulated under division (B) above.
      (2)   Multi-family residence. Multi-family residential buildings and
conditional uses may have:
         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height and shall have a front yard setback of 20 feet;
         (b)   One wall sign that shall not exceed 12 square feet in area; and
         (c)   Incidental signs which shall not exceed two square feet in area
nor require sign permits.
      (3)   Buildings used for religious or educational activities.
         (a)   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and eight feet in height;
         (b)   One wall sign per building that shall not to exceed 12 square
feet in area;
         (c)   One bulletin board that shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
and eight feet in height; and
         (d)   Incidental signs, which shall not exceed two square feet in area
nor require sign permits.
   (D)   Standard signage permitted in all commercial and industrial zones (CC,
CR, HC and I-1).
      (1)   One freestanding or monument sign per street frontage with a
maximum of two signs per lot.
         (a)   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 75 square feet in area, 25
feet in height and shall have a minimum setback of ten feet. When street
frontage permits two signs, the two freestanding signs may be combined into one
freestanding sign that shall not exceed 110 square feet in area. For buildings
with more than one occupying business, this freestanding sign may list all
businesses within the building.
         (b)   Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet in area, eight
feet in height and shall have a minimum setback of te feet.
      (2)   One wall sign, canopy sign or awning sign per street frontage with
a maximum of two signs per building. The maximum allowed area for all signage
in this category is 32 square feet or 15% of the wall area to which the sign,
canopy or awning is attached, whichever is greater. Awnings shall have at least
seven feet of clearance when fully extended. When a building contains two or
more separate businesses, these requirements shall be applied separately to the
wall area of the portion of the building occupied by the individual business.
      (3)   One wall sign per tenant or lessee not exceeding two square feet in
area.
      (4)   One attraction board either attached to the wall or attached to the
permitted freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet
in height.
      (5)   One menu board for every property that includes a drive-thru lane,
walk-up window or drive-up curbside. Menu boards shall not exceed 55 square
feet in area and shall have a maximum height of eight feet.
      (6)   Temporary signs shall include banners, streamers, tethered balloons
and inflatable signs and objects. One temporary sign per street frontage shall
be allowed subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Shall not exceed 50 square feet per sign where non-rigid
materials are used;
         (b)   Shall not exceed 32 square feet per sign where rigid materials,
such as wallboard or plywood, are used;
         (c)   Shall comply with the applicable regulations for the zone in
which they are located;
         (d)   Shall not remain in place for a period of more than 14
continuous days;
         (e)   Shall not be displayed for more than a total of eight times in
any calendar year; and
         (f)   Shall not be placed within the public right-of-way or the sight
triangle at intersections.
      (7)   One marquee per theatre. A marquee shall not exceed 32 square feet
in area, shall not project more than eight feet from the building face to which
it is attached and shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet.
      (8)   Incidental signs shall not exceed two square feet in area nor
require sign permits.
      (9)   Buildings used for religious or educational activities:
         (a)   In addition to signage permitted above, one bulletin board, not
exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.
         (b)   Signs with electronic message display systems shall be
prohibited in the CC (Central Commercial) and CR (Commercial Restricted)
Districts. Electronic message display systems may be incorporated into one
freestanding or wall sign for each property located within the HC (General
Highway Commercial) and I-1 (Industrial) Zones.
   (E)   Additional signage permitted in specific commercial and industrial
zones.
      (1)   Central Commercial (CC). In addition to the signage permitted in
division (D) above, the following signs shall be permitted:
         (a)   Permanent sidewalk sign. Where a building is located adjacent to
the public right-of-way, one non-illuminated, freestanding sign may be
permanently placed on the public sidewalk with the following restrictions:
            1.   Sign shall not exceed five and one-half square feet in area;
            2.   The edge of the sign shall not extend beyond the curb line;
            3.   The maximum dimensions of the support frame shall not exceed
eight square feet in area (maximum 48 inches wide or 36 inches high); and
            4.   The bottom of such support shall be seven feet above the
sidewalk and the vertical support shall be 24 inches from the curb.
         (b)   Portable sign. One shall be permitted for each business entrance
subject to the following restrictions:
            1.   Maximum surface area of the sign shall be six square feet per
face, maximum height of the sign shall be three feet and maximum width of the
sign shall be two feet; and
            2.   A minimum 36 inches wide pedestrian travelway shall be
maintained on the sidewalk. Signs may be designed with a changeable face and
shall be removed from the public sidewalk when the business is closed.
      (2)   Commercial Restricted (CR). In addition to the signage permitted
division (D) above, the following signs shall be permitted:
         (a)   Shopping center malls larger than 100,000 square feet may have
one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 250 square feet per
sign face and a maximum height of 30 feet. All other shopping malls may have
one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 75 square feet per
sign face and a maximum height of 25 feet.
         (b)   One interstate sign for those businesses which lie within a
2,500-foot radius of the center point of an interstate interchange overpass.
This interstate sign shall take the place of either the permitted freestanding
or wall sign outlined in division (D) above. These businesses may have a
combination of any two of these signs: interstate sign, freestanding sign or
wall sign. Interstate signs shall be subject to the following restrictions:
            1.   Shall not have an electronic message display system;
            2.   Individual signs shall not exceed 250 square feet in area;
            3.   Height (from the base to the top of the sign) shall not exceed
90 feet;
            4.   The sign’s base shall be at least 90 feet from any residential
zoned property; and
            5.   In addition to a sign permit, a building permit shall be
obtained prior to installation.
      (3)   General Highway Commercial and Industrial Zones (HC and I-1). In
addition to the signage permitted in division (D) above, the following signs
shall be permitted:
         (a)   Shopping center malls larger than 100,000 square feet may have
one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 250 square feet per
sign face and a maximum height of 30 feet. All other shopping malls may have
one freestanding sign per street frontage with a maximum of 75 square feet per
sign face and a maximum height of 25 feet.
         (b)   One interstate sign for those businesses which lie within a
2,500-foot radius of the center point of an interstate interchange overpass.
This interstate sign shall take the place of either the permitted freestanding
or wall sign outlined in division (D) above. These businesses may have a
combination of any two of these signs: interstate sign, freestanding sign or
wall sign. Interstate signs shall be subject to the following restrictions:
            1.   Shall not have an electronic message display system;
            2.   Individual signs shall not exceed 250 square feet in area;
            3.   Height (from the base to the top of the sign) shall not exceed
90 feet;
            4.   The sign’s base shall be at least 90 feet from any residential
zoned property; and
            5.   In addition to a sign permit, a building permit shall be
obtained prior to installation.
         (c)   One billboard shall be permitted subject to the following
restrictions:
            1.   The sign shall not have an electronic message display system;
            2.   The property on which the billboard is located shall abut a
federal or state highway;
            3.   The sign shall be the principal use; there shall be no other
buildings, freestanding signs and the like on the lot;
            4.   Signage face shall not exceed 720 square feet in area;
            5.   The sign shall be located no closer than 300 feet to any other
structure;
            6.   The sign shall be at least 150 feet away from any residential
zone or residential use;
            7.   There shall be a 40-foot setback requirement from any right-
of-way; and
            8.   Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
   (F)   Planned development. A permitted sign’s height, size, location and
design features shall be determined by the sign requirements set forth in the
zone in which the proposed or existing use is first permitted.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.156 ADVERTISING ON INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS.
   No billboard shall be permitted adjacent to interstate or limited-access
highways except in conformance with the setback requirements established by the
Federal Bureau of Public Roads, the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet and the
requirements of this chapter with respect to the zoning district involved.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.157 MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   Every sign, including those signs for which a permit is not required, shall
be maintained in good condition at all times.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.158 SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE.
   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter may
substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial speech or non-
commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional
approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or
favoring of any particular noncommercial speech over any other non-commercial
speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.159 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. Signage that has been neglected and fallen into disrepair.
   ATTRACTION BOARD. Copy is changed manually or electronically on a regular
basis.
   AWNING SIGN. Applied directly to the surface of an awning; defined as a
shelter supported entirely on a wall and made of non-rigid material supported
by a frame.
   BANNER SIGN. Made of non-rigid material with no enclosing framework.
   BILLBOARD. Signage intended for lease to a variety of businesses,
organizations and/or individuals. In such case, the sign itself shall be the
income generator and the primary commercial use of the property.
   BULLETIN BOARD. Allows the manual or electronic change of copy and is used
to notify the public of non-commercial events or occurrences such as church
services, political rallies, civic meetings or similar events.
   CANOPY SIGN. Applied directly to the surface of a canopy; defined as a
permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or similar area.
Canopies may be supported by a building, columns, poles, braces or a
combination of both.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. Two faces either set parallel or up to a 45-degree angle.
Any two sign faces set at an angle greater than 45 degrees shall be considered
two separate signs.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY SYSTEM. Copy which uses rotating reflective
discs, direct illumination, rotating veins, light emitting diodes (LEDs),
liquid crystal diodes (LCDs) or other digital devices and is changed by a
central computer.
   FARM. A tract of at least five contiguous acres used for the production of
agricultural or horticultural crops. Agricultural and horticultural crops shall
be defined as, but not limited to, livestock, livestock products, poultry,
poultry products, grain, hay, pastures, soybeans, tobacco, timber, orchard
fruits, vegetables, flowers, ornamental plants, vineyards and wineries.
   FLASHING or BLINKING. Intermittent or sequential illumination for the
purpose of attracting attention to the sign.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. Attached to the ground by columns, poles, braces or other
means and not attached to any building.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Temporary or permanent, erected by government employees or
officers in the performance of their professional/elected duties.
   HANDBILL. Printed or written material, circular, leaflet, pamphlet or
booklet designed for distribution on vehicles or other property, excluding
postal distribution, which advertises merchandise, commodities or services.
   ILLEGAL SIGN. Does not meet the requirements of this chapter and has not
been identified as a legal, non-conforming sign.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Emits or reflects artificial light from any source.
      (1)   DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. Lighted by an unshielded light source
(including neon tubing) which is visible as a part of the sign and where light
travels directly from the source to the viewer’s eye.
      (2)   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. Light source projects light onto the
exterior of the sign surface or onto the building where the sign is located.
      (3)   INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. Light source is within the sign, with a
transparent or translucent background or cover which silhouettes letters or
designs.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. Not exceeding two square feet in area.
   INTERSTATE SIGN. Sign that is designed to be seen from an interstate
highway.
   MARQUEE SIGN. Used in conjunction with a theatre, is attached to the
building, and projects from the building.
   MENU BOARD. Freestanding signs placed at properties where there is a drive-
thru lane, walk-up window or drive-up curbside.
   MOBILE SIGN. Affixed to a frame having wheels or capable of being moved.
MOBILE SIGNS do not have a permanent foundation and cannot withstand the wind-
load stress requirements of the adopted Building Code as they are designed to
stand free from a building. The removal of wheels from such a sign or
temporarily securing a sign of this type shall not prevent it from being
classified as a mobile sign within this definition. This includes signage
placed in a truck bed or on a trailer designed to be pulled behind a vehicle.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Attached to a permanent foundation or decorative base and not
attached to or dependent for support from any building, pole, post or similar
upright.
   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. Legally erected but does not comply with the current
regulations for the zone in which it is located.
   NON-ILLUMINATED SIGN. Does not emit or reflect artificial light from any
source.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Small sign, easily transported by hand, placed outside during
business hours and brought into the business after hours, usually tent style or
A-frame.
   PROJECTING SIGN. Attached to a building, extends more than 24 inches.
   ROOF SIGN. Projects above the cornice of a flat roof or the ridgeline of a
gabled or hipped roof. In determining the top edge of the roof, calculation
shall not include cupolas, pylons, chimneys or other projections above the
roofline.
   ROTATING OR MOVING SIGN. Any portion of which moves by mechanical means or
the wind; does not refer to changing copy with an electronic message display
system.
   SIGN. Any copy, including material used to differentiate the copy from the
background, which is applied to a surface as a means of identifying,
advertising, announcing or illustrating products, services and/or events.
   SIGN CLEARANCE. The vertical distance between the lowest point of any sign
and the grade at the base of the sign.
   SIGN COPY. Any word, figure, number, symbol or emblem affixed to a sign.
   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the
sign, including the frame and any embellishments, to the bottom of the base of
the sign.
   SIGN SETBACK. The horizontal distance between any street right-of-way and a
sign. The measurement shall be taken at the closest point between the right-of-
way and any part of the sign.
   SIGN SURFACE. That part of the sign on which the message is displayed.
   SQUARE FOOT. A unit of area equal to one foot by one foot square.
   STREET FRONTAGE. Property line that lies adjacent to street right-of-way.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display constructed
of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard, plywood or other
like materials and that appears to be intended to be displayed for a limited
period of time. They are intended to be displayed for not more than 14
continuous days or more than eight times per calendar year.
   VEHICLE SIGNAGE. Signage painted directly on a vehicle or attached
magnetically.
   WALL SIGN. Attached directly to a building; includes mansards, canopies,
awnings and signs attached to a roof which do not project above the roofline.
   WINDOW DISPLAY. Merchandise or other objects placed inside a building to be
viewed from outside the building.
   WINDOW SIGN. Attached to or located within three feet of the interior of a
window and which can be seen through the window from the exterior of the
structure.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter pursuant to KRS 100.991 shall be subject to
the following:
      (1)   Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of KRS
100.201 to 100.347 or any of the regulations of this chapter adopted pursuant
thereto for which no other penalty is provided, shall upon conviction, be fined
not less than $10 but not more than $500 for each conviction. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. The city may also enforce these
regulations as permitted by KRS 83A.065.
      (2)   Any person, owner or agent who violates this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each lot or
parcel which was subject of sale or transfer, or a contract for sale or
transfer.
      (3)   Any person who intentionally violates any provision of KRS 100.3681
to 100.3684 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500.
      (4)   Civil injunctions per KRS Chapter 100 and other applicable
enforcement remedies as provided in the law.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
156.050 through
156.056 for which no other penalty is provided shall upon conviction be fined
in an amount not less than $20 nor more than $250. Each day of the violation
shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating may also be found
guilty of a civil offense. The civil fine shall be no less than $20 no more
than $250. The civil fine shall be paid directly to the city. If the fine is
not paid within 30 days from the date of notification, then the city may
recover said fine in a civil action in a court of proper jurisdiction. The city
may also obtain injunctions or abatement orders to ensure compliance with this
chapter or pursue administrative remedies when appropriate, including
injunctions and abatement proceedings,
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
APPENDIX A: USE TABLE
Use Table
P   =   Permitted use
C   =   Conditional use
HO   =   Home occupation
A    =   Accessory use
Use by Use Category  R-1 R-2 R-3 MHP CC CR HC I-1
Use Table
P   =   Permitted use
C   =   Conditional use
HO   =   Home occupation
A    =   Accessory use
Use by Use Category                            R-1 R-2 R-3 MHP CC CR HC I-1
   Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing: Agricultural Production and Livestock and
Animal Specialities
Animal and livestock breeding, raising, training                     
and grazing
Apiary                                                               
Cattle shed                                                          
Chicken/poultry farm                                                 
Fur farm                                                            P
Medical cannabis cultivator                                       P  P
Stable                                                            P  P
   Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing: Agricultural Services
Agricultural business office                                  P  P  P  P
Agricultural contractors                                        P  P  P
Animal boarding                                                   P  P
Crop dusting                                                      C  P
Dog pound and humane society                                      P  P
Kennel, commercial                                                P  P
Landscaping display, sales, nurseries and                         P  P
greenhouses
Lawn and garden services                                        P  P  P
Livery stable                                                     P  P
Livestock sales and shipping                                      P  P
Livestock supplies                                            P  P  P  P
Medical cannabis safety compliance facilities                     P  P
Veterinarian office and hospital                              P  P  P  P
   Construction: Building Contraction General Contractors and Operative
Builders
Building contractor equipment and material                      P     
storage
Building contractor offices                                P   P  P     
Roofing contractor office                                  P   P  P     
Swimming pool installation                                      P  P  P
   Construction: Construction Special Trades Contractors
Carpentry equipment storage                                       P  P
Sheet metal shop                                                  P  P
   Construction: Heavy Construction, Other Than Construction Contractors
Heavy construction contractors, except building                   P  P
Paving contractor equipment and storage                           P  P
Road building equipment storage yard                              P  P
   Construction: Special Trade Contractors
Drilling company                                              P    P  P
Septic tank contractor                                        P    P  P
   Finance, Insurance and Real Estate: Depository Institutions
Banks and financial institutions                              P  P  P   
Savings and loan associations                                 P  P  P   
   Finance, Insurance and Real Estate: Insurance Agents, Brokers and Service
Appraisers services                               C   C   C      P  P  P   
Auctioneers and realtors services and office      C   C   C      P  P  P   
Insurance office                                              P  P  P   
   Finance, Insurance and Real Estate: Non-Depository Credit Institutions
Loan company                                                  P  P  P   
   Finance, Insurance and Real Estate: Real Estate
Adjusters services and office                                 P  P  P   
Auctioneers and realtors services and office      C   C   C      P  P  P   
   Manufacturing: Clothing and Related Products
Cap and hat manufacturing                                         C  P
Clothing manufacturing                                            C  P
Garment manufacturing                                             C  P
Hosiery manufacturing                                             C  P
Knit goods manufacturing                                          C  P
Shirt factory                                                     C  P
Woven goods manufacturing                                         C  P
   Manufacturing: Chemicals and Allied Products
Acetylene manufacturing                                             P
Ammonia manufacturing and storage                                   P
Bleaching compound manufacturing                                    P
Bottled gas manufacturing                                           P
Cellulose manufacturing                                             P
Charcoal manufacturing                                              P
Cosmetic manufacturing                                              P
Explosives manufacturing                          Not permitted
Fertilizer manufacturing                                            P
Gunpowder manufacturing                                             P
Hazardous chemical manufacturing                  Not permitted
Insecticides manufacturing                                          P
Lead oxide manufacturing                          Not permitted
Lime manufacturing and storage                                      P
Paint manufacturing                                                 P
Soap and detergent manufacturing                                    P
   Manufacturing: Electronic and Other Electrical Equipment and Components
Battery manufacturing                             Not permitted
Business machine manufacturing                                      P
Business machines manufacturing, except computer                    P
equipment
Meter manufacturing                                                 P
Office equipment manufacturing, except computers                    P
   Manufacturing: Fabricated Metal Products, Except Machinery and
Transportation Equipment
Boiler manufacturing                                                P
Bolts and nuts manufacturing                                        P
Firearms manufacturing                                              P
Furnace manufacturing                                               P
HVAC equipment manufacturing                                        C
Septic tank construction                                            P
Tower and antenna manufacturing                                     P
   Manufacturing: Food and Kindred Products
Bakery, industrial                                                  P
Bakery, retail                                                P  P  P  C
Beer distribution manufacturing                                     P
Beverage manufacturing, including alcoholic                         P
beverages
Butter and cheese manufacturing                                     P
Candy manufacturing                                                 P
Cider and vinegar manufacturing                                     P
Dairy and creamery                                                  P
Distillery                                                        C  P
Flour mill                                                          P
Food processor                                                      P
Gelatin manufacturing                                               P
Grease and tallow manufacturing                                     P
Grist mill                                                          P
Hide and tallow manufacturing                                       P
Horse radish manufacturing                                          P
Ice cream manufacturing                                             P
Ice plant                                                           P
Lindseed oil manufacturing                                          P
Meat packing plants                                                 P
Medical cannabis cultivator                                       P  P
Medical cannabis processor                                        P  P
Medical cannabis producer                                         P  P
Milk bottling plant                                                 P
Molasses manufacturing                                              P
Noodle manufacturing                                                P
Sausage manufacturing                                               P
Slaughterhouse                                                      P
Slaughtering plants                                                 P
Soft drink bottling                                                 P
   Manufacturing: Furniture and Fixtures
Bathroom accessories manufacturing                                P  P
Bedding/mattress manufacturing                                    P  P
Cabinetry manufacturing                                           P  P
Door and window screen manufacturing                              P  P
Furniture manufacturing                                           P  P
Mattress manufacturing                                            P  P
   Manufacturing: Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Computer Equipment
Advertising display office and agency                         P  P  P  P
Agricultural implements manufacturing                             P  P
Computer equipment manufacturing                                  P  P
Machine shops and tool and dye                                      P
Tool and dye                                                        P
   Manufacturing: Leather and Leather Products
Leather fabrication                                               P  P
Tannery                                                           P  P
   Manufacturing: Lumber and Wood Products, Except Furniture
Creosote manufacturing                            Not permitted
Deck manufacturing                                                  P
Door (wood) manufacturing                                         P  P
Lumber processing                                                 P  P
Manufactured home manufacturing                                     P
Millwork and planing                                              P  P
Mobile home manufacturing                                           P
Modular home manufacturing                                          P
Sash and trim (wood) manufacturing                                  P
Sawmill                                                             P
Wood barrel manufacturing                                           P
Woodworking                                                       P  P
   Manufacturing: Measuring, Analyzing and Controlling Instruments;
   Photographic, Medical and Optical Goods; Watches and Clocks
Artificial limb manufacturing                                     P  P
Medical appliance manufacturing                                   P  P
Optical display and sales                                     P  P  P   
   Manufacturing: Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries
Brush manufacturing and sales                                     P  P
Accoustical material manufacturing                                P  P
Accoustical material storage                                      P  P
Advertising display manufacturing                                   P
Athletic equipment manufacturing                                    P
Broom manufacturing                                                 P
Candle manufacturing                                                P
Casket manufacturing                                                P
Chalk manufacturing                                                 P
Clock factory                                                       P
Luggage manufacturing                                               P
Organ and piano manufacturing                                       P
Pencil factory                                                      P
Sign and display manufacturing                                      P
Sign painting shop                                                  P
Toys and games manufacturing                                        P
   Manufacturing: Paper and Allied Products
Assembly                                                          P  P
Paper bag manufacturing                           Not permitted
Paper products manufacturing                      Not permitted
   Manufacturing: Petroleum Refining and Related Industries
Asphalt plants and products                                         P
Blast furnaces                                                      P
Forge plants                                                        P
Foundry product manufacturing                                       P
Fuel distribution station, bulk plant                               P
Iron and steel fabrication                                          P
Kerosene manufacturing                                              P
Metal casting and foundry                                           P
Oil refinery                                                        P
Oil storage                                                         P
Petroleum refining and storage                                      P
   Manufacturing: Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries
Lithography                                                         P
Newspaper printing and publishing                                 P  P
   Manufacturing: Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastics Products
Hose manufacturing                                                P  P
Plastic molding manufacturing                                       P
Rubber products manufacturing                                       P
   Manufacturing: Stone, Clay, Glass and Concrete Products
Bottle manufacturing                                                P
Brick kilns                                                       P  P
Concrete manufacturing                                            P  P
Glass manufacturing                                               P  P
Graphite manufacturing                                              P
Gypsum board manufacturing                                          P
Marble processing                                                   P
Monument manufacturing                                              P
Mortar preparation                                                  P
Sandpaper manufacturing                                             P
Shingle manufacturing                                               P
Stone processing                                                    P
   Manufacturing: Textile Mill Products
Burlap bag manufacturing                                            P
Burlap processing                                                   P
Rope manufacturing                                                  P
Textile mill                                                        P
Wool processing                                                     P
   Manufacturing: Tobacco Products
Cigarette manufacturing                                             P
Snuff manufacturing                                                 P
Tobacco curing                                                      P
Tobacco manufacturing                                               P
Tobacco warehouse and sales                                         P
   Manufacturing: Transportation Equipment
Automobile assembly                                                 P
Automobile parts manufacturing                                      P
Ball bearings manufacturing                                         P
Boat manufacturing                                                  P
Brake lining manufacturing                        Not permitted
Motor test, internal combustion                                     P
Tire manufacturing                                Not permitted
   Mining: Coal Mining
Coal yard                                                         
Oil and gas extraction                                              P
Rock crushing and rock quarry                                       P
Sand and gravel extraction                                          P
   Private Households
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)                     C   C   C             
Condominiums                                         P   P      C  C  C   
Four-family residential                              P   P      C  P  C   
Multi-family (5 units or more)                          P        P  C   
Parish house, manse                               P   P   P      P  P  P   
Private garage not for dwelling (accessory)       A   A   A   A          
Private swimming pool, covered or fenced to       A   A   A             
prevent accidental access (accessory)
Single-family residential                         P   P   P             
Three-family residential                             P   P      C    C   
Two-family residential                               P   P      C    C   
   Retail Trade: Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Service Stations
Service station                                               P  P  P  P
   Retail Trade: Apparel and Accessory Stores
Cap and hat sales                                             P  P  P   
Children and infant clothing                                  P  P  P   
Clothing stores                                               P  P  P   
Dress shop sales                                              P  P  P   
Fur sales                                                     P  P  P   
Hosiery sales                                                 P  P  P   
Military surplus store                                        C  P  P   
Shoe store                                                    P  P  P   
Uniform rental                                                P  P  P   
   Retail Trade: Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Service Stations
Automobile parts dealers, retail                                P  P  C
Automobile sales lot                                          C  C  P  C
Convenience stores with gasoline                                P  P  C
Filling stations                                              P    P  C
New car sales                                                     P  C
Used car sales                                                    P  C
   Retail Trade: Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply and Mobile Home
Dealers
Garden seed retail                                            P  P  P  C
Glass sales and repair                                        P  P  P  C
Hardware store                                                P  P  P  P
Manufactured home sales, display and storage                    C  C  C
Paint and varnish display and sales                           P  P  P  C
Paint store                                                   P  P  P  C
Plumbing and heating store                                      P  P  C
Roofing material storage and sales                                P  C
   Retail Trade: Eating and Drinking Places
Alcohol beverage tasting rooms                                C  C  C  C
Barbecue stand/restaurant                                     P  P  P  C
Bars and lounges                                              P  P  P  C
Café and restaurant                                          P  P  P  C
Catering (food preparation)                                   P  P  P  C
Fountain soda establishment                                   P  P  P  C
Ice cream shop                                                P  P  P  C
Night club and lounge                                         P  P  P  C
Restaurant                                                    P  P  P  C
Tavern, bar, saloon and lounge                                P  P  P  C
   Retail Trade: Food Stores
Butcher and meat shop                                         C  C  P   
Convenience stores without gasoline                           P  P  P   
Drive-in market                                                 P  P   
Food and agricultural products roadside stand                 C  P  P   
Food and drink roadside stand                     C   C   C   C   C  P  P   
Fruit store                                                   P  P  P   
Grocery, retail                                               P  P  P   
Health food products and sales                                P  P  P   
Meat and fish store                                             P  P   
   Retail Trade: General Merchandise Stores
Department store                                              P  P  P  P
Variety store, retail                                         P  P  P  P
   Retail Trade: Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores
Appliance display and sales                                   P  P  P   
Bathroom accessories display and sales                        P  P  P   
Carpet and rugs retail sales                                  P  P  P   
Ceramic shop and sales                                        P  P  P   
Deck sales                                                      P  P   
Furniture display and sales                                   P  P  P   
Home furnishings                                              P  P  P   
Interior design display and storage                           P  P  P   
Lawn mowers sales and service                                   P  P   
Linen display and sales                                       P  P  P   
Outdoor furniture sales                                       P  P  P   
Washing machine sales and display                             P  P  P   
   Retail Trade: Miscellaneous Retail Stores
Adult bookstore                                                      
Adult novelty store                                                  
Adult video store                                                 C   
Auction house                                                     P   
Antiques display and sales                                    P  P  P   
Bicycle sales and service                                     P  P  P   
Bookstore and bookseller                                      P  P  P   
Bottled gas distribution and sales                              P  P   
Camera shop                                                   P  P  P   
Candy store                                                   P  P  P   
Cigar and cigarette store                                     P  P  P   
Cigarette vending sales and service                           P  P  P   
Coin dealer                                                   P  P  P   
Computer equipment display and sales                          P  P  P   
Costume rental                                                P  P  P   
Dress pattern shop                                            P  P  P   
Drugstores (with drive-through)                               C  P  P   
Drugstores (without drive-through)                            P  P  P   
Florist                                                       P  P  P   
Gift shop, curio shop                                         P  P  P   
Gun sales                                                     P  P  P   
Harness and saddle shop                                       P  P  P   
Herb production and sales                                     P  P  P   
Imported goods sales                                          P  P  P   
Medicinal cannabis dispensary (with drive-                        P   
through)
Medicinal cannabis dispensary (without drive-                     P   
through)
Jewelry store                                                 P  P  P   
Leather display and sales                                     P  P  P   
Liquor store                                                  P  P  P   
Loan and pawn shop                                            C  P  P   
Magazine sales and newsstand                                  P  P  P   
Monument sales and display                                    P  P  P   
Musical instrument sales and repair                           P  P  P   
Newspaper dealers                                             P  P  P   
Newspaper stands                                              P  P  P   
Notions display and sales                         C   C   C      P  P  P   
Novelties display and sales                                   P  P  P   
Office equipment display and sales                            P  P  P   
Orthopedic display and sales                                  P  P  P   
Package liquor store (with drive-through)                     C  P  P   
Pawn shop                                                     P  P  P   
Pet shops                                                     P  P  P   
Photographic shops                                            P  P  P   
Retail store and shop                                         P  P  P   
Sewing machine sales and repair                               P  P  P   
Sound system retail and service                               P  P  P   
Souvenirs roadside stand                                      P  P  P   
Specialities shop                                             C  P  P   
Sporting goods store                                          P  P  P   
Stamp dealer shops                                            P  P  P   
Taxidermist                                                   P  P  P  P
Used bookstore                                                P  P  P   
Vacuum cleaner sales and services                             P  P  P   
   Services: Amusement and Recreation Services
Adult cabaret                                                        
Amusement park                                                    C   
Arcade                                                        P  P  P   
Athletic fields, private and public               C   C   C        P  P  C
Auditorium                                                    P  P  P   
Billiard parlors and pool halls                               P  P  P   
Bowling alley                                                 P  P  P   
Carnival                                                             
Circus                                                               
Country club                                                    P  P   
Dance hall                                                    P  P  P   
Dancing school                                                P  P  P   
Golf course, private                              Not permitted
Golf course, public                                                  
Golf driving range                                                P  C
Gymnasium                                                     P  P  P   
Health and fitness center                                     P  P  P   
Health spa                                                    P  P  P   
Horse racing track                                Not permitted
Ice skating rink                                              P  P  P   
Miniature golf                                                  P  P   
Parks and playgrounds                             C   C   C      C  C  C   
Race track                                        Not permitted
Riding school and academy                                         P   
Rifle, pistol and skeet range                                     C  P
Roller skating rink                                           P  P  P   
Shooting gallery                                                  P   
Shooting range                                                      P
Skating rink                                                  P  P  P   
Sporting arenas                                               C  C  C   
Tennis court, private                             A   A   A      P  P  P   
Tennis court, public                              C   C   C      P  P  P   
YMCA/YWCA                                                     P  P  P   
   Services: Automotive Repair, Services and Parking
Automobile paint and body shop                                C  C  P   
Automobile repair                                             C  C  P   
Automobile wash                                                 P  P   
Diesel engine service                                             P  P
Motorcycle repair and sales                                       P   
Parking lots, commercial                                          P   
Parking lots, public                                          P  P  P   
Public parking garage                                         P  P  P   
Tire recapping                                                    P  P
Tire sales and repair                                         P  P  P   
Wrecker services and yards                                          P
   Services: Business Services
Billboard and outdoor advertising service                       P  P   
Blueprinting                                                  P  P  P   
Book publisher                                                P  P  P   
Business machines sales and service                           P  P  P   
Collection agency                                             P  P  P   
Newspaper offices                                             P  P  P   
Newspaper service                                             P  P  P   
Oxygen equipment rental and sales                             P  P  P   
Printing and lithographic store                               P  P  P  P
Termite control office                                        P  P  P   
Vending machine distribution and repair                         P  P  P
Window glass installation                                     P  P  P   
   Services: Educational Services
Art school (greater than 15 students              C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
Art school (less than 15 students simultaneously) C   C   C      P  P  P   
Barber school                                                 P  P  P   
Barber shop                                       C   C   C      P  P  P   
Beauty school                                                 P  P  P   
Beauty shop                                       C   C   C        P  P   
Business college                                  C   C   C      P  P  P   
Business school                                   C   C   C      P  P  P   
College or university                             C   C   C        P  P   
Dancing school (greater than 15 students          C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
Dancing school (less than 15 students             C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
Health school                                                 P  P  P   
Industrial school                                               C  P  P
Kindergarten                                      C   C   C      P  P  P   
Library, public                                   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Modeling school                                   C   C   C      P  P  P   
Music instruction (greater than 15 students       C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
Music instruction (less than 15 students          C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
Nursery school                                    C   C   C      P  P  P   
School, private                                   C   C   C      P  P  P   
School, public                                    C   C   C      P  P  P   
Seminary and Bible institute                      C   C   C      C  P  P   
Trade school                                                    C  P   
Vocational school                                 C   C   C        C  P   
Vocal school (greater than 15 students            C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
Vocal school (less than 15 students               C   C   C      P  P  P   
simultaneously)
   Services: Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management, and Related
Services
Accounting services and office                    C   C   C      P  P  P   
Architectural office                              C   C   C      P  P  P   
Construction services offices                     C   C   C      P  P  P   
Interior design office                            C   C   C      P  P  P   
Land surveying office                             C   C   C      P  P  P   
Landscape architectural offices                   C   C   C      P  P  P   
Research and experimental laboratory                              P  C
   Services: Government Services
Government buildings, offices and services        C   C   C   P   P  P  P  P
   Services: Health Services
Blood bank                                                        P   
Chiropodist                                       C   C   C        P  P   
Chiropractor                                      C   C   C        P  P   
Dentist office                                    C   C   C      P  P  C   
Doctor’s office                                 C   C   C      P  P  C   
Hospital, private                                 C   C   C      C  C  P   
Hospital, public                                  C   C   C      C  C  P   
Infirmary, private                                C   C   C        C  P   
Medical clinic                                    C   C   C      P  C  P   
Medical offices                                   C   C   C      P  P  P   
Mental hospital                                         C      P  C  P   
Nursing home                                            C        C  C   
Sanatorium                                              C      P  C  P   
Wheelchair rental                                               P  P   
   Services: Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places
Short term rental (residential)/air BNB/bed and   Follow residential guidelines
breakfast
Boarding house                                    C   C   C        P     
Campground/RV park                                                C   
Hotel and motel                                               P  P  P   
Manufactured home park                                     P       P   
Mobile home park                                           P       P   
   Services: Legal Services
Attorney and lawyer office                        C   C   C      P  P  P   
   Services: Membership Organizations
Association, clubs, and lodge                                 P  P  P   
Christian science reading and practitioner        C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Christian science rooms                           C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Church                                            C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Mission, religion                                 C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
   Services: Miscellaneous Repair Services
Agricultural implements repair and service                        P  P
Furnace cleaning and storage                                      P  C
Furniture refinishing                             C   C   C   C       P  C
Gunsmith                                          C   C         P  P  P   
Harness repair                                                P  P  P   
HVAC equipment installation and repairs                         C  P  P
Key shop                                          C   C   C   C   P  P  P   
Leather repair                                                P  P  P   
Locksmith shop                                    C   C   C   C   P  P  P   
Machine shop equipment repair                                     C  P
Septic tank service and cleaning equipment                        P  P
Upholstery                                        C   C   C      P  P  P   
Vacuum cleaner service                            C   C   C      P  P  P   
Watch repair                                      C   C   C      P  P  P   
Welding shop                                                    P  P  P
   Services: Motion Pictures
Adult indoor and outdoor motion picture theater                   C   
Adult mini motion picture theater                                 C   
Cinema and indoor motion picture theater                      P  P  P   
Outdoor theater or drive-in                                       P   
   Services: Museums, Art Galleries and Botanical and Zoological Gardens
Art gallery, commercial sales                                 P  P  P   
Art museum, private                                           P  P  P   
Art studio                                        C   C   C      P  P  P   
Botanical garden                                              P  P  P   
Glass blowing studio                                          P  P  P   
Museum                                                        P  P  P   
Zoo                                                                  
   Services: Personal Services
Adult bathhouse                                                 C     
Adult body painting studio                                      C     
Adult massage parlor                                            C     
Adult modeling studio                                           C     
Barber shop                                       C   C   C      P  P  P   
Carpet and rugs cleaning                          C   C   C        P  P   
Cemetery                                          C   C   C             
Diaper supply service                                         P  P  P   
Dry cleaners                                                  P  P  P  C
Embroidery, screenprint - retail                              P  P  P   
Full-service laundry                                            P  P   
Funeral home and parlor                                       P  P  P   
Hem stitching                                     C   C   C      P  P  P   
Massage therapy                                   C   C   C      P  P  P   
Mausoleums                                        C   C   C             
Millinery and dress making                        C   C   C      P  P  P   
Mortuary                                                        P  P   
Palmistry                                         C   C   C        P  P   
Photographic studios, portrait                    C   C   C      P  P  P   
Rug cleaners                                                    P  P   
Self-service laundry                                          P    P   
Shoe repair                                       C   C   C      P  P  P   
Tailor shop                                       C   C   C      P  P  P   
Tattoo and body piercing parlor                                 C  P   
Tax return preparation                            C   C   C      P  P  P   
Undertaker                                                    P  P  P   
   Services: Social Services
Assisted living facilities                           C   C             
Child and day care center (less than 15 children  C   C   C             
simultaneously)
Child and day care center (greater than 15                           
children simultaneously)
Children’s group home                           C   C   C             
Community center                                     C   C             
Halfway house                                                     C   
Salvation Army and Goodwill                                          
   Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Service: Air
Transportation
Heliport                                                             
   Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Service:
Communications
Broadcasting station                              C   C   C   C   P  P  P  C
Cellular telecommunication tower                  C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Radio tower and antenna                           C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Telecommunications (radio, television, telephone) C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
tower
Tower and antenna display and service             C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Transmission lines, pipes and other               P   P   P   P   P  P  P  P
infrastructure for non-local public utility
   Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services:
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services
Animal incineration                                                  
Ash dumps                                                            
Automobile salvage                                                  P
Electric power generation and substation plant                      C
Garbage incineration                              Not permitted
Junkyard                                          Not permitted
Sanitary landfill and dump                        Not permitted
Sewage disposal plants                                        C  C  C  C
Utility offices                                   C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Utility substation                                C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
   Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Service:
   Local/Suburban Transit and Interurban Highway Passenger Transportation
Ambulance service                                             C  P  P   
Public transportation terminal                                C  P  P   
   Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Service: Motor
Freight Transportation Warehousing
House movers office                                             P  P   
Imported goods warehousing                                        P  P
Refrigerator and food locker storage                              P   
   Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services:
   Motor Freight Transportation and Warehousing
Cold storage                                                      P  P
Department store, warehousing                                     P  C
Freight depot                                                     C  P
Fur warehouse                                                     P  C
Gas bulk storage                                                  C  C
Grocery, warehouse                                                P  C
Moving garage                                                     P  P
Moving warehouse                                                  P  P
Self-storage warehousing                                        P  P  P
Storage and warehousing                                           P  P
Stockyard                                         Not permitted
   Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services:
Transportation Services
Bus depot                                                       P  P   
Bus shop, garage and repair                                       P  C
Railroad expansion and appurtenances              C   C   C   C   C  C  C  C
Taxi service                                                  P  P  P   
Trucking company                                                  C  P
Wall boards wholesale and storage                                 P  P
Wood storage yard                                               C  P  P
   Wholesale Trade: Durable Goods
Agricultural implements sales                                     P   
Automobile parts dealers, wholesale                               P  P
Ball bearings display and sales                                 P  P   
Barber shop equipment and supplies                              P  P   
Boiler sales and service                                          P   
Bolts and nuts storage                                          P  P  P
Building contractor equipment and material sales                C  P  P
and service
Building materials wholesale and storage                          P  C
Carpet and rugs wholesale sales                                   P  C
Clothing wholesale and distributing                               P  C
Electrical supply store                                         P  P   
HVAC equipment sales                                            P  P  C
Irrigation sales and equipment                                  P  P   
Lumber storage yard                                             C  P  P
Milling equipment sales                                         C  P   
Mining machinery supplies                                         P  P
Mining machinery wholesale and storage                              P
Road building equipment sales                                     P  P
Woodworking equipment display and sales                           P   
   Wholesale Trade: Non-Durable Goods
Beer distribution and wholesale                                   P  P
Beverage distribution and wholesale                               P  P
Box sales                                                         P  P
Distillery distribution and wholesale                             P  P
Garden seed wholesale                                             P   
Grocery, wholesale                                                P   
Ice sales                                                         P   
Meat storage and wholesale                                        P   
Milk distribution center                                          P   
Mineral water distribution                                        P   
Notions wholesale                                                 P   
Novelties wholesale                                               P   
Office supplies                                                   P   
Paint and varnish wholesale                                       P   
School equipment and sales                                        P   
Soft drink distribution and wholesale                             P  P
Tobacco wholesale and storage                                     P   
Wholesale house and distribution                                  P   
*   Any use not identified shall be addressed as a conditional use unless
expressly labeled as “Not permitted”
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
CHAPTER 157: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Purpose
   
157.002   Short title
   
157.003   Authority and administration
   
157.004   Area of jurisdiction
Major and Minor Classes of Subdivisions
   
157.015   Purpose
   
157.016   Processing classes for subdivisions
   
157.017   Administratively approvable plats
Minor Subdivision Plats
   
157.030   Purpose
   
157.031   Procedure
Major Subdivision Plats
   
157.045   Purpose
   
157.046   Pre-application conference
   
157.047   Preliminary plat procedure
   
157.048   Final plat procedure
Specifications for Plats
   
157.060   Purpose
   
157.061   Plan materials for pre-application conference
   
157.062   Preliminary plat materials
   
157.063   Final plat materials
Design and Physical Improvements
   
157.075   Purpose
   
157.076   Completion of improvements
   
157.077   Classification of streets
   
157.078   Street design standards
   
157.079   Block design standards
   
157.080   Lot design standards
   
157.081   Easement design standards
   
157.082   Community facilities design standards
   
157.083   Other required improvements
Administration
   
157.095   Variances
   
157.096   Amendments to this chapter
   
157.097   Violations
 
   
157.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Typical street sections
   
Appendix B:   Pavement design detail
   
Appendix C:   Typical street details
   
Appendix D:   Roadway failure repair detail
   
Appendix E:   Common geometric practices
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 PURPOSE.
   These subdivision regulations are designed to encourage the development of
residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions according to recognized
standards which provide for sound, efficient and economical development; to
provide for safe, convenient and efficient traffic circulation; to coordinate
land development to ensure that future growth will be orderly and conducive to
the provision of minimum outlay of public and private expenditures in providing
services to developing areas; to minimize fire hazards; to provide adequate
light and air in inhabitable structures; and to provide sound and efficient
guidelines for the overall development of the area where these subdivision
regulations are in force.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.002 SHORT TITLE.
   The full title of these subdivision regulations shall be “The Land
Subdivision Regulations of Springfield, Kentucky.” The short title of these
regulations shall be known, and may be cited, as the “subdivision regulations”
or “this chapter.”
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.003 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION.
   These regulations are adopted by the City Planning Commission and the City
Council under the authority granted by the KRS Chapter 100. The regulations
shall be administered by the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.004 AREA OF JURISDICTION.
   The City Planning Commission, by virtue of adoption of these regulations,
shall have jurisdiction and control over the subdivision of all land within the
corporate limits of the city and within the unincorporated area adjacent to the
city for a distance of one mile from the corporate boundary.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
MAJOR AND MINOR CLASSES OF SUBDIVISIONS
§ 157.015 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish different classes of
land subdivisions on the basis of their importance to the overall development
of the community.
   (B)   The classification of land subdivisions will expedite the processing
of certain classes of subdivisions and permit the establishment of requirements
for subdivision plan preparation and approval which may vary for the different
classes of subdivisions.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.016 PROCESSING CLASSES FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, KRS Chapter 100 defines a SUBDIVISION
as the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development,
or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; provided,
that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five
acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a SUBDIVISION.
The term includes a re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided.
   (B)   (1)   The state statutes further provide that no land shall be
subdivided, transferred or sold, or agreed to be sold, until after a plat of
such land is prepared and approved in conformance with the requirements
established by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Metes and bounds descriptions shall not be used for the above
purposes to replace the required platting procedures, and no plat shall be
accepted for recording by the County Clerk until it has been approved in
writing by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   In order to proceed towards establishing such requirements,
subdivisions shall be classified as follows.
      (1)   Major subdivision. Subdivisions of land which are generally of
major significance to the future development of the community, and shall
include all subdivisions which do not conform to the definitions established
for minor subdivisions. Generally, major subdivisions would be those which
create five or more lots for sale or building development for the establishment
of residential, commercial or industrial activities. If the Commission
determines that a minor subdivision is of significant importance to the
development of an area, the subdivision may be treated as a major subdivision.
      (2)   Minor subdivision. Subdivisions of land which are generally of
secondary planning significance to the community’s future development. Such
minor subdivisions are described below, and shall conform to the requirements
established in this subchapter.
      (3)   Consolidation of minor subdivision. Subdivisions characterized by
the following.
         (a)   Adjoining properties. The subdivision shall be solely for the
purpose of transferring a portion of a parcel or tract of land to an adjoining
property with which it is to be consolidated. Such adjoining property shall
have a common boundary with the parcel of land intended for transfer.
         (b)   Conformance to community plans. The subdivision shall be in
conformance with community development plans, implementation devices and other
applicable regulations or ordinances, including, among other considerations,
any necessary dedication for adequate street rights-of-way.
      (4)   Building site minor subdivision. Subdivisions characterized by the
following.
         (a)   Number of divisions. There shall be a maximum of five lots in a
building site minor subdivision.
         (b)   Access.
            1.   All lots shall abut for at least 50 feet upon a street
dedicated for public use. Lots may abut upon private access easement when all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The private street will serve no more than four lots;
               b.   The minimum width of access easement shall be 30 feet;
               c.   The length of private street shall not exceed 150 feet;
               d.   The minimum pavement width shall be 16 feet;
               e.   The slope of the street shall not exceed 12%;
               f.   All setbacks established for the zone in which the property
is located shall be observed from the easement line;
               g.   All utilities must agree to serve any lots fronting on a
private street;
               h.   The private street shall not adversely impact neighboring
properties; and
               i.   A deed of restrictions outlining maintenance
responsibilities for the private street shall be filed with the plat.
            2.   If a new street dedicated to the public is involved, the
subdivision shall be considered a major subdivision. If a new private street is
involved, the subdivision shall be considered a minor subdivision.
         (c)   Conformance to community plans. The subdivision shall be in
conformance with community development plans, implementation devices and other
applicable regulations or ordinances, including, among other considerations,
any necessary dedication for adequate street rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.017 ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVABLE PLATS.
   If all of the following apply, the respective plat may be approved for
recording by the Zoning Enforcement Officer:
   (A)   The plat reflects a change in lot lines that do not increase the
number of lots/tracts or where the division of property results in only one
additional lot and there has been no more than one such division in the prior
five years, the minor subdivision may be approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer for recording;
   (B)   The use of the property is to remain the same or is a use allowed in
the current zoning classification for the property; and
   (C)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer may at his or her sole discretion refer
any plat, subject to approval under this section, to the Planning Commission
for its approval.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 157.030 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish special requirements to
expedite the preparation and processing of minor subdivision plats.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.031 PROCEDURE.
   Where a proposed subdivision can be classified as a minor subdivision
according to §§
157.015 through
157.017, the procedure for submission of a preliminary plat for approval may be
waived by the Planning Commission after the advisory meeting. However, the
procedure for approval of the final plat remains the same.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 157.045 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the procedure which shall be
followed by the developer and the Planning Commission in preparing, reviewing
and approving all subdivision plans. (Except that minor subdivisions may skip
the preliminary plat phase with approval of the Planning Commission.)
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.046 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   The developer should arrange a conference with the Planning Commission
before a preliminary plat is submitted. The purpose of the conference is to
afford the developer an opportunity to avail himself or herself the assistance
of the Commission and its staff before he or she prepares a preliminary plan
and makes formal application for its approval. This procedure will reduce the
number of unnecessary and costly changes which are often required when a plat
is submitted for review before the Commission has had an opportunity to review
it.
   (A)   Sketch plan. The developer should have a rough sketch plan prepared
before the pre-application conference to show the boundaries of the tract,
location and sidewalks, the proposed street and lot arrangement and other
pertinent information.
   (B)   Office visit. The developer should then visit the Commission’s office
and informally discuss his or her ideas with the Commission or its staff. This
informal discussion shall not constitute a formal application and will be
considered confidential. The developer should also consult with the utility
companies and other local agencies at this time.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.047 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE.
   All subdivision plats shall receive their first official consideration as
preliminary plats. No developer shall proceed with any construction work,
including grading, before a plat has been given preliminary approval. The
following procedures shall be required during the preliminary plat procedure.
   (A)   Design plans. The developer shall have a registered surveyor,
registered engineer, landscape architect, architect or community planner
(provided that engineering data is supplied by a registered engineer, or
surveyor for landscape architects, and community planners) prepare the
preliminary plat in conformance with the format, design and improvement
requirements of these regulations. Utility companies and other concerned city
and county agencies should be consulted before the preliminary plat is
prepared.
   (B)   Formal application and submission.
      (1)   A completed application secured from the Commission’s office and
six 11" x 17" copies of the preliminary plat folded to 8-1/2" x 11" submitted
to the Planning Commission shall constitute an application for formal action on
the preliminary plat. For maximum assurance that a plat will receive Commission
consideration at a certain meeting, the plats should be submitted at least 20
days before such meeting.
      (2)   A letter addressing the availability of utilities shall be filed
with the preliminary plat.
   (C)   Distribution and review of plats. The Commission shall make copies of
the preliminary plats available to all concerned city and county agencies. The
Commission will consider all comments from these agencies before making
recommendations on the plats.
   (D)   Notification of action. After Commission action, two copies of the
plat will be marked in conformance with the Commission’s actions and the
developer shall be notified of the Commission’s action and requested to pick up
his or her plat.
      (1)   Approval.
         (a)   The developer is authorized to proceed with physical
improvements in the proposed subdivision and to proceed with the preparation of
the final plats. Lots shall not be sold until a final plat has been approved.
         (b)   Preliminary approval grants a developer a maximum time limit of
12 months during which he or she shall submit a final plat, unless a time
extension is granted by the Commission. During this 12-month period, no changes
shall be made unless they are for the purpose of correcting obvious errors or
omissions.
      (2)   Conditional approval. The developer may proceed as outlined in
division (E) above but only after corrected preliminary plats have been
submitted to the Commission’s Chairperson.
      (3)   Postponement. Action is delayed for definite reasons which shall be
noted by the Commission.
      (4)   Disapproval. The denial of approval for the submitted plat. Before
further action can occur, the developer must revise his or her plat to conform
to the Commission’s requirements.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.048 FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE.
   All subdivision plats shall receive their second and last consideration as
final plats. No developer shall sell or agree to sell any lot until after a
final plat has been approved. The following procedure shall be required for all
final plats.
   (A)   Design plans. The developer shall have a registered surveyor or
engineer prepare a final plat in conformance with the format, design and
improvement requirements of these regulations. The final plat is a legal record
of the subdivision as surveyed in the field and must agree with the approved
preliminary plan, except that final plans covering a portion of the approved
preliminary plat may be submitted.
   (B)   Time lapse. Unless a time extension has been requested by the
developer and granted by the Commission, all final plats shall be submitted
within 12 months of the approval date of the preliminary plat. If a time period
in excess of 12 months elapses, the preliminary plat must be re-submitted and
approved before final plat approval can be considered.
   (C)   Material to be submitted. The following final plat materials must be
submitted by the developer. For maximum assurance that a plat will be
considered at a certain Commission meeting for the plat, materials should be
submitted at least ten days prior to such meeting.
      (1)   Subdivision plats. Six prints of the plat showing the manner in
which the land is proposed to be subdivided and legally recorded shall be
presented to the Commission. The plats shall be in conformance with
specifications outlined in §
156.156.
      (2)   Bond for physical improvements. The Commission shall have no
obligation to allow developers to post surety bonds in lieu of completed
physical improvements, but it may permit said bonds if it so desires. When
bonds are permitted, the developer shall submit cost estimates to the
Commission to cover the full cost of all physical improvements. The developer
shall then post a surety bond with the Commission, running to the Planning
Commission for and on behalf of the city. A time period of one year will be
allowed for construction of improvements.
      (3)   Utility approval. A copy of a letter approving the location and
size of all easements and rights-of-way must be obtained from the following
utilities: the City Water and Sewer Commission, electric utility companies, gas
utility companies, telephone utility companies, internet utility companies and
cable television utility companies.
   (D)   Distribution and review of plats. The Commission shall make copies of
the final plat available to all concerned city and county agencies. The
Commission will consider all comments from these agencies before making
recommendations on the plats.
   (E)   Notification of action. After Commission action, two copies of the
plat will be marked in conformance with the Commission’s action and the
developer shall be notified of the Commission’s action and requested to pick up
his or her plat.
      (1)   Approval. The final plat has been signed by the Chairperson of the
Commission and may be recorded. After recording, the developer may sell or
agree to sell lots by reference to the approved and recorded final plat.
Commission approval shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance
by the city or county of the dedication of any street or other proposed space
offered for dedication, since such acceptance is the prerogative of the city
and county legislative bodies.
      (2)   Conditional approval. The developer may proceed as outlined in
division (E)(1) above but only after he or she has met the conditions attached
to the approval.
      (3)   Postponement. The Commission has deferred action until some future
Commission meeting in order that certain clarification can be made in regard to
the plat.
      (4)   Disapproval. Complete denial of the final plat. To request review
and action, the developer must revise the plat to conform to Commission
requirements and re-submit a new set of final plats.
   (F)   Recording final plat. Within 90 days of the Commission’s approval,
unless a time extension has been granted by the Commission previous to the
expiration date, a certified copy of the final plat shall be filed for
recording in the County Clerk’s office. The Commission’s action becomes null
and void if this requirement is not met. The Commission’s action is also voided
if the certified plat is altered in any manner (except for Commission
requirements) between the date of Commission approval and recording.
   (G)   Release of bond. If a surety performance bond has been permitted by
the Commission, its release shall be approved by the Commission after all
improvements, in the opinion of the Commission, have been satisfactorily
completed, except a certain percentage that may be withheld for a period of one
year after date of approval of improvements to ensure that any roadway
construction remain in satisfactory condition after one year of use. Release of
the final portion of said bond shall be approved by the Commission after
inspection of the roadway is completed by the City Engineer or Zoning Official.
   (H)   Private engineer’s inspection. Before the surety performance bond is
released, the developer’s engineer must certify that all physical improvements
have been completed and are in full conformance with the Commission’s
regulations.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLATS
§ 157.060 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to describe the content and format
of required plat materials and the information which the plats must contain.
Conformance to these requirements will provide for the expedient processing of
plats.
   (B)   All plans shall adhere to these specifications unless the Commission
grants permission for modifications due to unusual or special circumstances.
Plans which are flagrantly or repeatedly lacking the required data shall be
returned to the developer by the Commission immediately after the absence of
data is apparent.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.061 PLAN MATERIALS FOR PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   As previously described in §
157.046, the minimum plat materials for the pre-application conference should
be a sketch plan showing the boundaries of the tract, a rough street and lot
layout, the sidewalk plans and other information concerning pertinent physical
features. The sketch is not required to be to any definite scale, drawn on any
special material or meet any other specifications.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.062 PRELIMINARY PLAT MATERIALS.
   The preliminary plat material shall consist of three categories of materials
as explained below. Other material may be submitted by the developer may be
required by the Planning Commission.
   (A)   Restrictive covenants. When the developer proposes to regulate land
use in a subdivision and otherwise protect a development, one draft copy of
such covenants shall be submitted as part of the preliminary plat materials.
   (B)   Land subdivision plat. Six prints of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted on sheet sizes of 18 inches by 24 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches
unless the Commission grants permission for other sizes because of unusual or
special circumstances. If necessary, more than one sheet may be used if a key
map is prepared to relate each sheet to the entire subdivision. The information
required on the preliminary plats shall be positioned in the following manner.
      (1)   Title block. The title block should be placed on the bottom of the
sheet and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name. The name of the proposed subdivision, which
shall not duplicate or approximate the name of any other subdivision in the
city or the county;
         (b)   Property identification. The record name and mailing address of
the property being subdivided;
         (c)   Identification. The name and mailing address of the property
owner and the developer’s engineer; and
         (d)   Legend information. Graphic scale, written scale, north point,
date of preparation and any other pertinent legend data.
      (2)   Location sketch. A sketch showing the general location of the
subdivision shall be placed in the upper right or left corner of the sheet. The
location sketch shall be drawn at a scale large enough to show the proposed
subdivision’s relationship to existing and proposed features, such as major
traffic arteries, schools, recreation areas, shopping areas and industrial
areas.
      (3)   Lot design. The design scheme shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet
or less to the inch and shall show the following existing conditions and
proposed development features.
         (a)   Existing conditions. The following information of existing
conditions shall be illustrated:
            1.   Boundary lines: the location, distance and bearings of the
boundary lines;
            2.   Streets: street names, right-of-way widths and approximate
grades shall be shown on all streets adjacent to and within the proposed
subdivision;
            3.   Utilities: the location and size of all utilities and
easements adjacent to and within the proposed subdivision;
            4.   Topography: contours with five foot intervals, referenced to
U.S.G.S. datum;
            5.   Subsurface conditions: when required, result of tests made to
ascertain soil percolation quality if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed;
            6.   Other conditions on the tract, such as watercourses, marshes,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees and houses or bans and other
significant features which will be retained or removed; and
            7.   Conditions on adjacent land, such as: approximate direction
and gradient of ground slope; railroads, commercial areas and other nearby
nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent, unplatted
land; subdivision names adjacent platted land; perimeter lotting; and typical
lot size in adjacent subdivision.
         (b)   Proposed development on tract. The following information on
proposed development shall be shown:
            1.   Streets: the proposed names, right-of-way and pavement widths
and approximate grades and direction thereof;
            2.   Other rights-of-way or easements: the location, width and
purpose;
            3.   Lots and setback lines: the location and approximate distances
of all lot lines. Lot numbers shall also be shown;
            4.   Setback lines: the location of proposed building setback lines
with dimensions showing the setback from the street rights-of-way;
            5.   Public sites: the name, acreage and use of any sites proposed
for public use, such as parks, playgrounds and school sites;
            6.   Multi-family and nonresidential uses: the acreage and use of
non-public uses, such as multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, church and
the like; and
            7.   Sidewalks: the location of sidewalks, cross-sections showing
width of sidewalks, materials, location and other pertinent information.
   (C)   Other materials. When the tract shown on the subdivision plan
represents only a portion of the developers holding, an additional sketch shall
be required to illustrate the proposed street layout for the remainder of the
tract.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.063 FINAL PLAT MATERIALS.
   The final plat materials shall consist of three groups of material:
restrictive covenants; plat for recording; and as-built improvement
construction drawings. Other materials may be submitted by the developer or
required by the Commission.
   (A)   Restrictive covenants. When the developer intends to regulate land use
in a subdivision and otherwise protect the development, two copies of the
restrictive covenants shall be submitted as part of the final plat materials.
   (B)   Plat for recording. A legible plat suitable for recording with an
overall sheet size of 18 inches by 24 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches shall be
prepared. If necessary, more than one sheet may be used if a key map is shown
to relate each sheet to the entire platted area. Six prints of this plat shall
be submitted by the developer when he or she makes application for final
approval. The information required on this sheet should be positioned in the
title block, certificate block, location sketch or on the lot design scheme.
      (1)   Title block. The title block should be placed on the bottom of the
sheet and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name. The name of the subdivision and, where the
proposed final plat is a portion of a larger subdivision bearing the same name,
the section number of other positive identification. A subdivision name shall
not duplicate or closely approximate any other subdivision name in the city or
county;
         (b)   Person identification. The names and mailing addresses of the
following:
            1.   The property owner;
            2.   Developer; and
            3.   Developer’s engineer.
         (c)   Legend information. The graphic scale, written scale, north
point, date of preparation and other pertinent legend information.
      (2)   Certification block. The certification block should be placed on
the bottom of the sheet at the end of the title block, and shall contain the
following certification with signatures.
         (a)   Owner’s certification.
 
   OWNER’S CERTIFICATION
 
      I (we) do hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of record of the property shown and described hereon which is
recorded in Deed Book ___, page ___, in the County Clerk’s office; do hereby adopt this plan of lots for this property; do hereby
dedicate the streets and any other spaces so indicated to public use; and do establish and reserve the indicated easements for
public utilities and drainage purposes.
 
                                                                 
         Date         Owner(s)
 
         (b)   Engineer’s certification.
 
   ENGINEER CERTIFICATION - THIS CERTIFICATION MAY BE
   MODIFIED TO MEET CURRENT ENGINEERING STANDARDS
 
I do hereby certify that the construction plans and/or as-built plans for this subdivision were prepared by me or under my direction; and are in conformance with all appropriate
rules and regulations; and that to the best of my knowledge and belief all requirements of the subdivision regulations, stormwater ordinance and zoning ordinance have been fully
complied with.
 
                                                                                           
    Date         Engineer’s Name      Engineer’s Seal
 
         (c)   Surveyor’s certification.
 
   SURVEYOR CERTIFICATION - THIS CERTIFICATION MAY BE
   MODIFIED TO MEET CURRENT ENGINEERING STANDARDS
 
I do hereby certify that this plat was prepared by me or under my direction; that all monuments indicated hereon actually exist and their locations, size and material are
correctly indicated; the information shown hereon is correct to the best of my knowledge and belief; and that to the best of my knowledge and belief all requirements of
the subdivision regulations have been fully complied with.
 
                                                                                     
    Date      Surveyor’s Name      Surveyor’s Seal
 
         (d)   Certification of streets.
 
   CERTIFICATION OF THE APPROVAL OF STREETS
 
I hereby certify: (1) that streets and other improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to city specifications in the subdivision entitled:
_________________________ and/or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of $__________ has been posted with the city legislative body to assure completion of all
streets and related improvements in case of default.
 
                                                                                    
    Date      City Engineer or Approving Agent
 
         (e)   Utilities certification.
 
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF ELECTRIC UTILITIES
 
I hereby certify: (1) that the electric utility improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to relevant specifications in the subdivision
entitled: and/or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of $__________ has been posted with the utility provider to assure completion of utility improvements in case
of default.
 
                                                                                    
    Date      Utility Agent or Approving Agent
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITIES
 
I hereby certify: (1) that the telecommunications utility improvements have
been installed in an acceptable manner and according to relevant specifications
in the subdivision entitled: and/or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of
$__________ has been posted with the utility provider to assure completion of
utility improvements in case of default.
 
    
               
    
                                                         
    
    Date      Utility Agent or Approving Agent
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF WATER LINE IMPROVEMENTS
 
I hereby certify: (1) that the water line utility improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and according to relevant specifications in
the subdivision entitled: and/or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of
$__________ has been posted with the utility provider to assure completion of
utility improvements in case of default.
 
    
               
    
                                                                            
    
    Date      Water and Sewer Commission Approving Agent
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF SEWER LINE IMPROVEMENTS
 
I hereby certify: (1) that the sewer line utility improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and according to relevant specifications in
the subdivision entitled: and/or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of
$__________ has been posted with the utility provider to assure completion of
utility improvements in case of default.
 
    
               
    
                                                                           
    
    Date      Water or Sewer Commission Approving Agent
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS
 
I hereby certify: (1) that the stormwater management improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and according to relevant specifications in
the subdivision entitled: and/or, (2) that a security bond in the amount of
$__________ has been posted with the utility provider to assure completion of
utility improvements in case of default.
 
    
               
    
                                                         
    
    Date      Approving Agent
 
         (f)   Commission’s certification.
 
   COMMISSION’S CERTIFICATION
 
I hereby certify this record plat was approved by the Springfield Planning Commission on                           , 20                           , and is now eligible for recording.
                                                                                                 
         Date          Planning Commission Chairperson
 
         (g)   Commissions certification for administratively approvable plats.
 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the subdivision regulations of Washington County, Kentucky, with the
exception of such variances, if any, as are noted on the plat and/or in the minutes of the Planning Commission, and that it has been approved for recording
in the office of the County Clerk.
 
                                                                              
Chairperson or Administrative Official             Date
 
      (3)   Location sketch. A sketch showing the general location of the
subdivision in relation to the surrounding area should be placed in the upper
right- or left-hand corner of the sheet. The location sketch shall be drawn at
a scale large enough to show the proposed subdivision’s relationship to
existing and proposed community features, such as major traffic arteries,
schools, recreation area, shopping areas and industrial areas.
      (4)   Lot design. The design scheme shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet
or less to the inch and shall show the following information for the proposed
subdivision and adjacent land:
         (a)    Street on adjacent land. The exact location of streets on
adjacent land and the width along the property lines for all existing or
recorded streets intersecting or paralleling and boundaries of the proposed
subdivision;
         (b)   Owners of adjacent land. For adjacent land which is platted,
show the boundaries with dashed lines, the record name, date of recording and
plat book and page number. For adjacent land which is unplatted, show the name
(s) of record;
         (c)   Boundary lines of tract. In a line style and weight which will
distinguish the developer’s property from all adjacent property, show the tract
boundary lines with lengths to hundredths of a foot and bearings to the nearest
minutes. These boundaries shall be determined from an accurate survey in the
field;
         (d)   Monuments. Show the accurate location and material of all
permanent reference monuments;
         (e)   Streets, easements and lot lines. For street rights-of-way, show
the names, bearings, angles of intersection, right-of-way and pavement widths;
for all easements or other rights-of-way, show the locations, widths and
purposes; for lot lines show dimensions in feet to hundredths of a foot and
bearings to the nearest minute;
         (f)   Lot numbers. Lot numbers shall be shown and numbered in
numerical order;
         (g)   Reservations and dedications. Show the accurate outline of all
property which is either offered for dedication to public use or which is
reserved by covenant in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in
the subdivision, with the purpose plainly printed thereon; and
         (h)   Building setback lines. Show the minimum building setback line
which shall be at least one-half of the total width of the street right-of-way
on which the building fronts.
      (5)   Construction drawings. Two copies of these drawings shall be
submitted to the City or County Engineer (whichever has jurisdiction) on a
sheet size of 18 inches by 24 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. The drawings
shall be referenced to the name and unit number of the proposed subdivision and
shall show the following information:
         (a)   Street profiles. The profile of each street indicating the
existing ground surface and the grade of the new street surfaces at a
horizontal scale equal to the horizontal scale of the record plat and a
vertical scale of one-tenth of the horizontal scale, with final grades
indicated; and
         (b)   Street cross-sections. A cross-section of each new street shall
be shown at a scale of ten feet or less to the inch and shall include the width
of pavement, the location and width of sidewalks and the location of utilities.
      (6)   Other materials. In addition to other sketches or material which
may be required by the Planning Commission, the following shall apply to surety
performance bonds and recording of plats: release of surety performance bond.
When the Commission has approved a final plat and permitted bonding to ensure
completion of required improvements, and the developer has completed such
improvement, the following procedure shall apply.
         (a)   City (County) Engineer’s inspection. After completing all
improvements, the developer shall notify the City (County) Engineer that the
improvements are ready for final inspection.
         (b)   Engineer’s notification to Commission. If the City (County)
Engineer finds the improvements are complete in conformance with Commission
requirements, he or she shall notify the Commission by letter and recommend the
release of the bond. Conversely, if the date of completion has passed and the
improvements are not completed in accordance with Commission requirements, the
Engineer shall notify the Commission and recommend that the bonding company be
notified to complete the required work within a specified period of time.
         (c)   Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall then
act on the Engineer’s recommendation and either release the bond and/or call
for completion of the required improvements.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
DESIGN AND PHYSICAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 157.075 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the minimum design standards
and the minimum standards to which developers shall conform in providing and
constructing physical improvements within a subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.076 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Unless the Planning Commission approves a surety performance bond, all
required improvements shall be completed prior to final plat approval.
   (B)   With the Commission’s approval the developer, in lieu of completing
the improvements as stated above, shall furnish the Commission with a surety
performance bond running to the City Planning Commission for and on behalf of
the city. The bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of all required
improvements to be installed by the subdivider.
   (C)   All physical improvements shall be installed under the direction and
supervision of the developer’s engineer.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.077 CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS.
   (A)   Streets within or adjacent to a proposed subdivision shall be
classified according to one or more of the classifications noted below and
physical improvements and design standards shall be required in accordance with
each classification.
   (B)   The required improvements shall be installed by the developer at his
or her expense in accordance with the specifications of the official or
agencies having jurisdiction. Improvements exceeding these minimum requirements
may be provided by the developer or required by the Commission.
   (C)   Design and improvement requirements for expressways and arterial
streets will be determined by the Planning Commission with the advice of the
City Engineer and the State Department of Highways.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.078 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Introduction. The purpose of this section is to establish the minimum
standards required for the design and construction of public roadways in the
city. This section is intended to assist a private developer in the design and
construction of subdivision roadways which will be dedicated (once properly
constructed) to the city for public use, repair and maintenance.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The local government agency which shall be responsible for all
current and future repair and maintenance of existing and newly developed city
roadways.
      CITY ENGINEER. The engineer employed by the city. The CITY ENGINEER shall
be responsible for the design review and construction review of any public
roadway owned and maintained by the city. The CITY ENGINEER’S Office is located
at Springfield City Hall, 127 West Main Street, Springfield, KY 40069 and has
phone number (859)336-5440.
      PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT. The Public Works Superintendent or other
designated representative of the PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT. The PUBLIC WORKS
DEPARTMENT shall be responsible for construction review and inspection of any
public roadway. The PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT is located at Springfield City
Hall, 127 West Main Street, Springfield, KY 40069 and has phone number of
(859)336-5440.
      STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The Kentucky Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction commonly used for all new, repair and maintenance work
associated with state highways and bridges in the state. The edition of this
book to be utilized shall be that edition which is in effect when the design/
construction plans for a new proposed city roadway has been submitted to the
city for approval. When the term “Engineer” or phrase “as approved by the
Engineer” is used in the STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS, it shall be construed to mean
the City Engineer. The STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS shall be the minimum standard
utilized for construction and inspection of the city public roadways. Any
developer who intends to utilize different specifications than the STANDARD
SPECIFICATIONS shall specifically identify the difference in the construction
plans.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   All developers/contractors who wish to construct a new road or
extend an existing road, and of which that developer intends to dedicate
ownership of that road to the city once constructed, shall accomplish the
following:
         (a)   Comply with all zoning regulations required by the city;
         (b)   Comply with this chapter developed by the Planning Commission;
         (c)   Submit preliminary construction plans (with or after the
preliminary plat submittal) to the City Engineer for review. No construction of
a proposed public roadway shall begin until the City Engineer has reviewed the
construction plan;
         (d)   Review the site with the City Engineer. Be prepared to discuss
locations of borrow material, sample locations and number of proctors (to be
used for soil densities), cross drain culverts, easements and rights-of-way;
         (e)   Revise preliminary construction plans to comply with the City
Engineer’s comments and concerns. Re-submit final construction plans for final
approval by the City Engineer; and
         (f)   Once the final construction plans have been approved by the City
Engineer, construction may begin; provided the preliminary plat and other
requirements of the Planning Commission have been complied with.
      (2)   Any construction activities which begin prior to construction plan
review and approval shall be at the owner’s own risk.
   (D)   Roadway design and construction.
      (1)   Construction plans.
         (a)   All newly developed roadways, either in subdivisions or
extensions of existing roads, which are intended to be dedicated to the city at
a later date, shall be required to have construction plans. These construction
plans shall be submitted to, reviewed by and approved by the City Engineer
prior to construction.
         (b)   To assure proper review and approval of the construction plans
prior to final plat approval, the construction plans shall be submitted to the
City Engineer a minimum of 20 working days prior to the Planning and Zoning
subdivision plat review committee meeting.
         (c)   These plans shall be in sufficient detail to properly inform the
City Engineer of all fills, cuts, ditches, culverts, bridges, preliminary lot
layout and any other information necessary which may be required for a city-
owned roadway. The plans shall comply with the following:
            1.   Roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
this document and this chapter; and
            2.   The minimum requirements for construction plans shall be:
               a.   Plan, profile, curve data, etc. of the roadway showing
roadway cuts, fills, alignment, and road grades;
               b.   Existing contour lines at a minimum of five feet (or closer
for hilly sites). Contour lines shall be of sufficient detail to depict all
hills, creeks, sink holes, ponds and other features which might impact roadway
construction;
               c.   Typical roadway cross-sections showing pavement structure,
width and side drainage ditches;
               d.   Roadway location with respect to subdivision lot layouts,
adjacent property owners, connection roads (names), new phases (proposed) and
the like;
               e.   Cross drain culverts, including sizes, lengths, locations
and materials (including headwalls). Culverts shall be sized for a 25-year
storm event and certified by a professional engineer. Show all retention
structures if required;
               f.   Roadway side ditches and proposed driveway culverts;
               g.   Roadway right-of-way to be dedicated to the city;
               h.   Utility easements with proposed utilities;
               i.   Construction or maintenance easements if needed;
               j.   If septic tanks/lateral fields are to be used for sewage
disposal, provide a copy of the preliminary on-site evaluation provided by the
County Health Department;
               k.   All plans shall be prepared, sealed, and signed by a
licensed professional engineer of the state who routinely prepares such design
assuring that all features such as culverts, bridges and any other structures
are properly designed to carry intended loads; and
               l.   All variances to the above requirements shall be
specifically noted or requested.
      (2)   Specifications. All materials and procedures utilized in the design
and construction of a new city roadway shall comply with the appropriate
section in the Standard Specifications such as concrete, asphalt, dense graded
aggregate, pipe materials and the like. Typical details such as culvert
headwalls shall be as specified in the Standard Drawings Manual developed by
the Kentucky Department of Highways. Reference to this Manual shall be made
when designing such structures. Any variance to this Manual shall be noted.
      (3)   Roadway construction (to subgrade).
         (a)   All roadway fills and cuts shall be shown on the plans. In areas
that require embankments to be constructed, the developer shall understand they
will be required to comply with Section 206 Embankment of the Standard
Specifications. Soil proctors (target densities) may be required as determined
in the construction plan review. This will depend on the soil type at the
proposed development site. Proctors will involve soil samples to be collected
and sent off to an acceptable laboratory with target densities (with acceptable
moisture contents) developed for the soil to be used in the embankment
construction. Field densities will be routinely checked by using nuclear
density meters operated by an approved construction inspection company. These
field densities will be the responsibility of the developer/contractor when
required by the City Engineer.
         (b)   Density reports shall be routinely provided to the City Engineer
during construction. Embankment materials which fail the field density check
will be required to be excavated, refilled, and compacted with suitable
material in accordance with the Standard Specifications.
         (c)   The minimum in place dry density of subgrade soils utilized for
subgrade construction shall be as described in Section 205 of the Standard
Specifications. Specifically, all subgrade construction shall obtain 95% of the
maximum density (based on the proctor) or 98 pounds per cubic foot (whichever
is greater).
         (d)   Most soils within the city and county have a California Bearing
Ratio (CBR) less than six. Subgrade stabilization is recommended for any soil
with a CBR less than seven.
         (e)   As a means to provide a barrier between the subgrade and
pavement base materials, geotextile fabrics should be used in accordance with
the Standard Specifications in saturated foundation areas and in embankment
benching areas or as required by the City Engineer.
         (f)   Subgrade drainage systems shall be installed so as to drain any
subsurface water from the pavement structure. Either porous aggregate
underdrains or perforated and non-perforated pipe underdrains shall be used in
accordance with the Standard Specifications. Underdrain systems shall be
installed at a minimum of 100 feet center-to-center spacing along the degrees
of the roadway and may be required as directed by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Roadway construction (pavement structure).
         (a)   Generally.
            1.   City streets shall be designed according to the following
minimum pavement sections for the specified street classification. Designs are
based on soils with a CBR of three or less and a design life of 15 years.
Alternate pavement designs may be submitted to the Office of the City Engineer
for approval by a licensed Engineer with an accompanying geotechnical report.
Alternate designs shall be in accordance with the current edition of KYTC’s
Pavement Design Guide and Standard Specifications.
 
   Street Classification          Minimum Pavement Section
Commercial                           12" DGA, 4.5" asphalt base, 1.25" asphalt
                                     surface
Industrial                           14" DGA, 6" asphalt base, 1.5" asphalt
                                     surface
Light industrial (LIP)               12" DGA, 5,5" asphalt base, 1.5" asphalt
                                     surface
Residential cul-de-sac (<1,000 feet) 9" DGA, 3" asphalt base, 1.25" asphalt
                                     surface
Residential collector (>1,000 feet)  9" DGA, 3.5" asphalt base, 1.25" asphalt
                                     surface
 
            2.   Use of concrete roads or any other variance from this minimum
standard shall be prepared and submitted by a licensed professional engineer to
the City Engineer for approval.
         (b)   Dense graded aggregate (DGA). The DGA to be used shall comply
with the Standard Specifications in that the DGA shall be run through a pugmill
and water added to achieve a moisture content of plus or minus 2% of optimum.
The DGA may be placed in one lift no thicker than six inches compacted. The DGA
shall be spread with a stone spreader capable of obtaining a uniform depth. For
roads less than 300 feet in length, tailgate spreading may be used; provided it
is graded to the correct depths. The DGA shall be compacted while still wet to
84% of solid volume. The contractor shall be responsible for testing compaction
which shall comply with the Standard Specifications.
         (c)   Asphalt bituminous base course. The asphalt base shall be laid
in one lift and compacted. The initial compaction pass shall be with a static
roller and at least two more passes of a roller in the vibratory mode or as
specified in Section 403.03.10 Compaction of the Standard Specifications.
Finish roiling shall be accomplished with a static roller.
         (d)   Asphalt tack coat. Asphalt tack coat shall be applied to any
asphalt base course prior to surface placement. The tack coat shall comply with
and be applied as specified in Section 406 Asphalt Curing Seal and Asphalt
Prime and Tack Coats of the Standard Specifications.
         (e)   Asphalt bituminous surface course.
            1.   The surface course shall be placed and compacted as required
by the Standard Specifications.
            2.   Both the bituminous base and bituminous surface courses shall
meet the current Standard Specifications for gradation and asphalt content for
work on similar projects by the State Department of Transportation. The
bituminous base shall be compacted to within 95% of the job mix formula for the
material being used as specified in the Standard Specifications Section 403
Production and Placement of Asphalt Mixtures. The contractor shall provide
density reports on the compaction.
            3.   The pavement width shall be as described in this chapter. No
DGA shoulders will be required unless determined necessary by the City
Engineer. See Appendix A for typical roadway sections intended for use in the
city. Any variance to this section shall be shown on the construction plans
when practical.
      (5)   Slopes, ditches and culverts.
         (a)   Slopes. The grades of the proposed roadway shall be specifically
shown on the profile sheet. Roadway side slopes (embankment fill areas,
including over culverts) shall be a maximum (steepest) of a three horizontal to
one vertical - 3H:1V.
         (b)   Ditches.
            1.   Parallel roadway ditches shall typically be a “V” type ditch
with a 3H:1V side slope designed to a depth to properly channel surface
drainage away from the pavement structure. Ditches shall be a minimum of six
inches below the bottom of the pavement stone base layer so as to allow the
subgrade drainage system to function properly. Typical ditches shall be shown
on the plan and profile sheets. When the roadway grade is greater than 5%, side
ditches shall be rip rap lined two feet up each side slope.
            2.   All other ditches shall be seeded and strawed with a Seed Mix
Type I, of Section 212.03.03 Permanent Seeding and Protection of the Standard
Specifications. Any variance of this mixture shall be identified in the
construction plans. The rates of application shall be as detailed in Section
212 Erosion Control of the Standard Specifications.
            3.   All disturbed right-of-way areas shall be seeded at a rate of
80 pounds per acre. Within 48 hours of seeding, the area shall be mulched with
straw at rates detailed in Section 212 Erosion Control of the Standard
Specifications.
         (c)   Culverts.
            1.   Culverts shall be sized to carry the flow rates expected for a
25-year storm event. In the design, the HW/D ratio shall be as close to 1.0 as
is practical, however, shall not exceed 1.5, or cause unnecessary ponding. A
100-year storm event should not reach an elevation of one foot below the
roadway surface so as to prevent overtopping during extreme storm events.
            2.   Culvert material shall be, as a minimum, aluminized corrugated
metal pipe (ACMP), 16 gage thickness complying with ASTM A819 and AASHTO M274
and the Standard Specifications. Alternative pipe materials may be utilized
provided the owner/developer specifically identifies and request a variance on
the construction plans. All materials to be used shall comply with the Standard
Specifications.
            3.   Cross drain round culverts 24 inches or larger shall require
concrete headwalls. All concrete box culverts require headwalls. The culvert
length shall be what is necessary for the 3H:1V embankment slope to toe out at
the culvert flowline. Rip-rap (shot limestone rock) shall be required at
culvert inlets/outlets. The minimum size for a roadway cross drain culvert
shall be 18 inches.
            4.   All culverts (box or pipe), and utility structures (pipelines)
within the pavement structure area shall be constructed and properly backfilled
in accordance with Section 611 Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culvert Sections
of the Standard Specifications.
      (6)   Right-of-way. Right-of-way to be dedicated to the city shall be a
minimum width identified in this chapter. Permanent right-of- way markers shall
be installed at all roadway change of direction. These right-of-way marker
locations shall be shown on the construction plans.
      (7)   Easements. All utility construction and/or maintenance easements
shall be shown on the construction plans. Typically, no utility easements shall
be located in the right-of- way unless specifically requested and identified on
the plans. All underground utilities which cross the roadway (i.e., electric
lines) shall be specifically shown on the construction plans. All utilities
which are to be installed in the city’s right-of- way shall have utility
identification tape installed during backfill of the utility trench. This
identification tape shall be placed at approximately 18 inches above the
utility. All utilities which are installed within the pavement structure area
shall be property backfilled and compacted in accordance with Section 603
Foundation Preparation and Backfill of the Standard Specifications.
      (8)   Curb and gutters/sidewalks.
         (a)   Curb, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed when required by
this chapter. The minimum sizes/configuration for the curb/gutters and
sidewalks are shown in Appendix B and Appendix C. Any variance from this detail
shall be identified in the construction plans.
         (b)   Adequate surface drain structures (i.e., curb box inlets with
clean out manholes) shall be installed along the curb and gutters (at all low
points in roadways or at sufficient intervals along relatively flat roadways as
designed by the Engineer) to allow surface water to drain off from the pavement
structure. Catch basin clean out manhole spacing shall not exceed 150 feet.
         (c)   The Design Engineer shall take into account any subsurface
drainage problems that could result from curb/gutter installation due to the
site’s soil/clay material and/or terrain. The requirement for subsurface
drainage is a designer decision.
      (9)   Street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed to meet city
requirements.
      (10)   Street signs. A list of the streets’ names shall be provided to
the city for a particular development. It shall be the responsibility of the
city to purchase and install all street signs for new and old developments.
      (11)   Stormwater management and drainage plan and encroachments on city
roads. Streets shall be designed with respect to topography to produce the most
usable and property situated lots; provided proper drainage for stormwater and
produce proper grades. See
Chapter 154 and any amendments for city requirements.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024) Penalty, see §
157.999
§ 157.079 BLOCK DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be observed in the design of blocks.
   (A)   Residential block length. Intersecting streets shall be provided at
such intervals as necessary to meet existing street patterns, topography and
standards required for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation. Blocks should not, however, exceed 1,600 feet in length, nor be
less than 500 feet in length.
   (B)   Residential block width. The width of blocks shall be sufficient to
provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.
   (C)   Nonresidential blocks. Blocks intended for nonresidential uses shall
be of such length, width and other design as the Commission finds necessary for
the prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking,
loading and unloading and limitation and control of vehicular access points to
adjacent streets.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.080 LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be required in the design of lots.
   (A)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall be of sufficient width to permit
compliance with the required minimum setback line. In order to comply with the
additional width requirement and continue the same size homes as are on
adjoining lots, corner lots shall be increased to whatever width is necessary.
   (B)   Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street
centerlines and radial to curved street centerlines. Rear lot lines should
consist of straight lines with a minimum number of deflections.
   (C)   Access. All lots shall abut a public street for at least 60 feet. Lot
frontage on curved streets and cul-de-sac may be reduced to a minimum of 35
feet, but such lots shall be at least 60 feet wide at the minimum building
setback line.
   (D)   Lot dimensions.
      (1)   Lots located in areas where a zoning ordinance is in effect shall
conform to the zoning regulations. Where no zoning ordinance is in effect,
zoning classification is required to be obtained prior to pubic sewer use.
      (2)   A greater lot area may be required if, in the opinion of the City
Engineer or Zoning Official, there are factors of drainage, soil conditions or
other conditions to cause potential health problems.
   (E)   Building setback line. The minimum building setback line from the
right-of-way shall be at least one-half of the total width of the street right-
of-way. In no instance shall this distance be less than 25 feet nor be required
to be more than 40 feet.
   (F)   Development of hazardous areas. When lots are located on land which is
subject to flooding, subsidence or other hazards injurious to the health and
safety of potential users; and when such hazards cannot be eliminated or
adequate safeguards provided to protect the health and safety of potential
users, the Planning Commission may declare such land to be unsuitable for
subdividing and disapprove such plans or portions thereof.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.081 EASEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Utilities. Easements 12 feet in width may be required between, at the
rear or across lots whenever necessary. Easements of greater width may be
required if necessary for the extension of water and sewer lines or other
utilities.
   (B)   Stormwater drainage easement. Stormwater easements or drainage rights-
of-way may be required by the Planning Commission if necessary for proper
drainage within or through a subdivision.
   (C)   Connection to existing easements. When necessary, utility and drainage
easements shall connect with existing easements on adjoining properties.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.082 COMMUNITY FACILITIES DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Accessing the need for community facilities. During the review of
subdivision plats, the Planning Commission shall consider the adequacy of
exiting or proposed community facilities which will serve the additional
population to be housed in a proposed subdivision. Subdividers shall also give
consideration to dedicating or reserving land for facilities which will be
needed in a subdivision, such as public buildings, recreational areas and
shopping facilities.
   (B)   Adequacy of such areas. Areas provided or reserved for such community
facilities shall be adequate for building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.083 OTHER REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Water supply system. Every subdivision shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system adequate to serve the proposed subdivision.
The entire water system shall be provided by the developer and shall be
designed to meet the approval of the agency having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Stormwater drainage system. Provision shall be made for the
satisfactory drainage of stormwater by means of underground pipes and/or
surface ditches. The stormwater drainage system shall be provided by the
developer and shall be designed to meet the approval of the agency having
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Sanitary sewage disposal system. Provision shall be made for the
satisfactory disposal of sanitary sewage in all subdivisions. When the Planning
Commission determines that a public sanitary sewer main is reasonably
accessible, the developer shall provide a complete sanitary sewer system
according to specifications of the agency having jurisdiction.
   (D)   Electric supply system. Provision shall be made in every subdivision
for a satisfactory electric supply system. Every consideration should be given
to the possibility of underground installation of all necessary wires.
   (E)   Monuments. Developer and developer’s engineer shall adhere to
regulations set forth by the state. The City Engineer or Zoning Official
reserves the right to set specific parameters if found necessary.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 157.095 VARIANCES.
   (A)   These land subdivision regulations are adopted as minimum
requirements, and all developers should consider developing their subdivisions
at higher standards. Thus, the developer is encouraged to go beyond the
requirements of these regulations, and the Planning Commission may require
standards above the minimum contained herein whenever it feels that public
health, safety or welfare purposes justify such increases.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may also reduce or otherwise vary the
requirements of these regulations whenever it encounters the situations
described below. In granting such variances, the Commission may attach and
require whatever conditions it feels are necessary to secure the basic
objectives of the regulations.
      (1)   Exceptional conditions. When the Commission finds that strict
application of these regulations would result in extreme practical difficulties
because of exceptional and unique topographic or other physical conditions, the
Commission may modify these regulations to the extent necessary to provide
relief for the undue hardship; provided, however, that such relieve may be
granted without detriment to the public welfare and without substantially
impairing the intent and purpose of these regulations. In granting such
variances or modifications, the Planning Commission may require such conditions
as will substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements so
varied or modified. Financial disadvantage to the property owner is no proof of
hardship within the purpose of these regulations.
      (2)    Design innovation and large scale development. These regulations
may be modified by the Planning Commission in the case of plans for cluster
development, planned unit development or other design innovations which, in the
Commission’s opinion, achieve the basic objectives of these regulations. The
Commission may require such conditions as it deems necessary to secure the
objectives of these regulations.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.096 AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.
   The Commission may revise, modify or amend these regulations by appropriate
action taken at a regularly scheduled meeting after the required notice and
public hearing as specified in KRS Chapter 160.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.097 VIOLATIONS.
   The following violations and penalties are hereby cited from KRS 100.277,
100.283, 100.291 and 100.991.
   (A)   No subdivision of land before approval. No person or his or her agent
shall subdivide any land before securing the approval of the Planning
Commission of a plat designating the areas to be subdivided.
   (B)   No selling of land before approval. No person owning land composing a
subdivision, or his or her agent, shall transfer or sell or agree to sell any
lot or parcel of land located within a subdivision by reference to, or by
exhibition, or by any other use of a plat of such subdivision, before such plat
has received final approval of the Planning Commission and been recorded by the
County Clerk. Any such instrument of transfer, sale or contract shall be void
and shall not be subject to be recorded.
   (C)   Metes and bounds descriptions. The description of lots or parcels by
metes and bounds in any contract or instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not exempt the person
attempting to transfer from penalties provided or deprive the purchaser of any
right or remedies he or she may otherwise have.
   (D)   No recording before approval. No plat of a subdivision of land shall
be recorded by the County Clerk until the plat has been approved by the
Commission and the approval entered thereon in writing by the Chairperson of
the Commission.
   (E)   Injunctions. The Planning Commission shall have the power to apply for
an injunction against any type of subdivision construction by a subdivider or a
landowner where the subdivision regulations have been violated.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity who violates any of these provisions, or any of the
regulations adopted pursuant hereunder for which no other penalty is provided,
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10 but no more than $500 for
each conviction. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
city may also enforce these regulations allowed by KRS 83A.065.
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
APPENDIX A: TYPICAL STREET SECTIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1139.png]
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
APPENDIX B: PAVEMENT DESIGN DETAIL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1141.png]
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
APPENDIX C: TYPICAL STREET DETAILS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1143.png]
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
APPENDIX D: ROADWAY FAILURE REPAIR DETAIL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1145.png]
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
APPENDIX E: COMMON GEOMETRIC PRACTICES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1147.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1149.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1151.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6da514bb8be494edd3808e4343c4c7607f3134a3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1153.png]
 
(Ord. 2024-004, passed 12-23-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   STREET VACATIONS, DEDICATIONS AND NAMING
      
III.   FUNDS
      
IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
V.   FRANCHISES
      
VI.   AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed   Description
No.
-     - -      Proposal to annex to the city the following described property:
               Annexation 1: beginning at a culvert in the Springfield and Perryville Highway
               at the property of Gilbert Moore; thence leaving said highway with a line
               crossing the properties of Gilbert Moore and Mrs. Brady Hall, to a point in
               the fence line of E.S. Goatley; thence with fence line of E.S. Goatley, to a
             new point in the fence line of E.S. Goatley and Mrs. Brady Hall; thence across
               the lands of Mrs. Brady Hall and Mrs. R.D. Goodlett, to a stone on the
               northeast side of the Springfield and Perryville Highway at the property line
               of Mrs. Dan West and Mrs. R.D. Goodlett; thence along the northeast side of
               the Springfield and Perryville Highway, to the point of beginning.
               Annexation 2: beginning at a stone on the west side of the Springfield and
               Perryville Highway in the fence line of Mrs. Ollie Eddleman and J.A. Ball;
               thence with west side of the Springfield and Lebanon Highway along the lands
             of J.A. Ball, to a stone on the west side of said highway at the fence line of
               J.A. Ball and S.C. Milburn and Mrs. Edwin Smith; thence across the lands of
               J.A. Ball to an iron post in the original survey at the south end of the old
               reservoir; thence with the original city limits line to the stone on the west
               side of the Springfield and Lebanon Highway at the point of beginning.
             (Prior Code, § 110.1)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               Annexation 1: beginning at a culvert in the Springfield and Perryville Highway
               at the property line of Gilbert Moore; thence leaving said highway with a line
               crossing the properties of Gilbert Moore and Mrs. Brady Hall, to point in the
               fence line of E.S. Goatley; thence with fence line of E.S. Goatley to a new
             point in the fence line of E.S. Goatley and Mrs. Brady Hall; thence across the
               lands of Mrs. Brady Hall and Mrs. R.D. Goodlett, to a stone on the northeast
               side of the Springfield and Perryville Highway at the property line of Mrs.
               Dan West and Mrs. R.D. Goodlett; thence along the northeast side of the
               Springfield and Perryville Highway to the point of beginning.
               Annexation 2: beginning at a stone on the west side of the Springfield and
               Lebanon highway in the fence line of Mrs. Ollie Eddleman and J.A. Ball; thence
               with west side of the Springfield and Lebanon Highway along the lands of J.A.
               Ball, to a stone on the west side of said highway at the fence line of J, A.
             Ball and S.C. Milburn; thence leaving said highway with fence line between
               J.A. Ball and S.C. Milburn and Mrs. Edwin Smith, to stone in fence, corner to
               Mrs. Edwin Smith and J, A. Ball; thence across the lands of J.A. Ball, to an
               iron post in the old original survey at the south end of the old reservoir;
               thence with the original city limits line, to the stone on the west side of
               the Springfield and Lebanon Highway at the point of beginning.
             (Prior Code, § 110.2)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               a certain tract or parcel of land, lying and being on the northern boundary of
             the present city limits, and on the west side of the Lincoln Park Highway.
               Said boundary is a major portion of the new Springfield High School grounds
               not included in the present city limits.
             (Prior Code, § 110.4)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               a certain tract or parcel of land, lying and being on the northern boundary of
             the present city limits, and on the west side of the Lincoln Park Highway.
               Said boundary is a major portion of the new Springfield High School grounds
               not included in the present city limits.
             (Prior Code, § 110.5)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point in the present boundary line in a field formerly owned by
               Alice M. Thurman and now owned by John Pile; thence to a stone at the garage
               door of M.A. Boswell; thence with reverse bearings from the original survey
             from said stone at Boswell’s corner with the line of Albert Goatley, to a
               stone corner to Goatley, said line running parallel with and 100 feet north of
               the Springfield and Mackville Highway; thence to a stone at the school lot;
               thence to the beginning, containing 7.9 acres, according to survey made by
               James Goatley, on June 4, 1964.
             (Prior Code, § 110.6)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point in the present boundary line in a field formerly owned by
               Alice Thurman and now owned by John Pile; thence to a stone at the garage door
               of M.A. Boswell; thence with reverse bearings from the original survey from
             said stone at Boswell’s corner with the line of Albert Goatley, to a stone
               corner to Goatley, said line running parallel with and 100 feet north of the
               Springfield and Mackville Highway; thence to a stone at the colored school
               lot; thence to the beginning, containing 7.9 acres, according to survey made
               by James Goatley, on June 4, 1964.
             (Prior Code, § 110.7)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a cement marker on the west side of the Lincoln Park Highway at
               the northeast corner of the New High School (which is the corner of the
               present city limits) and continuing with the west side of said Lincoln Park
               Highway along the lands of the Mayes lands to a point in the western edge of
               the right-of-way of the Lincoln Park Highway; thence crossing said highway and
               passing a utility pole on the east side of said highway and across the lands
               of Roy Coyle, to a hackberry stump in a rock fence line of the County Poor
             House Farm; thence continuing with the rock fence line of said county farm to
               the northeastern edge of the bridge on the Willisburg Highway across the Poor
               House Branch; thence crossing the lands of Zoy Milburn, to the old original
               stone in Thurman’s field; thence with the original city limits line to a point
               on the western edge of the Lincoln Park Highway at the new high school
               property; thence with the eastern edge of said highway to the beginning,
               containing 91.93 acres, according to a survey made by James Goatley on October
               4, 1965,
             (Prior Code, § 110.8)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               Annexation 1: beginning at a cement marker on the west side of the Lincoln
               Park Highway at the northeast corner of the new High School (which is the
               corner of the present city limits) and continuing with the west side of said
               Lincoln Park Highway along the lands of the Mayes heirs; thence to a point in
             the western edge of the right-of-way of the Lincoln Park Highway; thence
               crossing said highway and passing a utility pole on the east side of said
               highway and across the lands of Roy Coyle, to a hackberry stump in a rock
               fence line of the County Poor House Farm; thence continuing with the rock
               fence line of said county farm to the northeastern edge of the bridge on the
               Willisburg Highway across the Poor House
               Branch; thence crossing the lands of Zoy Milburn, to the old original stone in
               Thurman’s field (now John Pile) thence with the original city limits line to a
             point on the western edge of the Lincoln Park Highway at the new High School
               property; thence with the eastern edge of said highway to the beginning,
               containing 91.93 acres, according to a survey made by James Goatley on October
               4, 1965.
               Annexation 2: beginning at a point on the western edge of the Lebanon Highway
               at the northeast corner of the Ball Subdivision which is a corner of the
               present city limits; thence crossing said highway with the present city limits
               line to a point in the present city limits line in the property line of Dick
               Cheatham and J.C. Nally; thence leaving the present city limits line to a
               stake in the fence line of James O’Daniel and Tommy Osborne; thence to an iron
               post in fence behind the residence of Mrs. E.H. Campbell; thence to a locust
             tree three feet from the southeast corner of the residence of Jack A.; thence
               crossing the Lebanon Highway to a stake 18 feet south of the residence of Paul
               Fraysure; thence to an iron post on the north side of the Booker Highway in
               the line of the Walker heirs; thence leaving the Booker Highway and crossing
               the lands of the Walker heirs behind the residence, to a post in the present
               city limits line at the corner of the property of Charles Votaw, N.A. Smith,
               J.A. Ball and Sid Milburn; thence with the present city limits line, to the
               edge of the Lebanon Highway; thence to the beginning, containing 94.35 acres,
               according to survey made by James Goatley on October 4, 1965.
             (Prior Code, § 110.9)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point on the western edge of the Lincoln Park Highway at the
               present city limits corner, and continuing with the west edge of said highway;
               thence crossing said highway and lands of Roy Coyle to a fence in line of
               Coyle where Walter Clements and the County Poor Farm corners; thence
               continuing with line of Walter Clements and county farm at the lands of Mrs.
             John Hall, Sr; thence continuing with fence line of said county farm to a
               point opposite end of said fence on the eastern edge of Highway 53 being the
               line of Jack McElroy, to the northeastern edge of a bridge across Poorhouse
               Branch; thence crossing said highway with line of county farm in rock fence to
               hackberry stump in line of county farm and Roy Coyle; thence crossing lands of
               Coyle to the point of beginning, containing 46.17 acres, according to survey
               made by James Goatley in June, 1966.
             (Prior Code, § 110.10)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point on the present city limits line as it crosses U.S.
               Highway 150 at the L & N Railroad crossing; thence with the northern edge of
               the surface of U.S. Highway 150 in the following courses. At the point of
               intersection of U.S. Highway 150 with State Highway 55; thence with the center
               of Highway 55 to the center of the bridge across the town branch; thence with
             the centerline of the highway to center of a culvert; thence with center of
               highway to a point in the center of the highway at a corner to the Plastic
               Plant and Catherine Gowdy; thence leaving the highway with line of Gowdy to
               the Industrial Foundation; thence with line of Gowdy to a post, corner to
               Gowdy and the Mayes heirs; thence with line of Mayes heirs to intersect with
               the present city limits line in the old fairgrounds property; thence with the
               present city limits line to the point of beginning, containing 156.9 acres.
             (Prior Code, § 110.11)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point in the center of the Springfield and Mackville Highway at
               a corner to the High School Court Subdivision, and corner to Goatley’s Grocery
               lot; thence leaving highway with line of Goatley and others in line of the
               High School Courts, to a cement marker in line of Mrs. Brady Hall; thence
             leaving line of Hall with a new line across the lands of Calvin Reed to a post
               at the corner of the property of Calvin Reed and Fred Grigsby; thence with
               line of Grigsby to a point in the center of the Springfield and Mackville
               Highway at the southwest corner of the yard of Fred Grigsby; thence with the
               center of the highway to the point of beginning, containing 10.044 acres.
             (Prior Code, § 110.12)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point on the present city limits line as it crosses U.S.
               Highway 150 at the L & N Railroad crossing; thence with the northern edge of
               the surface of U.S. Highway 150 in the following courses. Beginning at a point
               of intersection of U.S. Highway 150 with State Highway 55; thence with the
               center of Highway 55 to center of a culvert; thence with center of said
             highway to a point in the center of the highway at a corner to the Plastic
               Plant and Catherine Gowdy; thence leaving highway with line of Gowdy to corner
               to Gowdy and Industrial Foundation; thence with line of Gowdy to a post,
               corner to Gowdy and the Mayes heirs; thence with line of the Mayes heirs to
               intersect with the present city limits line in the old Fairgrounds property;
               thence with the present city limits line to the point of beginning, containing
               156.9 acres.
             (Prior Code, § 110.13)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
               beginning at a point in the center of the Springfield and Mackville Highway at
               a corner to the High School Court Subdivision, and corner to Goatley’s Grocery
               lot; thence leaving highway with line of Goatley and others in line of the
               High School Court to a cement marker in line of Mrs. Brady Hall; thence
             leaving line of Hall with a new line across the lands of Calvin Reed to a
               cement marker, to a post at the corner of the property of Calvin Reed and Fred
               Grigsby; thence with line of Grigsby to a point in the center of the
               Springfield and Mackville Highway at the southwest corner of the yard of Fred
               Grigsby; thence with the center of the highway to the point of beginning,
               containing 10.044 acres.
             (Prior Code, § 110.14)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             Annexation 1: A certain tract of land lying in being on the north side of
               Highway 150 adjacent to the eastern boundary of the present city limits.
             Annexation 2: A certain tract of land lying in being east of Grundy Avenue at
               the northeast boundary of the present city limits.
               Annexation 3: A certain tract of land lying in being between U.S. Highway 150
             and Kentucky Highway 55, and known as Briartown at the western boundary of the
               present city limits.
             (Prior Code, § 110.15)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             a certain tract of land west of and adjacent to the present property boundary
               and located north of U.S. Highway 150, and west of State Highway 55.
             (Prior Code, § 110.16)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             A certain tract of land, west of and adjacent to the present city boundary and
               located on the north side of U.S. Highway 150 and west of State Highway 55.
             (Prior Code, § 110.17)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             a certain tract of land west of and adjacent to a present boundary line of
               said city located north of U.S. Highway 150 and west of State Highway 55.
             (Prior Code, § 110.18)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             Two certain tracts of land located between the Willisburg and Perryville
               Highways.
             (Prior Code, § 110.19)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             Two certain tracts of land located between the Willisburg and Perryville
               Highways.
             (Prior Code, § 110.20)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             beginning at a point in the center of the Springfield and Bardstown Highway at
               the railroad crossing.
             (Prior Code, § 110.21)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             A certain tract of land located on the Lincoln Park Highway 528.
             (Prior Code, § 110.23)
-     - -      Annexing to the city the following described property:
             Two certain tracts of land located between the Willisburg and Perryville
               Highways.
             (Prior Code, § 110.24)
88-            Annexing to the city the following described property: lying and being on the
001   2-1-1988 west side of Highway 555, known as the Western District warehouse property and
               a portion of the H & W Industries property.
88-   2-29-    Annexing to the city the following described property: lying and being on the
004   1988     west side of Highway 555, known as the Western District warehouse property and
               a portion of the H & W Industries property.
90-            Annexing to the city the following described property: a tract of real estate
003   4-9-1990 lying and being on the west side of Highway 555, known as the Western District
               warehouse property and a portion of the H & W Industries property.
90-   9-10-    Annexing to the city the following described property: a tract of real estate
010   1990     lying and being on the west side of Highway 555, known as the Western District
               warehouse property and a portion of the H & W Industries property.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: one tract of real
96-   2-22-    estate lying and being in the intersection of U.S. Highway 150 and State
001   1996     Highway 55, being a portion of the same property which Thomas S. Haydon and
               Company, Inc., acquired from C.J. Haydon, et al., by deed dated July 26, 1963,
               which appears of record in Deed Book 103, Page 411.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: one tract of real
96-   3-11-    estate lying and being at the intersection of State Highway 555 and U.S. 150,
003   1996     being a portion of the same property which Thomas S. Haydon and Company, Inc.,
               acquired from C.J. Haydon, et al., by deed dated July 26, 1963, which appears
               of record in Deed Book 103, Page 411.
00-   5-9-2000 Annexing to the city the following described property:
001
             property of TSR, LLC located on State Highway 528, on the west side of State
               Highway 555, adjoining the west city limits.
2001- 5-22-    Annexing to the city the following described property:
005   2001
             Tract 1: property of Pat and Elaine Mattingly, a parcel of land located on
               Highway 152 containing approximately 55.06 acres.
               Tract 2: Springfield/Washington County Economic Development Authority (SWEDA),
             a parcel of land located lying south at the intersection of Spaulding Lane and
               Highway 555 containing 453.22 acres.
               Tract 3: Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) Being a parcel of land joining
             the existing city limit line in the eastern edge of old Willisburg Road, along
               the utility corridor to the intersection of Spaulding Lane and Highway 555,
               containing approximately 9.25 acres.
2001- 8-14-    Annexing to the city the following described property:
009   2001
             Tract 1: land owned by River of Life Community Church, Inc. located north of
               Highway 555.
             Tract 2: land owned by William H. and Kathleen Tingle located north of Highway
               555.
             Tract 3: land owned by Andy and Denita Clements located east of Highway 152.
             Tract 4: land owned by Michael C. and Ella Elliott located east of Highway
               152.
2003- 1-12-    Annexing to the city the following described property:
010   2004
             Tract 1: the Bill Fowler tract located on Booker Road.
             Tract 2: the William Fowler tract located at the end of Hammer Head cul-de-sac
               on Booker Road.
             Tract 3: the J. Murray Walker, Jr. tract located east of the intersection of
               Booker Road and State Highway 555.
2006- 4-11-    Annexing to the city the following described property: a certain tract of land
003   2006     located at the end of Walnut Street off Highway 555, conveyed to Baker, Thomas
               and Hamm, Inc. Deed Book 298, Page 253.
2007- 3-13-    Annexing to the city the following described property: property of Standard
002   2007     Commercial Tobacco Company, Inc. Deed Book 253, Page 472.
2008- 9-23-    Annexing to the city the following described property: property conveyed to
007   2008     Norma Bradley, dba Wright Way Inc.
2009- 8-11-    Annexing to the city the following described property: The Pat and Elaine
001   2009     Mattingly tracts in the Carolina Heights Subdivision as recorded in Plat
               Cabinet, Slide 533.
2010- 4-13-    Annexing to the city the following described property: Tract 5 of Carolina
001   2010     Heights Subdivision as recorded in Plat Cabinet A, Slide 533.
             Tract 6 of Carolina Heights Subdivision as recorded in Plat Cabinet A, Slide
               533.
2011- 12-22-   Annexing to the city the following described property:
010   2011
             Parcel #1: St. Catharine College, Inc. land, 34.963 acres as recorded in Deed
               Book N, Page 507.
             Parcel #2: A ridge area and continuous to 34.963-acre College Tract #1: 6.926
               acres as recorded in Deed Book 319, Page 399.
               Parcel #3: Parking area and acreage off Lourdes and Spalding Hall Road
             continuous to the 34.963-acre tract #1 and Lourdes Hall, daycare building and
               parking areas. 2.201 acres as recorded in Deed Book N, Page 507.
             Parcel #4: St. Catharine College Lourdes Hall. 6.3020 acres as recorded in
               Deed Book N, Page 507.
             Parcel #7: Advancement Office, Nagge House. 0.5685 acres. Deed Book 321, Page
               411.
             Parcel #8: Sisters of Peace St. Catharine Motherhouse and Sansbury. 33.499
               acres. Deed Book N, Page 507.
               Parcel #9: Department of Transportation 28.279 acres Project #FD52 115 0150
               009-002 and U.S. Project #115-129 On file with Kentucky Transportation
             Cabinet, Frankfort, Kentucky. Also included is the U.S. 150 Connector Road
               described as a part of U.S. 150 bypass. The connector Road to St. Catharine
               for access corridor to annex Tract #1 and #2 from DB
             326 Page 750 containing 02.768 acres.
             Parcel #10: Lakeview Landing Property, Tract 1, 1.16444 acres and Tract 2,
               2.0024 acres. Deed Book 227, Page 489.
             Parcel #11: Beam Property, 39.75 acres, Deed Book 238, Page 015.
Res.  12-11-
2012- 2012     Adopting legal description of annexed territory.
006
2015-          Annexing to the city the following described property: Alex Montgomery/Wesley
002   6-9-2015 Smith property to be annexed and zoned R-2 per the recommendation of the
               Planning Commission to the City Council at the April 21, 2015 meeting.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: Washington County
2020- 9-15-    Parcel #1-3: A part of A & W Developments, LLC- Located about 900 feet west of
006   2020     Highway 555 - U.S. 150 Bypass; on the south right-of-way of Highway 555 and
               adjacent to Idle Hour Park, from DB 357 Page 283.
2022- 4-12-    Annexing to the city the following described property: A certain trat or
001   2022     parcel of land located 0.25 miles north of SR 152 junction on the west side of
               U.S. 150.
               Annexing 15.839 acres conveyed to SBB Properties, LLC of Record in Deed Book
2022- 11-7-    373, Page 333 and a tract of land conveyed to Springfield-Washington County
008   2022     Economic Development Authority, Inc. of record in Deed Book 259, Page 736 and
               Deed Book 259, Page 738 in the Office of the County Clerk.
2022- 12–12- Annexing 4.013 acres of land on the south side of Kentucky Highway 555,
010   2022     approximately 0.15 miles west of the intersection with U.S. Highway 150
               bypass.
2023- 3-14-    Annexing to the city the following described property: 15.839 acres, corner to
002   2023     a tract of land conveyed to SBB Properties, LLC, in Deed Book 373, Page 333.
2023- 3-14-    Annexing to the city the following described property: a tract of land located
003   2023     on the south side of State Highway 555, approximately 0.15 miles west of the
               intersection with U.S. Highway 150 bypass.
2023- 6-13-    Annexing to the city the following described property:
005   2023
             Field 1: 6.81 acres located along Lincoln Drive approximately 1,000 feet
               northwest of the junction of Lincoln Park Road and Lincoln Drive.
             Field 2: 12.41 acres located along Lincoln Drive approximately 950 feet west
               of the junction of Lincoln Park Road and Lincoln Drive.
2023- 6-13-    Annexing to the city the following described property: a property on the south
014   2023     right-of-way line of Mackville Road and more particularly described in this
               ordinance.
2023- 7-13-    Annexing to the city the following described property:
013   2023
             Field 1: 6.81 acres located along Lincoln Drive approximately 1,000 feet
               northwest of the junction of Lincoln Park Road and Lincoln Drive.
             Field 2: 12.41 acres located along Lincoln Drive approximately 950 feet west
               of the junction of Lincoln Park Road and Lincoln Drive.
               Annexing certain tracts of land located on the south side of Mackville Road
2023- 11-14-   (Highway 152), approximately 0.8 miles east of the junction of Mackville Road
017   2023     (Highway 152) and Highway 150, conveyed to Thomas G. and Sybil F. Ward, parcel
               ID: 25-018, as recorded in Deed Book 227, Page 302 and Deed Book 215, Page 22
               in the County Clerk’s Office.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: a total area of 27.206
               acres commencing at a common corner to Tract 6 of the Clearview Commerce
2024- 3-12-    Complex Division Conveyed to Springwater Kentucky Realty, LLC. of record in
003   2024     Deed Book 355, Page 545 and Plat Cabinet C, Slide 189 and Revised Lot 5e of
               Clearview Commerce Complex Division Conveyed to J & D Distilling Company, LLC.
               of record in Deed Book 378, Page 284 and Plat Cabinet C, Slide 189.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: 119.22 acres beginning
2024- 3-12-    at the right-of-way of Highway 152 (Mackville Road) having the State Plane
010   2024     Single Zone Coordinates of N: 3,775,365.3955 E: 5,083,864.6577 and being a
               corner common with Thomas G & Sybil Ward (Deed Book 367, Page 308, D. B.227,
               Page 302 and Deed Book 215, Page 22).
               Annexing to the city the following described property: 4.013 acres of the
2024-          property commonly referred to as Elizabeth Park Extension annexed by the city
006   4-9-2024 on March 14, 2023 in the revised survey description and plat map prepared by
               Licensed Professional Land Surveyor Jeffrey Wolf #3742 attached hereto and
               made a part hereof, Exhibits A and B.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: 7.33 acres of the
2024-          property commonly referred to as Elizabeth Park annexed by the city on June 9,
007   4-9-2024 2015 in the revised survey description and plat map prepared by Licensed
               Professional Land Surveyor Timothy Woodcock #3124 attached hereto and made a
               part hereof; Exhibits A and B.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: 9.64 acres of the
2024-          property commonly referred to as city property annexed by the city on
008   4-9-2024 September 15, 2020 in the revised survey description and plat map prepared by
               Licensed Professional Land Surveyor Timothy Woodcock #3124 attached hereto and
               made a part hereof, Exhibits A and B.
               Annexing to the city the following described property: 1.42 acres of the
2024-          property commonly referred to as Goatley property annexed by the city on April
009   4-9-2024 12, 2022 in the revised survey description and plat map prepared by Licensed
               Professional Land Surveyor Timothy Woodcock #3124 attached hereto and made a
               part hereof, Exhibits A and B.
2024- 4-9-2024 Annexing to the city the following described property: 119.22 acres beginning
011            in the right-of-way of Highway 152 (Mackville Road).
               Annexing to the city the following described property: A total area of 27.206
               acres, commencing at a corner to Tract 6 of the Clearview Commerce Complex
2024- 4-9-2024 Division; conveyed to Springwater Kentucky Realty, LLC, of record in Deed Book
012            355, Page 545 and Plat Cabinet C, Slide 189 and revised lot southeast of
               Clearview Commerce Complex Division Conveyed to J & D Distilling Company, LLC.
               of record in Deed Book 378, Page 284 and Plat Cabinet C, slide 189.
              
 
TABLE II: STREET VACATIONS, DEDICATIONS AND NAMING
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Accepting for maintenance and all other public
-             - -         purposes the streets located in Mayes Subdivision 1
                          and Ball Subdivision.
                        (Prior Code, § 110.3)
                          Closing an alley beginning on Walnut Street and
                          running parallel with Virginia Avenue and also
-             - -         parallel with Parrott alley, and extending in a
                          western direction to the Lincoln Park Road or
                          Highway.
                        (Prior Code, § 620.2)
                          Closing the northernmost portion of Doctor Street
                          extending from the southern boundary of the County
                          High School property in a southerly direction, a
-             - -         distance of 285 feet and being that portion of Doctor
                          Street abutting on the east and on the west, the
                          property above mentioned owned by the County Board of
                          Education.
                        (Prior Code, § 620.4)
                          Closing the portion of an alley that begins at Doctor
                          Street and lies at approximately a right angle to
93-003        6-14-1993   Doctor Street between the properties owned by Robert
                          and Connie Osbourne and Thomas W. Keene from Doctor
                          Street to the rear property line of the Thomas W.
                          Keene property.
2003-004      7-8-2003    Alley name change.
2003-018      12-11-2003  Closing the extension of West Grundy Avenue.
2005-008      1-10-2005   Closing a portion of McLane Street.
2007-004      6-26-2007   Closing a portion of Ballard Street.
2008-002      5-30-2008   Dominic Drive, also known as Church Alley is closed
                          as a public way.
                         
 
TABLE III: FUNDS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
2001-017      1-8-2002    Revolving Loan Fund and Facade Grant Fund.
                          Amending Revolving Loan Fund in conjunction with the
2022–009    12-12-2022  Main Street Board for funding the Renaissance
                          Funding.
                         
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
             Changing the following described property from Industrial to Commercial: the
-     - -    south side of downtown Springfield bounded by portions of Ballard Street on
             the north, Cross Main on the east, the former Miller Redrying Company on the
             south and Locust Street on the west.
           (Prior Code, § 920.06)
             Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Commercial
-     - -    Restricted: beginning at a post on the edge of the right-of-way of the
             Springfield-Lebanon Highway at a corner to Thomas S. Haydon (formerly J.A.
             Ball), containing 2.55 acres more or less.
           (Prior Code, § 920.07)
             Changing the following described property from Residential 2 to Commercial
-     - -    Restricted: property which was conveyed to Leon F. Simms, Jr. and Patricia G.
             Simms, by deed dated January 2, 1971, from Rebecca T. Wharton.
           (Prior Code, § 920.08)
             Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Commercial
             Restricted: beginning at a stake on the curb line of Main Cross Street, which
             point is as measured along the curb line 278.5 feet from the intersection of
-     - -    the curb and the south side of the sidewalk on High Street; thence to the
             intersection of Virginia Avenue; thence with the south side of Virginia
             Avenue to the point of intersection with Doctor Street; thence with the east
             side of Doctor Street to a stake in the retaining wall on the edge of said
             street at a corner to Joe S. O’Daniel; thence leaving the street to stake.
           (Prior Code, § 920.9)
88-   5-23-  Changing the following described property from Highway Commercial to Single-
005   1988   Family Residential: a tract of land bounded by Elizabeth Graves’ western
             boundary on U.S. 150 west and the city limits on the east.
88-   5-23-  Establishing a Zoning District for the Hamilton Development Property located
006   1988   at the intersection of Highway 555 and U.S. 150.
88-   6-13-  Changing the following described property from Highway Commercial to
007   1988   Industrial: a tract of land located between Lincoln Park Road and Progress
             Road to the southern side of Highway 555.
95-   2-13-  Changing the following described property from Commercial Restricted to
001   1995   Single-Family Residential: a tract of land owned by Steve Half located on
             Virginia Avenue and Doctor Street.
98-   4-14-  Establishing a Zoning District for the Tony S. Royalty Property located at
002   1998   the intersection of Highway 555 and Lincoln Park Road.
2001- 2-13-  Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Highway
001   2001   Commercial: two tracts of land located on Perryville Road, the first owned by
             Dean Cook and the second owned by Thomas E. Johnson.
             Establishing a zoning district for the following properties: Springfield/
2001- 5-22-  Washington County Economic Development Authority, located on Spaulding Lane
003   2001   and State Highway 555 as Industrial, Pat and Elaine Mattingly, Mackville Road
             as Highway Commercial and Department of Transportation on Highway 152, with
             no zoning classification.
2001- 8-14-  Zoning newly annexed property as follows:
008   2001
           1: River of Life Community Church, Inc. property zoned Residential 1.
           2: William H. Tingle and Kathleen Tingle property zoned Highway Commercial.
           3: Andy and Denita Clements property zoned Residential 1
           4: Michael C. and Ella Elliot property zoned Residential 1.
2001- 11-13- Changing the following described property from Central Commercial to
014   2001   Residential 1: a house and lot located at 500 East High Street.
2006- 2-14-  Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Residential
002   2006   3: land owned by Billy and Bettylene Mudd, on the north right-of-way of U.S.
             150 at Jimtown Road junction.
2009- 7-14-  Changing the following described property from Industrial to Residential 3:
002   2009   property at the northwest junction of Bob-O-Link Drive and Bonnie Boulevard,
             belonging to TSR, Inc.
2011- 4-12-  Changing the following described property from Industrial to Residential 2:
001   2011   Property north of Rosary Heights, belonging to Wesley Smith.
2023- 7-11-  Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Residential
009   2023   2: 2.53 acres located on Mackville Hill, belonging to Alex Montgomery.
2023- 7-11-  Changing the following described property from Highway Commercial to
012   2023   Residential 2: 1.334 acres located on Rosary Heights, belonging to Alex
             Montgomery.
2024- 4-9-   Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Residential
005   2024   2: 0.7449 acres of land located on Armory Hill.
2025- 2-11-  Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Residential
001   2025   2: 0.6922 acres of land located on Booker Road, belonging to Fowl
             Investments, LLC and Michael McCain.
             Changing the following described property from Residential 1 to Industrial:
2025- 2-11-  32.25 acres of land located on the south side of Mackville Road (Highway
002   2025   152), approximately 1,000 feet west of the junction of Mackville Road
             (Highway 152) and Highway 150 Bypass.
            
 
TABLE V: FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
-             - -         Contract for electric franchise.
                        (Prior Code, § 450.3)
                          Franchise renewal, Centel Cable Television Company
87-06         6-8-1987    for the continued operation and maintenance of its
                          cable communications system.
                        (Prior Code, § 450.8)
93-007        8-9-1993    Invitation for franchise bids for a gas system.
98-007        7-13-1998   Invitation for franchise bids for a gas system.
                          Granting cable system franchise to Frontiervision
2002-011      9-10-2002   Operating Partners, LP dba Adelphia Cable
                          Communications.
2003-009      10-14-2003  Invitation for franchise bids for a gas system.
2013-001      2-12-2013   Electric facilities franchise agreement with Kentucky
                          Utilities Company.
2018-001      3-20-2018   Invitation for franchise bids for the operation and
                          maintenance of a telecommunications system.
2018-002      5-8-2018    Granting telecommunications system franchise to
                          Bluegrass Network LLC.
2018-004      7-10-2018   Invitation for franchise bids for a natural gas
                          system.
2018-006      9-11-2018   Granting natural gas franchise to Atmos Energy
                          Corporation.
2018-009      11-13-2018  Cable franchise agreement with Insight Kentucky
                          Partners, L.P.
                         
 
TABLE VI: AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. -        -           911 Board interlocal agreement.
-             - -         Mayor empowered and directed to enter into contracts
                          and agreements with Department of Highways.
                        (Prior Code, § 130.1)
92-014        1-11-1993   Interlocal agreement; establishment of Public Safety
                          Answering Point for emergency services.
93-004        5-24-1993   Interlocal agreement; establishment of Kentucky
                          Municipal Risk Management Association.
2001-006      6-12-2001   Exemption of Akebono Corporation.
2002-005      7-9-2002    Exemption of Alltech Corporation.
                          Agreement with Kentucky Infrastructure Authority to
2024-013      5-29-2024   provide up to $635,000 of loan funds for Project
                          Number B23-002.
                         
 
TABLE VII: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
-             - -         Terms of highway project.
                        (Prior Code, § 620.3)
                          Authorizing a public improvement for the purpose of
                          constructing sidewalks along the north side of East
-             - -         High Street in the City of Springfield extending from
                          Covington Avenue to Melavin Circle for an approximate
                          distance of 1,200 feet.
                        (Prior Code, § 620.5)
-             - -         Authorizing a public improvement for the purpose of
                          constructing sidewalks on East High Street.
                        (Prior Code, § 620.6)
-             - -         Authorizing a public improvement for the purpose of
                          constructing sidewalks on Mackville Hill.
                        (Prior Code, § 620.7)
                          Declaring that each house erected in the Mayes
-             - -         Subdivision must be constructed of either stone,
                          brick or frame with a concrete or brick or stone
                          foundation.
                        (Prior Code, § 930.1)
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Section Code Section
KRS Section                    Code Section
Chapter 13B                    116.047
15.310 through 15.370          33.03
15.409                         35.27
18A.225(2)                     113.04
Chapter 31                     35.27
Chapter 45A                    35.27
Chapter 56                     35.27
Chapter 61                     32.25;
                               32.26
61.168                         35.27
61.169                         35.27
61.420                         32.23
61.470                         32.23
                               32.40;
61.870 through 61.884          32.43;
                               Ch. 35;
                               35.28
61.870                         30.17
61.870(1)                      35.15
61.870(2)                      35.15
61.870(3)                      35.15
61.870(4)                      35.15
61.870(5)                      35.15
61.870(6)                      35.15
61.870(7)                      35.15
61.870(8)                      35.15
61.870(9)                      35.15
61.870(10)                     35.15
61.872(1) through (3)          35.16
61.872(4)                      35.17
61.872(5)                      35.18
61.872(6)                      35.19
61.874(1)                      35.23
61.874(2)                      35.23
61.874(3)                      35.24
61.874(4)                      35.24
61.874(5)                      35.25
61.874(6)                      35.26
61.878                         35.15
61.878(1)                      35.27
61.878(2)                      35.27
61.878(3)                      35.27
61.878(4)                      35.27
61.878(5)                      35.27
61.878(6)                      35.27
61.880(1)                      35.20
61.884                         35.22
80.230                         92.09
82.082                         155.01
82.700 through 82.725          91.01
Chapter 83A                    30.15
83A.010(5)                     10.02
83A.010(6)                     10.02
83A.010(8)                     10.02
83A.020                        30.01
83A.040                        30.16
83A.045                        30.15
83A.045(2)(b)                  30.15
83A.060(3)                     10.14
                               10.99;
83A.065                        156.999;
                               157.999
83A.130                        30.01
83A.130(5)                     30.30
83A.130(11)                    30.31
83A.165                        32.41
83A.170                        30.15;
                               32.41
83A.175                        30.15;
                               32.41
91A.010(4)                     10.02
91A.010(8)                     10.02
91A.350 through 91A.390        114.05
91A.400                        114.02
95.710                         33.03
                               34.04;
                               156.009;
                               156.010;
                               156.020;
                               156.036;
                               156.037;
Chapter 100                    156.110—
                               156.112;
                               156.130—
                               156.132;
                               156.999;
                               157.003;
                               157.016
100.131                        34.04
100.133 through 100.182        156.020
100.147                        34.04
100.157                        34.04
100.201 through 100.347        156.999
100.201                        156.003
100.217 through 100.271        156.020
100.271                        156.020
100.277                        157.097
100.283                        157.097
100.291                        157.097
100.523                        156.020
100.982                        156.009
                               156.010;
100.991                        156.999;
                               157.097
100.3681 to 100.3684           156.999
Chapters 116 through 121       30.15
Chapter 118                    30.15
118.105                        32.41
118.115                        32.41
118.325                        32.41
118.760                        32.41
131.010(6)                     113.05
131.190                        35.27
132.010(9)                     156.009
132.010(10)                    156.009
136.120                        110.03
136.602                        110.03
Chapter 151                    155.05
151.250                        155.05;
                               155.06
Chapter 154                    35.27
Chapter 154A                   116.046
154.20-250 through 154.20-284  110.03
154.50 through 154.301         34.05
154.50 through 154.301 et seq. 34.05
154.50 through 154.336         34.05
154.50 through 154.346         34.05
Chapter 160                    157.096
177.905 through 177.990        156.054
Chapter 183                    34.03
183.132                        34.03
186.020                        72.34
186.050                        72.34
Chapter 189                    72.34
189.394                        70.99;
                               Ch. 73, Sched. I
189.635(9)(B)1.a. to e.        35.15
189.820                        72.32;
                               72.37
196.099                        35.15
198B.060(1)                    150.01
198B.060(8)                    150.03
198B.060(18)                   150.01
Chapter 218A                   116.046
218A.010                       118.01
Chapter 218B                   118.02
218B.080                       118.01
218B.085                       118.01
218B.090                       118.01
224.01-010(31)(a)(4)           91.02
224.20-720                     72.34
224.868                        156.009
                               91.03;
227.550                        156.009;
                               156.055
227.550(12)                    91.02
227.570                        156.055
Chapter 238                    116.046
                               116.002;
                               116.003;
Chapter 241 through 244        116.005;
                               116.045;
                               116.046;
                               116.077
241.100                        116.045
241.160                        116.045
241.170                        116.045
241.200                        116.046
Chapter 243                    116.078
243.030                        116.046
243.036                        116.046
243.040                        116.046
243.070                        116.020
243.090                        116.021
243.450                        116.026
243.480                        116.999
243.490                        116.026
243.500                        116.026
243.550                        116.046
244.050                        116.078
244.085                        116.077
244.085(5)                     116.077
244.090                        116.074
244.090(2)                     116.074
244.130                        116.080
244.150                        116.045
244.500                        116.068
260.850                        118.01
278.020                        156.009
304.39-080                     72.33;
                               72.37
Chapter 342                    113.21
Chapter 350                    155.05
Chapter 351                    156.078
Chapter 352                    156.078
381.805 et seq.                156.009
416.450 through 416.680        92.05
                               156.111;
                               156.112;
Chapter 424                    156.131;
                               156.132;
                               156.134
424.120                        116.024
431.105                        156.010
446.010(1)                     10.02
446.010(2)                     10.02
446.010(9)                     10.02
446.010(10)                    10.02
446.010(12)                    10.02
446.010(13)                    10.02
446.010(14)                    10.02
446.010(15)                    10.02
446.010(17)                    10.02
446.010(18)                    10.02
446.010(23)                    10.02
446.010(25)                    10.02
446.010(26)                    10.02
446.010(27)                    10.02
446.010(28)                    10.02
446.010(30)                    10.02
446.010(31)                    10.02
446.010(33)                    10.02
446.010(37)                    10.02
446.010(39)                    10.02
446.010(43)                    10.02
446.010(46)                    10.02
446.010(47)                    10.02
446.010(49)                    10.02
446.010(55)                    10.02
446.020(1)                     10.03
446.020(2)                     10.03
446.030                        10.04
446.050                        10.05
446.060                        10.06
446.080(1)                     10.03
446.080(3)                     10.03
446.080(4)                     10.03
446.090                        10.07
446.100                        10.08
446.110                        10.09
446.140                        10.01
Chapter 494                    92.11
Chapter 507                    115.03
Chapter 508                    115.03
520.010                        35.15
Chapter 525                    115.03
Chapter 530                    115.03
                               91.99;
532.090(2)                     94.99;
                               152.99
                               91.99;
534.040(2)(b)                  94.99;
                               152.99
534.040(2)(c)                  10.99
                               91.99;
534.050(c)                     94.99;
                               152.99
                               
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
110.1              TSO Table I
110.2              TSO Table I
110.3              TSO Table II
110.4              TSO Table I
110.5              TSO Table I
110.6              TSO Table I
110.7              TSO Table I
110.8              TSO Table I
110.9              TSO Table I
110.10             TSO Table I
110.11             TSO Table I
110.12             TSO Table I
110.13             TSO Table I
110.14             TSO Table I
110.15             TSO Table I
110.16             TSO Table I
110.17             TSO Table I
110.18             TSO Table I
110.19             TSO Table I
110.20             TSO Table I
110.21             TSO Table I
110.23             TSO Table I
110.24             TSO Table I
130.1              TSO Table VI
150.3              34.03
150.6              34.04
150.8              34.05
                   113.20—
220.1              113.23;
                   113.99
220.7              113.01;
                   113.99
220.8              113.02—
                   113.06
230.02             30.17
230.03             35.01—
                   35.04
230.1              32.55
240.1              32.20—
                   32.26
240.3              34.01
240.4              30.01
310.1              33.20—
                   33.22
                   33.35—
330.1              33.38;
                   33.99
                   32.01—
430.2              32.07;
                   32.99
430.4              112.03;
                   112.99
                   111.01;
440.1              111.02;
                   111.99
450.3              TSO Table V
450.8              TSO Table V
520.1              72.01;
                   72.99
520.5              71.02;
                   71.99
540.1              Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.3              Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.4              71.01;
                   Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.6              Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.7              Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.8              71.04;
                   71.99
540.10             71.03;
                   71.99
540.11             Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.12             Ch. 74, Sched. I
540.13             Ch. 74, Sched. I
610.5              50.02
620.11             112.02
620.2              TSO Table II
620.3              TSO Table VII
620.4              TSO Table II
620.5              TSO Table VII
620.6              TSO Table VII
620.7              TSO Table VII
620.8              112.01
620.8              112.99
620.9              70.01;
                   70.99
820.1              50.01;
                   50.99
840.1              90.01;
                   90.99
840.2              90.02;
                   90.99
910.0              31.01
920.06             TSO Table IV
920.07             TSO Table IV
920.08             TSO Table IV
920.9              TSO Table IV
930.1              TSO Table VII
940.1              92.01—
                   92.11
1010.1             130.01;
                   130.99
1010.2             130.02;
                   130.99
1010.3             130.03;
                   130.99
1010.4             130.04;
                   130.99
1020.1             130.05;
                   130.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         TSO Table VI
2012-006 12-11-2012  TSO Table I
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
86-010   - -         31.01
                     153.01—
92-011   - -         153.13;
                     153.99
87-06    6-8-1987    TSO Table V
88-001   2-1-1988    TSO Table I
88-004   2-29-1988   TSO Table I
88-005   5-23-1988   TSO Table IV
88-006   5-23-1988   TSO Table IV
88-007   6-13-1988   TSO Table IV
88-012   9-12-1988   31.01
89-001   1-20-1989   30.15
90-001   1-8-1990    30.30
90-002   2-12-1990   30.16
90-003   4-9-1990    TSO Table I
90-004   5-14-1990   112.02
90-008   7-9-1990    50.02
90-009   8-13-1990   90.03;
                     90.99
90-010   9-10-1990   TSO Table I
91-002   3-13-1991   130.06;
                     130.99
91-007   10-14-1991  30.17
91-011   11-18-1991  112.02
                     93.01—
92-002   5-11-1992   93.14;
                     93.99
92-014   1-11-1993   TSO Table VI
93-004   5-24-1993   TSO Table VI
93-003   6-14-1993   TSO Table II
93-007   8-9-1993    TSO Table V
                     117.01—
94-001   2-14-1994   117.03;
                     117.99
94-002   3-14-1994   50.02
                     70.02;
94-007   9-12-1994   70.99;
                     Ch. 73, Sched. I
94-009   10-10-1994  70.03
                     32.40—
94-011   12-12-1994  32.43;
                     32.99
95-001   2-13-1995   TSO Table IV
96-001   2-22-1996   TSO Table I
96-003   3-11-1996   TSO Table I
97-006   5-12-1997   130.07;
                     130.99
97-009   7-28-1997   34.05
98-002   4-14-1998   TSO Table IV
98-007   7-13-1998   TSO Table V
                     115.01—
98-009   10-12-1998  115.05;
                     115.99
99-001   2-9-1999    50.02
00-001   5-9-2000    TSO Table I
00-008   12-12-2000  50.02
2001-001 2-13-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-003 5-22-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-005 5-22-2001   TSO Table I
2001-006 6-12-2001   TSO Table VI
2001-008 8-14-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-009 8-14-2001   TSO Table I
2001-014 11-13-2001  TSO Table IV
2001-017 1-8-2002    TSO Table III
2002-005 7-9-2002    TSO Table VI
2002-011 9-10-2002   TSO Table V
2003-004 7-8-2003    Ch. 73, Sched. I;
                     TSO Table II
2003-009 10-14-2003  TSO Table V
2003-012 11-11-2003  Ch. 73, Sched. I
2003-018 12-11-2003  TSO Table II
2003-010 1-12-2004   TSO Table I
                     31.15—
2004-001 3-9-2004    31.19;
                     31.99
2004-004 8-18-2004   50.02
2005-008 1-10-2005   TSO Table II
                     71.05—
2005-007 10-11-2005  71.13;
                     71.99;
                     Ch. 74, Sched. I
2006-002 2-14-2006   TSO Table IV
2006-003 4-11-2006   TSO Table I
                     52.048;
2006-006 7-11-2006   52.049;
                     52.062
2006-010 12-11-2006  33.01—
                     33.07
2006-011 12-11-2006  34.03
2006-012 12-11-2006  151.01—
                     151.04
2007-002 3-13-2007   TSO Table I
2007-003 3-13-2007   150.01—
                     150.04
2007-004 6-26-2007   TSO Table II
2007-007 9-11-2007   72.15;
                     72.99
                     110.01—
2007-010 11-13-2007  110.12;
                     110.99
2007-013 12-19-2007  113.05
2008-002 5-30-2008   TSO Table II
2008-007 9-23-2008   TSO Table I
                     72.30—
2008-008 9-23-2008   72.37;
                     72.99
2009-002 7-14-2009   TSO Table IV
2009-001 8-11-2009   TSO Table I
                     155.01—
                     155.11;
                     155.25—
2009-006 11-10-2009  155.27;
                     155.40—
                     155.46;
                     155.99
2010-001 4-13-2010   TSO Table I
2011-001 4-12-2011   TSO Table IV
2011-003 4-12-2011   32.43
2011-010 12-22-2011  TSO Table I
                     51.01—
2012-004 8-14-2012   51.08;
                     51.99
2012-007 10-9-2012   130.08;
                     130.99
2013-001 2-12-2013   TSO Table V
                     152.01;
2013-003 5-14-2013   152.02;
                     152.99
2013-007 6-20-2013   110.13;
                     110.14
                     91.01—
2014-003 6-10-2014   91.04;
                     91.99
2014-004 6-10-2014   50.02
                     94.01;
2014-006 8-12-2014   94.02;
                     94.99
2015-001 2-10-2015   30.16
2015-002 6-9-2015    TSO Table I
                     114.01—
2015-010 10-29-2015  114.07;
                     114.99
2016-001 5-10-2016   91.03
2016-004 7-12-2016   50.02
2016-007 10-11-2016  91.03
2017-002 2-27-2017   91.02;
                     91.03
2017-005 5-15-2017   110.02;
                     110.99
2017-006 6-20-2017   130.09;
                     130.99
2018-001 3-20-2018   TSO Table V
2018-002 5-8-2018    TSO Table V
2018-004 7-10-2018   TSO Table V
2018-005 7-10-2018   50.02
2018-006 9-11-2018   TSO Table V
2018-009 11-13-2018  TSO Table V
2019-002 9-10-2019   91.03
2019-005 9-24-2019   91.02—
                     91.04
2019-007 11-12-2019  50.02
2020-002 8-11-2020   91.02;
                     91.03
2020-006 9-15-2020   TSO Table I
2021-001 6-22-2021   32.55
2022-001 4-12-2022   TSO Table I
2022-003 6-23-2022   34.02
2022-008 11-7-2022   TSO Table I
2022-009 12-12-2022  TSO Table III
2022-010 12-12-2022  TSO Table I
                     52.001—
                     52.003;
                     52.015—
                     52.019;
                     52.030;
                     52.031;
                     52.045—
                     52.049;
                     52.060—
2022-011 12-19-2022  52.069;
                     52.080—
                     52.096;
                     52.110;
                     52.111;
                     52.125—
                     52.128;
                     52.140—
                     52.142;
                     52.999
2023-001 1-20-2023   30.31
2023-002 3-14-2023   TSO Table I
2023-003 3-14-2023   TSO Table I
2023-005 6-13-2023   TSO Table I
2023-014 6-13-2023   TSO Table I
2023-008 7-11-2023   110.03
2023-009 7-11-2023   TSO Table IV
2023-010 7-11-2023   31.15
2023-012 7-11-2023   TSO Table IV
2023-013 7-13-2023   TSO Table I
2023-017 11-147-2023 TSO Table I
                     154.01—
                     154.04;
                     154.15—
                     154.17;
2023-018 1-9-2024    154.30—
                     154.33;
                     154.45—
                     154.50;
                     154.99
2024-001 2-13-2024   32.55
2024-002 2-13-2024   152.02
2024-003 3-12-2024   TSO Table I
                     156.001—
                     156.011;
                     156.020;
                     156.021;
                     156.035—
                     156.039;
                     156.050—
                     156.058;
                     156.070—
                     156.078;
                     156.090—
                     156.095;
                     156.110—
                     156.112;
                     156.130—
                     156.134;
                     156.145—
2024-004 12-23-2024  156.159;
                     156.999;
                     Ch. 156, App. A;
                     157.001—
                     157.004;
                     157.015—
                     157.017;
                     157.030;
                     157.031;
                     157.045—
                     157.048;
                     157.060—
                     157.063;
                     157.075—
                     157.083;
                     157.095—
                     157.097;
                     157.999
2024-010 3-12-2024   TSO Table I
2024-005 4-9-2024    TSO Table IV
2024-006 4-9-2024    TSO Table I
2024-007 4-9-2024    TSO Table I
2024-008 4-9-2024    TSO Table I
2024-009 4-9-2024    TSO Table I
2024-011 4-9-2024    TSO Table I
2024-012 4-9-2024    TSO Table I
2024-013 5-9-2024    TSO Table VI
2024-017 10-8-2024   50.02
2024-018 10-8-2024   118.01;
                     118.02
                     116.001—
                     116.006;
                     116.020—
                     116.030;
2024-019 11-12-2024  116.045—
                     116.051;
                     116.065—
                     116.081;
                     116.999
2025-001 2-11-2025   TSO Table IV
2025-002 2-11-2025   TSO Table IV
2025-003 3-11-2025   52.062
                    
 
