WOODLAWN PARK, KENTUCKY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 4, series 2025-2026, passed 12-15-2025;
and
State legislation current through KRS 2024 Pamphlet
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 3 - SERIES 2023
   CITY OF WOODLAWN PARK, KENTUCKY
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF WOODLAWN PARK,
KENTUCKY, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WOODLAWN PARK DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Woodlawn
Park are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs;
and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the Commonwealth of Kentucky empower
and authorize the City of Woodlawn Park to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Woodlawn Park has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
Woodlawn Park of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WOODLAWN
PARK, KENTUCKY:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Woodlawn Park as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Woodlawn Park,
Kentucky.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
                        TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
                        TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
                        TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
                        TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
                        TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
                        TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
                        TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
                        TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Woodlawn Park is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect upon adoption and
publication, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved.
   First Reading held June 19, 2023.
   Second Reading, Passed and Approved July 17, 2023.
                                                 /s/ Mike Brown
                                                Mike Brown, Mayor
                                                Date: July 17, 2023
ATTEST:
/s/ Jennifer Osborne
City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Computation of time
   
10.05   Majority may act for all; authorized agent
   
10.06   Writings and signatures
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Revivor
   
10.09   Rights and liabilities accruing before repeal of ordinance
   
10.10   Construction of section references
   
10.11   Ordinances repealed
   
10.12   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.13   Ordinances saved
   
10.14   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.15   Conflicting provisions
   
10.16   Reference to offices
   
10.17   Errors and omissions
   
10.18   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections shall be known and designated as the
Woodlawn Park Code, for which designation “codified ordinances” or “code” may
be substituted. Title heads, chapter heads and section and division heads or
titles, and explanatory notes and cross references, do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code.
(KRS 446.140)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to those
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTION. Includes all proceedings in any court of this state.
(KRS 446.010(1))
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANIMAL. Includes every warm-blooded living creature except a human being.
(KRS 446.010(2))
   AVIS. The automated vehicle information system established and maintained by
the Transportation Cabinet to collect titling and registration information on
vehicles and boats and information on holders of motor vehicle operator’s
licenses and personal identification cards.
(KRS 446.010(55))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. When used in this code, shall
denote the City of Woodlawn Park irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   COMPANY. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company, person,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(9))
   CORPORATION. May extend and be applied to any corporation, company,
partnership, joint stock company or association.
(KRS 446.010(10))
   COUNCIL. The city legislative body.
(KRS 83A.010(5))
   COUNTY. Jefferson County, Kentucky.
   CRUELTY. As applied to animals, includes every act or omission whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted.
(KRS 446.010(12))
   DIRECTORS. When applied to corporations, includes managers or trustees.
(KRS 446.010(13))
   DOMESTIC. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, means all those incorporated or formed by authority
of this state.
(KRS 446.010(14))
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal converted to domestic habitat.
(KRS 446.010(15))
   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY. The Mayor.
(KRS 83A.010(6), KRS 91A.010(4))
   FEDERAL. Refers to the United States.
(KRS 446.010(17))
   FOREIGN. When applied to a corporation, partnership, business trust or
limited liability company, includes all those incorporated or formed by
authority of any other state.
(KRS 446.010(18))
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   KRS. Kentucky Revised Statutes.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and all
rights thereto and interest therein, other than a chattel interest.
(KRS 446.010(23))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The City Council.
(KRS 91A.010(8))
   LEGISLATIVE BODY MEMBER. A City Councilmember.
(KRS 83A.010(8))
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, alpacas, llamas, buffaloes
or any other animals of the bovine, ovine, porcine, caprine, equine or camelid
species.
(KRS 446.010(25))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive. (See SHALL.)
(KRS 446.010(26))
   MONTH. Calendar month.
(KRS 446.010(27))
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Woodlawn Park, Kentucky.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH.
(KRS 446.010(28))
   PARTNERSHIP. Includes both general and limited partnerships.
(KRS 446.010(30))
   PEACE OFFICER. Includes sheriffs, constables, coroners, jailers,
metropolitan and urban-county government correctional officers, marshals,
police officers and other persons with similar authority to make arrests.
(KRS 446.010(31))
   PERSON. May extend and be applied to bodies-politic and corporate,
societies, communities, the public generally, individuals, partnerships, joint
stock companies and limited liability companies.
(KRS 446.010(33))
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGULAR ELECTION. The election in even-numbered years at which members of
Congress are elected, and the election in odd-numbered years at which state
officers are elected.
(KRS 446.010(37))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory. (See MAY.)
(KRS 446.010(39))
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the city.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
   SWORN. Includes affirmed in all cases in which an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath.
(KRS 446.010(43))
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   VACANCY IN OFFICE. Exists when there is an unexpired part of a term of
office without a lawful incumbent therein, when the person elected or appointed
to an office fails to qualify according to law, or when there has been no
election to fill the office at the time appointed by law; it applies whether
the vacancy is occasioned by death, resignation, removal from the state,
county, city or district, or otherwise.
(KRS 446.010(46))
   VIOLATE. Includes failure to comply with.
(KRS 446.010(47))
   YEAR. Calendar year.
(KRS 446.010(49))
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Singular includes plural. A word importing the singular number only
may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one
person or thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things.
(KRS 446.020(1))
   (B)   Masculine includes feminine. A word importing the masculine gender
only may extend and be applied to females as well as males.
(KRS 446.020(2))
   (C)   Liberal construction. All sections of this code shall be liberally
construed with a view to promote their objects and carry out the intent of
Council.
(KRS 446.080(1))
   (D)   Retroactivity. No ordinance shall be construed to be retroactive,
unless expressly so declared.
(KRS 446.080(3))
   (E)   Technical terms. All words and phrases shall be construed according to
the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law,
shall be construed according to that meaning.
(KRS 446.080(4))
§ 10.04 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by order of
court, or by any applicable ordinance or regulation, the day of the act, event
or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it
is a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the public office in
which a document is required to be filed is actually and legally closed, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not one of
the days just mentioned. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less
than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation.
   (B)   When an ordinance, regulation or order of court requires an act to be
done either a certain time before an event or a certain time before the day on
which an event occurs, the day of the event shall be excluded in computing the
time. If the day thereby computed on which or by which the act is required to
be done falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or a day on which the public
office in which the act is required to be completed is actually and legally
closed, the act may be done on the next day which is none of the days just
mentioned.
   (C)   If any proceeding is directed by law to take place, or any act is
directed to be done, on a particular day of a month and that day is Sunday, the
proceeding shall take place, or the act shall be done, on the next day that is
not a legal holiday.
(KRS 446.030)
   (D)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a reasonable
time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall mean the
time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or
compliance with the notice.
§ 10.05 MAJORITY MAY ACT FOR ALL; AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   (A)   Words giving authority to three or more public officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the
officers or other persons.
(KRS 446.050)
   (B)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include those acts when done by an authorized agent.
§ 10.06 WRITINGS AND SIGNATURES.
   (A)   When this code requires any writing to be signed by a party thereto,
it shall not be deemed to be signed unless the signature is subscribed at the
end or close of the writing.
   (B)   Every writing contemplated by this code shall be in the English
language.
(KRS 446.060)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   It shall be considered that it is the intent of Council in enacting any
ordinance, that if any part of the ordinance be held unconstitutional, the
remaining parts shall remain in force, unless the ordinance provides otherwise,
or unless the remaining parts are so essentially and inseparably connected with
and dependent upon the unconstitutional part that it is apparent that Council
would not have enacted the remaining parts without the unconstitutional part;
or unless the remaining parts, standing alone, are incomplete and incapable of
being executed in accordance with the intent of Council.
(KRS 446.090)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR.
   (A)   A repealed ordinance without a delayed effective date is revived when
the ordinance that repealed it is repealed by another ordinance enacted at the
same meeting of Council.
   (B)   A repealed ordinance with a delayed effective date is revived by the
enactment of a repealer of the ordinance that repealed it at the same or any
subsequent meeting of Council as long as it takes effect prior to the effective
date of the original repealer.
   (C)   An amended ordinance without a delayed effective date remains
unchanged with respect to an amendment which is repealed at the same meeting of
Council which enacted the amendment.
   (D)   An amended ordinance with a delayed effective date remains unchanged
with respect to that amendment if the ordinance making the amendment is
repealed at the same or at a subsequent meeting of Council, as long as the
repealing ordinance takes effect prior to the effective date of the original
amendment.
   (E)   No other action of Council repealing a repealer or an amendment shall
have the effect of reviving the original language of the repealer or amendment,
as the case may be.
(KRS 446.100)
§ 10.09 RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ACCRUING BEFORE REPEAL OF ORDINANCE.
   No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any
offense committed against a former ordinance, nor as to any act done, or
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance
takes effect, except that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far
as practicable, to the laws in force at the time of the proceedings. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance, the provision may, by the consent of the party affected, be applied
to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance takes effect.
(KRS 446.110)
§ 10.10 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance, by its nature, either authorizes or enables the
Council, or a certain city officer or employee, to make additional ordinances
or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving the purpose effected
prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto shall remain in effect
and are saved.
§ 10.14 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any
chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded
from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as
printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances
until Council shall adopt a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   The method of amendment set forth in §
32.32 should be used by the city to amend, add or repeal a chapter, section or
division of this code of ordinances.
§ 10.15 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
§ 10.16 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.17 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.18 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a KRS cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
      (KRS 83A.090)
   (C)   If a KRS cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see KRS 61.870 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this code of
ordinances, and no penalty is otherwise provided, the offense shall be deemed a
violation, and the offender shall be fined not more than $250 for each offense.
Statutory references:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see KRS 83A.065
   Maximum fine for violations, see KRS 534.040(2)(c)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY COUNCIL
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   PUBLIC RECORDS
      
35.   TAXATION
      
36.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
37.   PUBLIC SAFETY
      
38.   POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR-COUNCIL PLAN
Section
   
30.01   Form of government
   
30.02   Governing officers
   
30.03   Retaining organization and structure
   
30.04   Control withstanding repeal
   
30.05   Ordinances to remain in effect
   
30.06   Enforcement
§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government provided for this city shall be known as the Mayor-
Council Plan, and this chapter, together with KRS 83A.010 to 83A.120, govern
the city.
(KRS 83A.130(1))
§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.
   (A)   The city shall be governed by an elected executive who shall be called
Mayor and by an elected legislative body which shall be called the City
Council, and by other officers and employees as are provided for by statute or
city ordinance.
(KRS 83A.130(2))
   (B)   The City Council shall be composed of not less than six nor more than
12 members as prescribed by ordinance. An ordinance amending the number of
legislative body members shall be:
      (1)   Enacted and filed with the County Clerk of any county or counties
in which the city is located by no later than the first Wednesday after the
first Monday in November of the year preceding the year in which the
legislative offices will appear on the ballot; and
      (2)   Crafted in such a manner that the amended number of legislative
body members becomes effective on January 1 of the year following the election
of the number of legislative body members specified in the amending ordinance.
(KRS 83A.030(1))
§ 30.03 RETAINING ORGANIZATION AND STRUCTURE.
   Pursuant to SB 41 and SB 26 of the 1980 Regular Session of the General
Assembly of the state, the city hereby elects to retain the organization and
structure of its city government existing on July 14, 1980, immediately before
the effective date of non-emergency legislation enacted by the 1980 Regular
Session of the General Assembly.
(Ord. 5 - series 1980, passed - -1980)
§ 30.04 CONTROL WITHSTANDING REPEAL.
   For the purposes of the organization and structure of the government of the
city, those sections of the Kentucky Revised Statutes pursuant to which city
government operated on July 14, 1980, which sections have been repealed
effective July 15, 1980, shall continue as directing and controlling the
organization and structure of city government, notwithstanding their respective
repeal.
(Ord. 5 - series 1980, passed - -1980)
§ 30.05 ORDINANCES TO REMAIN IN EFFECT.
   Ordinances and resolutions of the city are hereby declared to remain in
force and effect, and any such ordinance citing or relying on a section of
Kentucky Revised Statutes repealed by the 1980 Regular Session of the General
Assembly shall be deemed to refer to such repealed statute for purposes of
structure, procedure and operation only, and not for the grant of any power or
authority found in such section.
(Ord. 5 - series 1980, passed - -1980)
§ 30.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enactment of §§
30.03 to
30.06 is for purposes of compliance with SB 26, KRS 83.020(2), and is pursuant
to SB 41, KRS 82.020.
(Ord. 5 - series 1980, passed - -1980)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Oath
   
31.02   Compensation
   
31.03   Removal from office
   
31.04   Bond
Elected Officials
   
31.15   Election procedure
   
31.16   Mayor
   
31.17   Councilmembers
Nonelected City Officials
   
31.30   Establishment of nonelected city offices
   
31.31   City Clerk
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 OATH.
   Each officer of the city shall, before entering upon the discharge of duties
of his or her office, take the following oath: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm,
as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of this Commonwealth,
and the Constitution of the United States, and be faithful and true to the
Commonwealth of Kentucky, so long as I continue a citizen thereof, and that I
will faithfully execute, to the best of my ability, the office of           ,
according to law; and I do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that, since the
adoption of the present Constitution, I, being a citizen of this United States,
have not fought a duel with deadly weapons within this State, nor out of it,
nor have I sent or accepted a challenge to fight a duel with deadly weapons,
nor have I acted as a second in carrying a challenge, nor aided or assisted any
person thus offending, so help me God”, as established by § 228 of the Kentucky
Constitution.
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   City Council shall, by ordinance, fix the compensation of every
elected city officer not later than the first Monday in May in the year in
which the officer is elected. An elected officer’s compensation shall not be
changed after his or her election or during his or her term of office.
(KRS 83A.070(1))
      (1)   In order to equate the compensation of Mayors and Councilmembers
with the purchasing power of the dollar, the Department for Local Government
shall compute by the second Friday in February of every year the annual
increase or decrease in the consumer price index of the preceding year by using
1949 as the base year in accordance with § 246 of the Kentucky Constitution,
which provides that the Mayor in cities of the first class shall be paid at a
rate no greater than $12,000 per annum, and Mayors in cities other than the
first class and Councilmembers shall be paid at a rate no greater than $7,200
per annum.
      (2)   The City Council shall set the compensation of these officers in
accordance with KRS 83A.070 at a rate no greater than that stipulated by the
Department for Local Government.
(KRS 83A.075)
   (B)   The City Council shall fix the compensation of city employees and
nonelected city officers in accordance with the personnel and pay
classification plan ordinance of the city.
(KRS 83A.070(2))
   (C)   All fees and commissions authorized by law shall be paid into the City
Treasury for the benefit of the city and shall not be retained by any officer
or employee.
(KRS 83A.070(3))
Case law reference:
   The limits on compensation contained in the Kentucky Constitution are not
absolute limits but rather increase or decrease in accordance with changes in
the consumer price index. See Matthews v. Allen, 360 SW2d 248 (1948).
Editor’s note:
   Compensation ordinances are not set forth in this code but are rather kept
on file and available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk-
Treasurer.
§ 31.03 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   (A)   Elected officers. Any elected officer, in case of misconduct,
incapacity or willful neglect in the performance of the duties of his or her
office, may be removed from office by a unanimous vote of the members of the
City Council exclusive of any member to be removed, who shall not vote in the
deliberation of his or her removal. No elected officer shall be removed without
having been given the right to a full public hearing. The officer, if removed,
has the right to appeal to the circuit court of the county and the appeal shall
be on the record. No officer so removed is eligible to fill the office vacated
before the expiration of the term to which originally elected.
   (B)   Nonelected officers. Nonelected city officers may be removed by the
Mayor at will, unless otherwise provided by state law or ordinance.
Statutory references:
   Removal of elected officers, see KRS 83A.040(9)
   Removal of nonelected officers, see KRS 83A.080(3)
§ 31.04 BOND.
   (A)   Official bonds shall, if required, meet the standards of KRS 62.060.
   (B)   All officers, officials and employees of the city who handle public
funds in the execution of their duties shall give a good and sufficient bond to
the city for the faithful and honest performance of their duties, and as
security for all money coming into that person’s hands or under that person’s
control. The amount of the bond shall be based upon the maximum amount of
public funds the officer, official or employee handles at any given time during
a fiscal year cycle. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Elected officials who post bond as required by statute, and employees
of their offices covered by a blanket or umbrella bond, shall be deemed to have
complied with division (A) above.
(KRS 65.067)
ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.15 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Election of city officers shall be governed by general election laws
as provided in KRS Chapters 116 through 121 unless City Council otherwise
prescribes by ordinance that election of city officers shall be under
nonpartisan city election laws as provided in KRS Chapter 83A. The ordinance
shall become effective not later than 23 days prior to the date prescribed by
the election law generally for filing notification and declaration forms with
the County Clerk in a year in which a regular election is to be held in which
any city office is to be filled. Immediately subsequent to publication of any
ordinance prescribing that election of city officers be under nonpartisan city
election laws, a copy of the ordinance shall be filed with the County Clerk of
the county in which the city is located.
   (B)   The city may change the manner of election of city officers within the
provisions of division (A) above by ordinance, except that no change shall be
made earlier than five years from the last change.
   (C)   The city shall pay the costs of city elections only if city elections
are held at a time other than prescribed by law for elections generally.
(KRS 83A.050)
   (D)   Each appointed and elected city office existing upon adoption of this
chapter shall continue until abolished by ordinance, except that the offices of
Mayor and City Councilmembers may not be abolished.
   (E)   No abolition of any elected office shall take effect until expiration
of the term of the current holder of the office.
   (F)   No ordinance abolishing any elected office shall be enacted later than
240 days preceding the regular election for that office, except in the event of
a vacancy in the office.
(KRS 83A.080(4))
   (G)   The city may not create any elected office. Existing elected offices
may be continued under provision of divisions (D), (E) and (F) above, but no
existing elected office may be changed.
(KRS 83A.080(5))
   (H)   (1)   The election of all elected city officers shall be by
nonpartisan city election.
      (2)   The city does hereby elect to forgo nonpartisan primary elections.
      (3)   The nomination and election of all city offices shall be as
provided in KRS 83A.045.
(Ord. 4, series 1992, passed 12-26-1992)
§ 31.16 MAYOR.
   (A)   Election; term of office. The Mayor of this city shall be elected by
the voters of the city at a regular election. A candidate for Mayor shall be a
resident of the city for not less than one year prior to his or her election.
His or her term of office shall begin on January 1 following his or her
election and shall be for four years and until his or her successor qualifies.
If a person is elected or appointed as Mayor in response to a vacancy and
serves less than four calendar years, then that period of service shall not be
considered for purposes of re-election to a term of office.
   (B)   Qualifications. The Mayor shall be at least 21 years of age, shall be
a qualified voter in the city and shall reside in the city throughout his or
her term of office.
(KRS 83A.040(1))
   (C)   Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, Council shall
fill the vacancy within 30 days. If, for any reason, any vacancy in the office
of Mayor is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall
promptly fill the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve
for the same period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(2)(a), (6))
      (1)   When voting to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a member of
the City Council shall not vote for himself or herself.
(KRS 83A.040(2)(c))
      (2)   When voting to fill a vacancy created by the resignation of the
Mayor, the resigning Mayor shall not vote on his or her successor.
(KRS 83A.040(3))
      (3)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation in the office of
Mayor shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies the resignation
date is tendered to the City Council. The resignation shall be effective at the
next regular or special meeting of the City Council occurring after the date
specified in the written letter of resignation.
(KRS 83A.040(7))
      (4)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor which is required by law
to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City Council or the Governor,
whichever is designated to make the appointment, shall immediately notify, in
writing, both the County Clerk and the Secretary of State of the vacancy.
(KRS 83A.040(8))
      (5)   The City Council shall elect from among its members an individual
to preside over meetings of the City Council during any vacancy in the office
of the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of KRS 83A.130 to 83A.150.
(KRS 83A.040(2)(d))
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The executive authority of the city is hereby vested in and
exercised by the Mayor. The Mayor shall enforce the Mayor-Council Plan, city
ordinances and orders and all applicable statutes. He or she shall supervise
all departments of city government and the conduct of all city officers and
employees under his or her jurisdiction and shall require each department to
make reports to him or her as required by ordinance or as he or she deems
desirable.
      (2)   The Mayor shall maintain liaison with related units of local
government respecting interlocal contracting and joint activities.
      (3)   The Mayor shall report to the Council and to the public on the
condition and needs of city government as he or she finds appropriate or as
required by ordinance, but not less than annually. He or she shall make any
recommendations for actions by the Council he or she finds in the public
interest.
(KRS 83A.130(3))
      (4)   Subject to disapproval of the Council, the Mayor shall promulgate
procedures to ensure orderly administration of the functions of city government
and compliance with statutes or ordinances. Upon promulgation or upon revision
or rescission of the procedures, copies shall be filed with the person
responsible for maintaining city records.
(KRS 83A.130(4))
      (5)   Any delegation of the Mayor’s power, duties or responsibilities to
subordinate officers and employees and any expression of his or her official
authority to fulfill executive functions shall be made by executive order.
Executive orders shall be sequentially numbered by years and kept in a
permanent file.
(KRS 83A.130(7))
      (6)   All bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the city
shall be made and executed by the Mayor, or his or her agent, designated by
executive order.
(KRS 83A.130(8))
      (7)   The Mayor shall be the appointing authority with power to appoint
and remove all city employees, including police officers, except as tenure and
terms of employment are protected by statute, ordinance or contract and except
for employees of the Council.
(KRS 83A.130(9))
      (8)   (a)   The Mayor shall provide for the orderly continuation of the
functions of city government at any time he or she is unable to attend to the
duties of his or her office by delegating responsibility for any function to be
performed, in accordance with division (D)(5) above.
         (b)   However, the Mayor may not delegate the responsibility of
presiding at meetings of the Council, and the authority to approve ordinances
or promulgate administrative procedures may only be delegated to an elected
officer. With approval of the Council, the Mayor may rescind any action taken
in his or her absence under this division (D)(8) within 30 days of the action.
If for any reason the disability of the Mayor to attend to his or her duties
persists for 60 consecutive days, the office of Mayor may be declared vacant by
a majority vote of the Council and the provisions of division (C) above shall
apply.
(KRS 83A.130(10))
§ 31.17 COUNCILMEMBERS.
   For provisions concerning City Council, see
Chapter 32 of this code of ordinances.
NONELECTED CITY OFFICIALS
§ 31.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF NONELECTED CITY OFFICES.
   (A)   All nonelected city offices shall be created by ordinance which shall
specify:
      (1)   Title of office;
      (2)   Powers and duties of office;
      (3)   Oath of office; and
      (4)   Bond, if required.
(KRS 83A.080(1))
   (B)   With the exception of the Police Chief and all city police officers,
all nonelected city officers shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be with
approval of City Council. The Police Chief and all city police officers shall
be appointed by the Mayor at will and these appointments need not be approved
by City Council.
   (C)   All nonelected officers may be removed by the Mayor at will unless
otherwise provided by state law or ordinance. Upon removal of a nonelected
officer at will, the Mayor shall give the officer a written statement setting
forth the reason or reasons for the removal. However, this requirement shall
not be construed as limiting in any way the at-will dismissal power of the
Mayor.
(KRS 83A.080(3))
   (D)   The following are nonelected city offices:
   [Reserved]
Statutory reference:
   Nonelected city offices, see KRS 83A.080(2), (3)
§ 31.31 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The office of City Clerk may, by ordinance, be combined with any other
nonelected city office by inclusion of the title and duties of the office.
   (C)   The duties and responsibilities of the Clerk shall include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the city;
      (2)   Performance of the duties required of the official custodian or
custodian in accordance with KRS 61.870 to 61.882;
      (3)   Possession of the seal of the city, if used;
      (4)   No later than January 31 of each year, mail or electronically
submit to the Department for Local Government a list containing current city
information, including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The correct name, telephone number and electronic mail address
of the Mayor, Councilmembers and the correct name, telephone number and
electronic mail address for the city’s appointed officials or employees who are
serving in the following roles or substantially similar roles as of January 1
of each year:
            1.   City Clerk;
            2.   City Treasurer or chief financial officer;
            3.   City Manager or administrator;
            4.   City Attorney;
            5.   Human Resources Director;
            6.   Police Chief;
            7.   Fire Chief;
            8.   Public Works Director;
            9.   Risk Manager;
            10.   Information Technology Manager;
            11.   Public Relations or Communications Officer; and
            12.   Planning and Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   The correct name of the city, mailing address for City Hall and
telephone number of City Hall; and
         (c)   The name and telephone number of either an elected or appointed
official to serve as a contact person who may be reached during normal business
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
      (5)   Performance of all other duties and responsibilities required of
the City Clerk by statute or ordinance.
(KRS 83A.085)
   (D)   Compensation shall be in the amount as established by the City
Council, from time to time, as set forth in §
31.02.
   (E)   No person shall be appointed or act as the City Clerk unless the
person has taken the oath required by § 228 of the Kentucky Constitution and
has provided bond, if required, with corporate surety authorized to transact
business in the commonwealth and conditioned upon the performance of the duties
specified herein.
CHAPTER 32: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Members; election, qualifications, compensation
   
32.02   Vacancies
   
32.03   Powers and duties
Rules of Procedure
   
32.15   Mayor as Presiding Officer
   
32.16   Meetings
   
32.17   Quorum
   
32.18   Residents addressing the Council
Ordinances
   
32.30   One subject; title
   
32.31   Introduction; enacting clause
   
32.32   Form of amendment
   
32.33   Reading requirement; exception for emergency
   
32.34   Approval, disapproval by Mayor
   
32.35   Adoption of standard codes by reference
   
32.36   Official city records
   
32.37   Indexing and maintenance requirements
   
32.38   Publication requirements
   
32.39   Additional requirements for adoption may be established by city
   
32.40   Periodic review required
   
32.41   Municipal orders
   
32.42   Proved by Clerk; received in evidence
   
32.43   Legislative immunity
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS; ELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Election; term of office. Each Councilmember shall be elected at large
by the voters of the city at a regular election. A candidate for Council shall
be a resident of the city for not less than one year prior to his or her
election. Terms of office begin on January 1 following the election and shall
be for two years, except as provided by KRS 83A.050.
   (B)   Qualifications. A member shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a
qualified voter in the city and shall reside in the city throughout his or her
term of office.
(KRS 83A.040(4))
   (C)   Compensation. For provisions concerning compensation, see §
31.02.
§ 32.02 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Vacancies. If one or more vacancies on Council occur in a way that one
or more members remain seated, the remaining members shall, within 30 days,
fill the vacancies one at a time, giving each new appointee reasonable notice
of his or her selection as will enable him or her to meet and act with the
remaining members in making further appointments until all vacancies are
filled. If vacancies occur in a way that all seats become vacant, the Governor
shall appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies sufficient to constitute
a quorum. Remaining vacancies shall be filled as provided in this section.
(KRS 83A.040(5))
      (1)   No vacancy by reason of a voluntary resignation of a member of the
City Council shall occur unless a written resignation which specifies a
resignation date is tendered to the City Council .The resignation may be
submitted through electronic mail if it originates from the official’s
electronic mail address and includes also the official’s handwritten signature.
The resignation shall be effective at the next regular or special meeting of
the City Council occurring on or after the date specified in the written letter
of resignation. If a resignation date is not specified, the written resignation
shall be deemed to become effective at the first regular or special meeting of
the legislative body occurring on or after its receipt.
(KRS 83A.040(7))
      (2)   Pursuant to KRS 118.305(7), if a vacancy occurs on the City Council
which is required by law to be filled temporarily by appointment, the City
Council or the Governor, whichever is designated to make the appointment, shall
immediately notify in writing both the County Clerk and the Secretary of State
of the vacancy.
(KRS 83A.040(8))
   (B)   Failure to fill vacancies. If, for any reason, any vacancy on Council
is not filled within 30 days after it occurs, the Governor shall promptly fill
the vacancy by appointment of a qualified person who shall serve for the same
period as if otherwise appointed.
(KRS 83A.040(6))
Statutory reference:
   Filling of vacancies for nonpartisan city office, see KRS 83A.175
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The legislative authority of the city shall be vested in and exercised
by the elected Council of the city. The Council shall not perform any executive
functions except those functions assigned to it by statute.
(KRS 83A.130(11))
   (B)   The Council shall, by ordinance, establish all appointive offices and
the duties and responsibilities of those offices and codes, rules and
regulations for the public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for sufficient revenue to
operate city government and shall appropriate the funds of the city in a budget
which provides for the orderly management of city resources.
(KRS 83A.130(12))
   (D)   (1)   The Council shall have the right to investigate all activities
of city government. The Council may require any city officer or employee to
prepare and submit to it sworn statements regarding the performance of his or
her official duties. Any statement required by the Council to be submitted or
any investigation undertaken by the Council, if any office, department or
agency under the jurisdiction of the Mayor is involved, shall not be submitted
or undertaken unless and until written notice of the Council’s action is given
to the Mayor.
      (2)   The Mayor may review any statement before submission to the Council
and to appear personally or through his or her designee on behalf of any
department, office or agency in the course of any investigation.
(KRS 83A.130(13))
RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 32.15 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council. The Council may
set, by ordinance, the manner in which one of its number may be selected to
preside at meetings of the Council in place of the Mayor.
   (B)   The Mayor may participate in Council proceedings, but shall not have a
vote, except that he or she may cast the deciding vote in case of a tie.
(KRS 83A.130(5))
Cross-reference:
   Council’s responsibility to select one of its own members to preside when
there is vacancy in the office of Mayor, see §
31.16
§ 32.16 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held at least once each month
at those times and places established by ordinance.
   (B)   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or upon
written request of a majority of the Council. In the call, the Mayor or Council
shall designate the purpose, time and place of the special meeting with
sufficient notice for the attendance of Councilmembers and for compliance with
KRS Chapter 61.
   (C)   At a special meeting, no business may be considered other than that
set forth in the designation of purpose.
   (D)   The minutes of every meeting shall be signed by the person responsible
for maintaining city records as provided under §
31.31 and by the officer presiding at the meeting.
(KRS 83A.130(11))
   (E)   Effective June 26, 2014, the City Council shall meet regularly at 7:00
p.m. on the third Monday of each month at 4327 Wingate Road, Louisville,
Kentucky.
(Ord. 5, series 2013/2014, passed 5-19-2014)
§ 32.17 QUORUM.
   Unless otherwise provided by statute, a majority of the Council shall
constitute a quorum and a vote of a majority of a quorum is sufficient to take
action.
(KRS 83A.060(6))
§ 32.18 RESIDENTS ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Any resident who desires to address the Council shall identify himself
or herself by name and address.
   (B)   Each resident shall be subject to a three minute maximum time within
which he or she may address the Council.
   (C)   A maximum of two persons shall be permitted to address the Council on
the same side of an issue.
   (D)   In the event the person addressing the Council has written comments, a
copy may be provided to the Mayor and Council prior to the Council meeting.
   (E)   Residents are permitted to address the Council during meetings only as
set forth above.
(Ord. 2011-1, passed 11-21-2011)
ORDINANCES
§ 32.30 ONE SUBJECT; TITLE.
   Each ordinance shall embrace only one subject and shall have a title that
shall clearly state the subject.
(KRS 83A.060(1))
§ 32.31 INTRODUCTION; ENACTING CLAUSE.
   Each ordinance shall be introduced in writing and shall have an enacting
clause, styled: “Be it ordained by the City of Woodlawn Park, Kentucky”.
(KRS 83A.060(2))
§ 32.32 FORM OF AMENDMENT.
   (A)   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, and
ordinances to amend shall set out in full the amended ordinance or section
indicating any text being added by a single solid line drawn underneath it.
   (B)   Text that is intended to be removed shall be marked at the beginning
with an opening bracket and at the end with a closing bracket. The text between
the brackets shall be stricken through with a single solid line.
(KRS 83A.060(3))
§ 32.33 READING REQUIREMENT; EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no ordinance shall be
enacted until it has been read on two separate days. The reading of an
ordinance may be satisfied by stating the title and reading a summary rather
than the full text.
(KRS 83A.060(4))
   (B)   (1)   In an emergency, upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the
membership, the Council may suspend the requirements of second reading and
publication to provide for an ordinance to become effective by naming and
describing the emergency in the ordinance.
      (2)   Publication requirements of §
32.38 shall be complied with within ten days of the enactment of the emergency
ordinance.
(KRS 83A.060(7))
§ 32.34 APPROVAL, DISAPPROVAL BY MAYOR.
   (A)   All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor
who, within ten days after submission, shall either approve the ordinance by
affixing his or her signature or disapprove it by returning it to the Council
together with a statement of his or her objections.
   (B)   No ordinance shall take effect without the Mayor’s approval unless he
or she fails to return it to the Council within ten days after receiving it or
unless the Council votes to override the Mayor’s veto, upon reconsideration of
the ordinance not later than the second regular meeting following its return,
by the affirmative vote of one more than a majority of the membership.
(KRS 83A.130(6))
§ 32.35 ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES BY REFERENCE.
   The Council may adopt the provisions of any local, statewide or nationally
recognized standard code and codifications of entire bodies of local
legislation by an ordinance that identifies the subject matter by title, source
and date and incorporates the adopted provisions by reference without setting
them out in full, if a copy accompanies the adopting ordinance and is made a
part of the permanent records of the city.
(KRS 83A.060(5))
§ 32.36 OFFICIAL CITY RECORDS.
   (A)   Every action of the Council shall be made a part of the permanent
records of the city, and on passage of an ordinance the vote of each member of
the Council shall be entered on the official record of the meeting.
   (B)   (1)   The Council has provided, under the provisions of §§
31.31(C) and
32.37, for the maintenance and safekeeping of the permanent records of the
city.
      (2)   The City Clerk and the presiding officer shall sign the official
record of each meeting.
(KRS 83A.060(8))
§ 32.37 INDEXING AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   At the end of each month, all ordinances adopted in the city shall be
indexed and maintained by the City Clerk in the following manner:
   (A)   The city budget, appropriations of money and tax levies shall be
maintained and indexed so that each fiscal year is kept separate from other
years; and
   (B)   All other city ordinances shall be kept in the minute book or an
ordinance book in the order adopted and indexed in a composite index or
maintained in this code of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060(8)(a), (b))
§ 32.38 PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
32.33(B), no ordinance shall be enforceable until published pursuant to KRS
Chapter 424.
   (B)   (1)   Ordinances may be published in full or in summary as designated
by the Council.
      (2)   If the Council elects to publish an ordinance in summary, the
summary shall be prepared or certified by an attorney licensed to practice law
in the commonwealth and shall include the following:
         (a)   The title of the ordinance;
         (b)   A brief narrative setting forth the main points of the ordinance
in a way reasonably calculated to inform the public in a clear and
understandable manner of the meaning of the ordinance; and
         (c)   The full text of each section that imposes taxes or fees.
   (C)   Ordinances that include descriptions of real property may include a
sketch, drawing or map, including common landmarks, such as streets or roads in
lieu of metes and bounds descriptions.
(KRS 83A.060(9))
§ 32.39 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY CITY.
   The city may, by ordinance, specify additional requirements for adoption of
ordinances in greater detail than contained herein, but the city shall not
lessen or reduce the substantial requirements of this chapter or any statute
relating to adoption of ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060(10))
§ 32.40 PERIODIC REVIEW REQUIRED.
   At least once every five years, the city shall cause all ordinances in this
code of ordinances to be examined for consistency with state law and with one
another and to be revised to eliminate redundant, obsolete, inconsistent and
invalid provisions.
(KRS 83A.060(11))
§ 32.41 MUNICIPAL ORDERS.
   (A)   Council may adopt municipal orders. All municipal orders shall be in
writing and may be adopted only at an official meeting. Orders may be amended
by a subsequent municipal order or ordinance. All orders adopted shall be
maintained in an official order book.
(KRS 83A.060(12))
   (B)   In lieu of an ordinance, a municipal order may be used for matters
relating to the internal operation and functions of the city and to appoint or
remove or approve appointment or removal of members of boards, commissions and
other agencies over which the city has control.
(KRS 83A.060(13))
§ 32.42 PROVED BY CLERK; RECEIVED IN EVIDENCE.
   All ordinances and orders of the city may be proved by the signature of the
City Clerk; and when the ordinances are placed in this code of ordinances by
authority of the city, the printed copy shall be received in evidence by any
state court without further proof of the ordinances.
(KRS 83A.060(14))
§ 32.43 LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY.
   For anything said in debate, Councilmembers shall be entitled to the same
immunities and protections allowed to members of the General Assembly.
(KRS 83A.060(15))
Statutory reference:
   Privileges of members of General Assembly, see KRS 6.050 and KY. Const. § 43
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Financial Administration
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Accounting records and financial reports
   
33.03   Annual budget ordinance
   
33.04   Annual audit of city funds
   
33.05   Official depositories; disbursement of city funds
Improvements
   
33.20   Definitions
   
33.21   Financing of improvements
   
33.22   Apportionment of cost
   
33.23   Comprehensive report required
   
33.24   Public hearing required
   
33.25   Adoption of ordinance; notice to affected owners
   
33.26   Affected owner may contest
   
33.27   When city may proceed; assessment constitutes lien
   
33.28   Effect of additional property or change in financing
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUDGET. A proposed plan for raising and spending money for specified
programs, functions, activities or objectives during a fiscal year.
   DEBT SERVICE. The sum of money required to pay installments of principal and
interest on bonds, notes and other evidences of debt accruing within a fiscal
year, and to maintain sinking funds.
   ENCUMBRANCES. Obligations in the form of purchase orders or contracts that
are chargeable to an appropriation. An obligation ceases to be an ENCUMBRANCE
when paid or when the actual liability is recorded.
   FISCAL YEAR. The accounting period for the administration of fiscal
operations.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED GOVERNMENTAL AUDITING STANDARDS. Those standards for
audit of governmental organizations, programs, activities and functions issued
by the Comptroller General of the United States.
   GENERALLY ACCEPTED PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTING. Those standards
and procedures promulgated and recognized by the Governmental Accounting
Standards Board.
(KRS 91A.010)
§ 33.02 ACCOUNTING RECORDS AND FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   (A)   The city shall keep its accounting records and render financial
reports in such a way as to:
      (1)   Determine compliance with statutory provisions; and
      (2)   Determine fairly and with full disclosure the financial operations
of constituent funds and account groups of the city in conformity with
generally accepted governmental accounting principles.
   (B)   The municipal accounting system shall be organized and operated on a
fund basis.
(KRS 91A.020)
§ 33.03 ANNUAL BUDGET ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The city shall operate under an annual budget ordinance adopted and
administered in accordance with the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, no monies shall be expended from any governmental
or proprietary fund, except in accordance with a budget ordinance adopted
pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Monies held by the city as a trustee or agent for individuals, private
organizations or other governmental units need not be included in the budget
ordinance.
   (C)   If in any fiscal year subsequent to a fiscal year in which the city
has adopted a budget ordinance in accordance with this section, no budget
ordinance is adopted, the budget ordinance of the previous fiscal year has full
force and effect as if readopted.
   (D)   The budget ordinance of the city shall cover one fiscal year.
   (E)   Preparation of the budget proposal shall be the responsibility of the
Mayor.
   (F)   The budget proposal shall be prepared in the form and detail as
prescribed by ordinance.
   (G)   The budget proposal together with a budget message shall be submitted
to Council not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year it
covers. The budget message shall contain an explanation of the governmental
goals fixed by the budget for the coming fiscal year; explain important
features of the activities anticipated in the budget; set forth the reasons for
stated changes from the previous year in program goals, programs and
appropriation levels; and explain any major changes in fiscal policy.
   (H)   (1)   Council shall adopt a budget ordinance making appropriations for
the fiscal year in such sums as it finds sufficient and proper, whether greater
or less than the sums recommended in the budget proposal. The budget ordinance
may be in any form that Council finds most efficient in enabling it to make the
necessary fiscal policy decisions.
      (2)   No budget ordinance shall be adopted which provides for
appropriations to exceed revenues in any one fiscal year in violation of § 157
of the Kentucky Constitution.
   (I)   The full amount estimated to be required for debt service during the
budget year shall be appropriated for all governmental fund types.
   (J)   Council may amend the budget ordinance at any time after the
ordinance’s adoption, if the amended ordinance continues to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
   (K)   Administration and implementation of an adopted budget ordinance shall
be the responsibility of the Mayor. That responsibility includes the
preparation and submission to Council of operating statements, including
budgetary comparisons of each governmental fund for which an annual budget has
been adopted. The reports shall be submitted not less than once every three
months in each fiscal year.
   (L)   To the extent practical, the system utilized in the administration and
implementation of the adopted budget ordinance shall be consistent in form with
the accounting system called for in §
33.02.
   (M)   No city agency, or member, director, officer or employee of a city
agency, may bind the city in any way to any extent beyond the amount of money
at that time appropriated for the purpose of the agency. All contracts,
agreements and obligations, express or implied, beyond existing appropriations
are void; nor shall any city officer issue any bond, certificate or warrant for
the payment of money by the city in any way to any extent, beyond the
unexpended balance of any appropriation made for the purpose.
(KRS 91A.030)
§ 33.04 ANNUAL AUDIT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) to (D) below, each city shall,
after the close of each fiscal year, cause each fund of the city to be audited
by the Auditor of Public Accounts or a certified public accountant. The audit
shall be completed by February 1 immediately following the fiscal year being
audited. The city shall forward an electronic copy of the audit report to the
Department for Local Government for information purposes by no later than March
1 immediately following the fiscal year being audited.
   (B)   In lieu of the annual audit requirements in division (A) above, a city
with a population equal to or less than 1,000 based upon the most recent
federal decennial census may elect to have an audit performed every other
fiscal year in the following manner.
      (1)   After the close of each odd-numbered fiscal year, the city shall,
for that odd-numbered year, cause each fund of the city to be audited by the
Auditor of Public Accounts or a certified public accountant.
      (2)   The audits shall be completed by February 1 immediately following
the fiscal year to be audited. The city shall forward an electronic copy of the
audit report to the Department for Local Government for information purposes by
no later than March 1 immediately following the fiscal year being audited.
      (3)   After the close of each even-numbered fiscal year, the city shall
not be required to complete an annual audit but shall forward an electronic
copy of its financial statement prepared in accordance with KRS 424.220 to the
Department for Local Government by no later than October 1 immediately
following the close of the even-numbered fiscal year.
   (C)   In lieu of the annual audit requirements in division (A) above, a city
with a population of more than 1,000 but less than 2,000 based upon the most
recent federal decennial census may elect to have an audit performed every
other fiscal year to cover the two fiscal years occurring since the prior audit
in the following manner.
      (1)   After the close of each odd-numbered fiscal year, the city shall
cause each fund of the city to be audited by the Auditor of Public Accounts or
a certified public accountant.
      (2)   The audit shall include both fiscal years since the prior audit and
shall be completed by February 1 immediately following the fiscal years to be
audited. The city shall forward an electronic copy of the audit report to the
Department for Local Government for information purposes by no later than March
1 immediately following the fiscal years being audited.
      (3)   After the close of each even-numbered fiscal year, the city shall
not be required to complete an annual audit but shall forward an electronic
copy of its financial statement prepared in accordance
with KRS 424.220 to the Department for Local Government by no later than
October 1 immediately following the close of the even-numbered fiscal year.
   (D)   Any city, which for any fiscal year receives and expends, from all
sources and for all purposes, less than $75,000, and which has no long-term
debt, whether general obligation or revenue debt, shall not be required to
audit each fund of the city for that particular fiscal year. Each city exempted
in accordance with division (C) above shall annually prepare a financial
statement in accordance with KRS 424.220 and shall, not later than October 1
following the conclusion of the fiscal year, forward one electronic or paper
copy to the Department for Local Government for information purposes.
   (E)   If a city is required by another provision of law to audit its funds
more frequently or more stringently than is required by this section, the city
shall also comply with the provisions of that law.
   (F)   Each city required by this section to conduct an annual or biennial
audit shall enter into a written contract with the selected auditor. The
contract shall set forth all terms and conditions of the agreement which shall
include, but not be limited to, requirements that:
      (1)   The auditor be employed to examine the basic financial statements
which shall include the government-wide and fund financial statements;
      (2)   The auditor shall include in the annual or biennial city audit
report an examination of local government economic assistance funds granted to
the city under KRS 42.450 to 42.495. The auditor shall include a certification
with the annual audit or biennial report that the funds were expended for the
purpose intended;
      (3)   All audit information be prepared in accordance with generally
accepted governmental auditing standards which include tests of the accounting
records and auditing procedures considered necessary in the circumstances.
Where the audit is to cover the use of state or federal funds, appropriate
state or federal guidelines shall be utilized;
      (4)   The auditor shall prepare a typewritten or printed report
embodying:
         (a)   The basic financial statements and accompanying supplemental and
required supplemental information;
         (b)   The auditor’s opinion on the basic financial statements or
reasons why an opinion cannot be expressed; and
         (c)   Findings required to be reported as a result of the audit.
      (5)   The completed audit and all accompanying documentation shall be
presented to the City Council at a regular or special meeting; and
      (6)   Any contract with a certified public accountant for an audit shall
require the accountant to forward a copy of the audit report and management
letters to the Auditor of Public Accounts upon request of the city or the
Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Auditor of Public Accounts shall have the
right to review the certified public accountant’s workpapers upon request.
   (G)   A copy of an audit report which meets the requirements of this section
shall be considered satisfactory and final in meeting any official request to
the city for financial data, except for statutory or judicial requirements, or
requirements of the Legislative Research Commission necessary to carry out the
purposes of KRS 6.955 to 6.975.
   (H)   Each city shall, within 30 days after the presentation of an audit to
the City Council, publish an advertisement, in accordance with KRS Chapter 424,
containing:
      (1)   The auditor’s opinion letter;
      (2)   The “Budgetary Comparison Schedules - Major Funds”, which shall
include the general fund and all major funds;
      (3)   A statement that a copy of the complete audit report, including
financial statements and supplemental information, is on file at City Hall and
is available for public inspection during normal business hours;
      (4)   A statement that any citizen may obtain from City Hall a copy of
the complete audit report, including financial statements and supplemental
information, for his or her personal use;
      (5)   A statement which notifies citizens requesting a personal copy of
the city audit report that they will be charged for duplication costs at a rate
that shall not exceed $0.25 per page; and
      (6)   A statement that copies of the financial statement prepared in
accordance with KRS 424.220, when a financial statement is required by KRS
424.220, are available to the public at no cost at the business address of the
officer responsible for preparation of the statement.
   (I)   (1)   Any resident of the city or owner of real property within the
city may bring an action in the Circuit Court to enforce the provisions of this
section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $500.
      (2)   In addition, any officer who fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall, for each failure, be subject to a forfeiture
of not less than $50 nor more than $500, in the discretion of the court, which
may be recovered only once in a civil action brought by any resident of the
city or owner of real property within the city.
      (3)   The costs of all proceedings, including a reasonable fee for the
attorney of the resident bringing the action, shall be assessed against the
unsuccessful party.
   (J)   (1)   In the event of extenuating circumstances that prevent a city
from completing and submitting a required audit or financial statement in
compliance with the applicable deadlines in divisions (A) to (D) above, the
city may submit a written request for an extension of time to the Department
for Local Government on a form prescribed by the Department for Local
Government. The Department for Local Government shall approve the request if it
is submitted on or before the applicable deadline and, in the judgment of the
Department for Local Government, the request is warranted by extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the city.
      (2)   Extensions granted under this division (J) shall not exceed nine
months from the original due date of the audit or financial statement. If the
Department for Local Government approves an extension for a city and the city
fails to complete and submit the required audit or financial statement in
compliance with that extended deadline, then the provisions of division (K)
below shall apply.
   (K)   If a city fails to complete an audit or financial statement and submit
it to the Department for Local Government as required in divisions (A) to (D)
and (J) above, the Department for Local Government shall notify the Finance and
Administration Cabinet that the city has failed to comply with the audit
requirements of this section, and that any funds in the possession of any
agency, entity or branch of state government shall be withheld from the city
until further notice. The Department for Local Government shall immediately
notify the Finance and Administration Cabinet when the city complies with the
requirements of divisions (A) through (J) above for all prior fiscal years it
has failed to comply with the audit requirements of this section, and the
Finance and Administration Cabinet shall direct the reinstatement of payments
to the city, including any funds that were withheld due to the noncompliance.
   (L)   Within a reasonable time after the completion of a special audit or
examination conducted pursuant to KRS 43.050, the Auditor shall bill the city
for the actual expense of the audit or examination conducted. The actual
expense shall include the hours of work performed on the audit or examination
as well as reasonable associated costs, including, but not limited to, travel
costs. The bill submitted to the city shall include a statement of the hourly
rate, total hours and total costs for the entire audit or examination.
(KRS 91A.040)
Statutory reference:
   Department for Local Government to provide assistance, see KRS 91A.050
§ 33.05 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES; DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall designate as the city’s official depositories one or
more banks, federally insured savings and loan companies or trust companies
within the commonwealth. The amount of funds on deposit in an official
depository shall be fully insured by deposit insurance or collateralized in
accordance with 12 U.S.C. § 1823, to the extent uninsured, by any obligations,
including surety bonds permitted by KRS 41.240(4).
   (B)   All receipts from any source of city money or money for which the city
is responsible, which has not been otherwise invested or deposited in a manner
authorized by law, shall be deposited in official depositories. All city funds
shall be disbursed by written authorization approved by the Mayor which states
the name of the person to whom funds are payable, the purpose of the payment
and the fund out of which the funds are payable. Each authorization shall be
numbered and recorded.
(KRS 91A.060)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 33.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSESSED VALUE BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according
to the ratio the assessed value of individual parcels of property bears to the
total assessed value of all the properties.
   BENEFITS RECEIVED BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement
according to equitable determination by Council of the special benefit received
by property from the improvement, including assessed value basis, front foot
basis and square foot basis, or any combination thereof, and may include
consideration of assessed value of land only, graduation for different classes
of property based on nature and extent of special benefits received and other
factors affecting benefits received.
   COST. All costs related to an improvement, including planning, design,
property or easement acquisition and construction costs, fiscal and legal fees,
financing costs and publication expenses.
   FAIR BASIS. Assessed value basis, front foot basis, square foot basis or
benefits received basis.
   FRONT FOOT BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to
the ratio the front footage on the improvement of individual parcels of
property bears to the front footage of all the properties.
   IMPROVEMENT. Construction of any facility for public use or services or any
addition thereto, which is of special benefit to specific properties in the
area served by the facility.
   PROPERTY. Any real property benefitted by an improvement.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT or ASSESSMENT. A special charge fixed on property to
finance an improvement in whole or in part.
   SQUARE FOOT BASIS. The apportionment of cost of an improvement according to
the ratio the square footage of individual parcels of property bears to the
square footage of all the property.
(KRS 91A.210)
§ 33.21 FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city may not finance any improvement in whole or in part through
special assessments except as provided in this subchapter and in any applicable
statutes.
(KRS 91A.200)
   (B)   Cost of an improvement shall be apportioned equitably on a fair basis.
   (C)   The city may provide for lump sum or installment payment of
assessments or for bond or other long-term financing, and for any improvement
may afford property owners the option as to method of payment or financing.
(KRS 91A.220)
Statutory reference:
   Improvements; alternate methods, see KRS Chapter 107
§ 33.22 APPORTIONMENT OF COST.
   The cost of any improvement shall be apportioned on a benefits received
basis with respect to any property owned by the state, a local unit of
government or any educational, religious or charitable organization. Council
may assess the property in the same manner as for privately owned property or
it may pay the costs so apportioned out of general revenues.
(KRS 91A.230)
§ 33.23 COMPREHENSIVE REPORT REQUIRED.
   Before undertaking any improvements pursuant to this subchapter, the city
shall prepare a comprehensive report setting out:
   (A)   The nature of the improvement;
   (B)   The scope and the extent of the improvement, including the boundaries
or other description of the area to be assessed;
   (C)   The preliminary estimated cost of the improvement;
   (D)   The fair basis of assessment proposed;
   (E)   If financing of assessments is provided, the proposed method,
including the proposed years to maturity of any bonds to be issued in
connection with the improvement; and
   (F)   Such other information as may further explain material aspects of the
improvement, assessments or financing.
(KRS 91A.240)
§ 33.24 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   After preparation of the report required by §
33.23, the city shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed
improvement at which all interested persons shall be heard. Notice of the
hearing shall be published pursuant to KRS Chapter 424, and mailed to each
affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall
include:
   (A)   The nature of the improvement;
   (B)   Description of area of the improvement;
   (C)   Statement that the city proposes to finance the improvement in whole
or in part by special assessment of property and the method to be used;
   (D)   Time and place the report may be examined; and
   (E)   Time and place of the hearing.
(KRS 91A.250)
§ 33.25 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE; NOTICE TO AFFECTED OWNERS.
   Within 90 days of conclusion of the hearing, the city shall determine
whether to proceed with the improvement by special assessments, and if it
determines to proceed shall adopt an ordinance so stating and containing all
necessary terms, including the items referred to in §
33.23 and a description of all properties. Promptly upon passage, the city
shall publish the ordinance pursuant to KRS Chapter 424 and shall mail by
certified mail to each affected property owner a notice of determination to
proceed with the project, the fair basis of assessment to be utilized, the
estimated cost to the property owner and the ratio the cost to each property
owner bears to the total cost of the entire project.
(KRS 91A.260)
§ 33.26 AFFECTED OWNER MAY CONTEST.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the mailing of the notice provided for in §
33.25, any affected property owner may file an action in the circuit court of
the county, contesting the undertaking of the project by special assessment,
the inclusion of his or her property in the improvement or the amount of his or
her assessment. If the action contests the undertaking of the improvement by
the special assessment method of the inclusion of the property of that property
owner, no further action on the improvement insofar as it relates to any
property owner who is a plaintiff shall be taken until the final judgment has
been entered.
   (B)   The city may proceed with the improvement with respect to any
properties whose owners have not filed or joined in an action as provided in
this section or who have contested only the amounts of their assessments, and
the provisions of the resolution shall be final and binding with respect to the
property owners except as to contested amounts of assessments. After the lapse
of time as herein provided, all actions by owners of properties are forever
barred.
(KRS 91A.270)
§ 33.27 WHEN CITY MAY PROCEED; ASSESSMENT CONSTITUTES LIEN.
   (A)   After the passage of time for the action provided for in §
33.26, or after favorable final judgment in the action, whichever comes later,
the city may proceed with the improvement or part thereof stayed by the action,
including notice requiring payment of special assessment or installment thereon
and bonds or other method proposed to finance the improvement. The first
installment may be apportioned so that other payments will coincide with
payment of ad valorem taxes.
   (B)   The amount of any outstanding assessment or installments thereof on
any property, and accrued interest and other charges, constitutes a lien on the
property to secure payment to the bondholders or any other source of financing
of the improvement. The lien takes precedence over all other liens, whether
created prior to or subsequent to the publication of the ordinance, except a
lien for state and county taxes, general municipal taxes and prior improvement
taxes, and is not defeated or postponed by any private or judicial sale, by any
mortgage or by any error or mistake in the description of the property or in
the names of the owners. No error in the proceedings of the Council shall
exempt any benefitted property from the lien for the improvement assessment,
from payment thereof or from the penalties or interest thereon, as herein
provided.
(KRS 91A.280)
§ 33.28 EFFECT OF ADDITIONAL PROPERTY OR CHANGE IN FINANCING.
   The city may undertake any further proceedings to carry out the improvement
or any extension or refinancing thereof, except that §§
33.23 through
33.27 apply if additional property is included in the improvement or if change
is made in the method or period of financing; but additional property may be
included in the improvement with the consent of the owner thereof without
compliance with other sections if it does not increase the cost apportioned to
any other property, or any other change may be made without this compliance, if
all property owners of the improvement consent.
(KRS 91A.290)
CHAPTER 34: PUBLIC RECORDS
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Definitions
Procedures for Requesting Public Records
   
34.15   Initial request with immediate inspection
   
34.16   Referral to proper custodian
   
34.17   Public records not immediately available
   
34.18   Refusal of unreasonable requests
   
34.19   Time limitation; denial of inspection
   
34.20   Concealing or destroying records prohibited
   
34.21   Access to records relating to particular individual
   
34.22   Format of copies
   
34.23   Fees for copies
   
34.24   Misstatement of purpose prohibited
   
34.25   Online access to public records in electronic form
   
34.26   Public records protected from disclosure
   
34.27   Notification of the Attorney General
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOOKING PHOTOGRAPH AND PHOTOGRAPHIC RECORD OF INMATE. A photograph or image
of an individual generated by law enforcement for identification purposes when
the individual is booked into a detention facility, as defined in KRS 520.010,
or photograph and image of an inmate taken, pursuant to KRS 196.099.
(KRS 61.870(9))
   CITY. The city government of this city.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. The direct or indirect use of any part of a public
record or records, in any form, for sale, resale, solicitation, rent or lease
of a service, or any use by which the user expects a profit either through
commission, salary or fee. COMMERCIAL PURPOSE shall not include:
      (1)   Publication or related use of a public record by a newspaper or
periodical;
      (2)   Use of a public record by a radio or television station in its news
or other informational programs; or
      (3)   Use of a public record in the preparation for prosecution or
defense of litigation, or claims settlement by the parties to the action, or
the attorneys representing the parties.
(KRS 61.870(4))
   CUSTODIAN.
      (1)   The official custodian or any authorized person having personal
custody and control of public records.
(KRS 61.870(6))
      (2)   The CUSTODIAN having personal custody of most of the public records
of this city is the City Clerk.
   MECHANICAL PROCESSING. Any operation or other procedure which is transacted
on a machine, and which may include, but is not limited to, a copier, computer,
recorder or tape processor or other automated device.
(KRS 61.870(8))
   MEDIA. The physical material in or on which records may be stored or
represented, and which may include, but is not limited to, paper, microform,
disks, diskettes, optical disks, magnetic tapes and cards.
(KRS 61.870(7))
   OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN.
      (1)   The chief administrative officer or any other officer or employee
of a public agency who is responsible for the maintenance, care and keeping of
public records, regardless of whether the records are in his or her actual
personal custody and control.
(KRS 61.870(5))
      (2)   The OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN of this city shall be the Mayor.
   PERSON. A human being who makes a request for inspection of public records.
   PRESCRIBED FEE or FEE. The fair payment required by the city for making
copies of public records and for mailing public records, which shall not exceed
the actual cost thereof and shall not include the cost of required staff time.
   PUBLIC AGENCY.
      (1)   Every state or local government officer;
      (2)   Every state or local government department, division, bureau,
board, commission and authority;
      (3)   Every state or local legislative board, commission, committee and
officer;
      (4)   Every county and city governing body, council, school district
board, special district board and municipal corporation;
      (5)   Every state or local court or judicial agency;
      (6)   Every state or local government agency, including the policy-making
board of an institution of education, created by or pursuant to state or local
statute, executive order, ordinance, resolution or other legislative act;
      (7)   Any body created by state or local authority in any branch of
government;
      (8)   Any body which, within any fiscal year, derives at least 25% of its
funds expended by it in the commonwealth from state or local authority funds.
However, any funds derived from a state or local authority in compensation for
goods or services that are provided by a contract obtained through a
competitive procurement process shall not be included in the determination of
whether a body is a public agency under this division (8);
      (9)   Any entity where the majority of its governing body is appointed by
a public agency, as defined in this division; by a member or employee of the
public agency; or by any combination thereof;
      (10)   Any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, ad hoc committee,
advisory committee, council or agency, except for a committee of a hospital
medical staff, established, created and controlled by a public agency as
defined in this division; and
      (11)   Any interagency body of two or more public agencies where each
public agency is defined in this division.
(KRS 61.870(1))
   PUBLIC RECORD. All books, papers, maps, photographs, cards, tapes, discs,
diskettes, recordings, software or other documentation regardless of physical
form or characteristics, which are prepared, owned or used, in the possession
of or retained by the public agency. PUBLIC RECORD shall not include any
records owned or maintained by or for a body discussed in division (8) of the
definition of PUBLIC AGENCY above that are not related to functions,
activities, programs or operations funded by state or local authority.
(KRS 61.870(2))
   REQUEST. An oral or written application by any person to inspect public
records of the agency.
   RESIDENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
      (1)   An individual residing in the commonwealth;
      (2)   A domestic business entity with a location in the commonwealth;
      (3)   A foreign business entity registered with the Secretary of State;
      (4)   An individual that is employed and works at a location or locations
within the commonwealth;
      (5)   An individual or business entity that owns real property within the
commonwealth;
      (6)   Any individual or business entity that has been authorized to act
on behalf of an individual or business entity defined in divisions (1) to (5)
above; or
      (7)   A news-gathering organization as defined in KRS 189.6359(9)(b)1.a.
to e.
(KRS 61.870(10))
   SOFTWARE. The program code which makes a computer system function, but does
not include that portion of the program code which contains public records
exempted from inspection, as provided by KRS 61.878 or specific addresses of
files, passwords, access codes, user identifications or any other mechanism for
controlling the security or restricting access to public records in the public
agency’s computer system. SOFTWARE consists of the operating system,
application programs, procedures, routines and subroutines such as translators
and utility programs, but does not include that material which is prohibited
from disclosure or copying by a license agreement between a public agency and
an outside entity which supplied the material to the agency.
(KRS 61.870(3))
PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 34.15 INITIAL REQUEST WITH IMMEDIATE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to inspect or copy the public records of this city
shall make a request for inspection at the office of the City Clerk during
regular office hours, except during legal holidays. The official custodian, or
the custodian acting under the authority of the official custodian, may require
a request to inspect public records to be in writing, signed by the applicant
and with the applicant’s name printed legibly on the application. A written
request to inspect public records may be presented by hand delivery, mail or
via facsimile, if one is available.
   (B)   If the custodian determines that a person’s request is in compliance
with this chapter and the open records law, and the requested public records
are immediately available, the custodian shall deliver the records for
inspection. A person may inspect public records at the designated office of the
city during the regular office hours, or in appropriate cases, by receiving
copies of the records through the mail.
   (C)   (1)   If the public records are to be inspected at the offices of the
city, suitable facilities shall be made available in the office of the City
Clerk or in another office of the city as determined by the official custodian
or custodian for the inspection.
      (2)   No person shall remove original copies of public records from the
offices of the city without the written permission of the official custodian of
the record. When public records are inspected at the city offices, the person
inspecting the records shall have the right to make abstracts and memoranda of
the public records and to obtain copies of all written public records. When
copies are requested, the custodian may require advance payment of the
prescribed fee.
   (D)   Upon proper request, the city shall mail copies of the public records
to a person whose residence or principal place of business is located outside
of the county after the person precisely describes the public records which are
readily available and after the person pays in advance the prescribed fee.
Statutory reference:
   Right to inspection, limitations, see KRS 61.872(1) - (3)
§ 34.16 REFERRAL TO PROPER CUSTODIAN.
   If the City Clerk does not have custody or control of the public record or
records requested, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant and shall furnish
the name and location of the official custodian of the agency’s public records.
(KRS 61.872(4))
§ 34.17 PUBLIC RECORDS NOT IMMEDIATELY AVAILABLE.
   If the public record is in active use, in storage or not otherwise
available, the official custodian shall immediately notify the applicant and
shall designate a place, time and date for inspection or mailing of the public
records, not to exceed three days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays) from receipt of the application, unless a detailed explanation of the
cause is given for further delay and the place, time and earliest date on which
the public record will be available for inspection or duplication.
(KRS 61.872(5))
§ 34.18 REFUSAL OF UNREASONABLE REQUESTS.
   If the application places an unreasonable burden in producing public
records, or if the custodian has reason to believe that repeated requests are
intended to disrupt other essential functions of the public agency, the
official custodian may refuse to permit inspection of the public records or
mail copies thereof. However, refusal under this section must be sustained by
clear and convincing evidence.
(KRS 61.872(6))
§ 34.19 TIME LIMITATION; DENIAL OF INSPECTION.
   Each public agency, upon any request for records made under this chapter,
shall determine within five days (excepting Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays) after the receipt of any request whether to comply with the request
and shall notify, in writing, the person making the request within the five-day
period of its decision. Any agency response denying, in whole or in part,
inspection of any record shall include a statement of the specific exception
authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief explanation of how the
exception applies to the record withheld. The response shall be issued by the
official custodian or under his or her authority and shall constitute final
agency action.
(KRS 61.880(1))
§ 34.20 CONCEALING OR DESTROYING RECORDS PROHIBITED.
   No official of the city shall willfully conceal or destroy any record with
the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or these rules and
regulations.
§ 34.21 ACCESS TO RECORDS RELATING TO PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL.
   Any person shall have access to any public record relating to him or her or
in which he or she is mentioned by name, upon presentation of appropriate
identification, subject to the provisions of §
34.26.
(KRS 61.884)
§ 34.22 FORMAT OF COPIES.
   (A)   Upon inspection, the applicant shall have the right to make abstracts
of the public records and memoranda thereof, and to obtain copies of all public
records not exempted by the terms of §
34.26. When copies are requested, the custodian may require a written request
and advance payment of the prescribed fee, including postage where appropriate.
If the applicant desires copies of public records other than written records,
the custodian of the records shall duplicate the records or permit the
applicant to duplicate the records; however, the custodian shall ensure that
the duplication will not damage or alter the original records.
(KRS 61.874(1))
   (B)   (1)   Nonexempt public records used for noncommercial purposes shall
be available for copying in either standard electronic or standard hard copy
format, as designated by the party requesting the records, where the agency
currently maintains the records in electronic format. Nonexempt public records
used for noncommercial purposes shall be copied in standard hard copy format
where agencies currently maintain records in hard copy format. Agencies are not
required to convert hard copy format records to electronic formats.
      (2)   The minimum standard format in paper form shall be defined as not
less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in at least one color on white
paper, or for electronic format, in a flat file electronic American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) format.
      (3)   If the public agency maintains electronic public records in a
format other than ASCII, and the format conforms to the requestor’s
requirements, the public record may be provided in this alternate electronic
format for standard fees as specified by the public agency. Any request for a
public record in a form other than the forms described in this section shall be
considered a nonstandardized request.
(KRS 61.874(2))
§ 34.23 FEES FOR COPIES.
   (A)   Noncommercial purposes. The public agency may prescribe a reasonable
fee for making copies of nonexempt public records requested for use for
noncommercial purposes which shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction,
including the costs of the media and any mechanical processing cost incurred by
the public agency, but not including the cost of staff required. If a public
agency is asked to produce a record in a nonstandardized format, or to tailor
the format to meet the request of an individual or a group, the public agency
may, at its discretion, provide the requested format and recover staff costs as
well as any actual costs incurred.
(KRS 61.874(3))
   (B)   Commercial purposes.
      (1)   Unless an enactment of the General Assembly prohibits the
disclosure of public records to persons who intend to use them for commercial
purposes, if copies of nonexempt public records are requested for commercial
purposes, the public agency may establish a reasonable fee.
      (2)   The public agency from which copies of nonexempt public records are
requested for a commercial purpose may require a certified statement from the
requestor stating the commercial purpose for which they shall be used, and may
require the requestor to enter into a contract with the agency. The contract
shall permit use of the public records for the stated commercial purpose for a
specified fee.
      (3)   The fee provided for in division (B)(1) above may be based on one
or both of the following:
         (a)   Cost to the public agency of media, mechanical processing and
staff required to produce a copy of the public record or records; and
         (b)   Cost to the public agency of the creation, purchase or other
acquisition of the public records.
(KRS 61.874(4))
Cross-reference:
   Fees for online access to public records, see §
34.25
§ 34.24 MISSTATEMENT OF PURPOSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain a copy of any part of a public
record for a:
   (A)   Commercial purpose, without stating the commercial purpose, if a
certified statement from the requestor was required by the public agency
pursuant to §
34.23(B)(2);
   (B)   Commercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use of
the public record for a different commercial purpose; or
   (C)   Noncommercial purpose, if the person uses or knowingly allows the use
of the public record for a commercial purpose. A newspaper, periodical, radio
or television station shall not be held to have used or knowingly allowed the
use of the public record for a commercial purpose merely because of its
publication or broadcast, unless it has also given its express permission for
that commercial use.
(KRS 61.874(5)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.25 ONLINE ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS IN ELECTRONIC FORM.
   (A)   Online access to public records in electronic form may be provided and
made available at the discretion of the public agency. If a party wishes to
access public records by electronic means and the public agency agrees to
provide online access, a public agency may require that the party enter into a
contract, license or other agreement with the agency, and may charge fees for
these agreements.
   (B)   Fees shall not exceed:
      (1)   The cost of physical connection to the system and reasonable cost
of computer time access charges; and
      (2)   If the records are requested for a commercial purpose, a reasonable
fee based on the factors set forth in §
34.23(B).
(KRS 61.874(6))
§ 34.26 PUBLIC RECORDS PROTECTED FROM DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The following public records are excluded from the application of this
chapter and these rules and regulations and shall be subject to inspection only
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction, except that no court shall
authorize the inspection by any party of any materials pertaining to civil
litigation beyond that which is provided by the Rules of Civil Procedure
governing pretrial discovery:
      (1)   Public records containing information of a personal nature where
the public disclosure thereof would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion
of personal privacy;
      (2)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency and compiled and
maintained for scientific research. This exemption shall not, however, apply to
records the disclosure or publication of which is directed by other statute;
      (3)   (a)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency, or required by
an agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which if openly disclosed would permit an unfair commercial
advantage to competitors of the entity that disclosed the records;
         (b)   Records confidentially disclosed to an agency or required by an
agency to be disclosed to it, generally recognized as confidential or
proprietary, which are compiled and maintained:
            1.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of a loan or a grant;
            2.   In conjunction with an application for or the administration
of assessments, incentives, inducements and tax credits as described in KRS
Chapter 154;
            3.   In conjunction with the regulation of commercial enterprise,
including mineral exploration records, unpatented, secret commercially valuable
plans, appliances, formulae or processes, which are used for the making,
preparing, compounding, treating or processing of articles or materials which
are trade commodities obtained from a person; or
            4.   For the grant or review of a license to do business.
         (c)   The exemptions provided for in divisions (A)(3)(a) and (A)(3)(b)
above shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which is
directed by statute.
      (4)   Public records pertaining to a prospective location of a business
or industry where no previous public disclosure has been made of the business’s
or industry’s interest in locating in, relocating within or expanding within
the commonwealth. This exemption shall not include those records pertaining to
applications to agencies for permits or licenses necessary to do business or to
expand business operations within the state, except as provided in division (A)
(3) above;
      (5)   Public records which are developed by an agency in conjunction with
the regulation or supervision of financial institutions, including, but not
limited to, banks, savings and loan associations and credit unions, which
disclose the agency’s internal examining or audit criteria and related
analytical methods;
      (6)   The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or
feasibility estimates and evaluations made by or for a public agency relative
to acquisition of property, until such time as all of the property has been
acquired. The law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision;
      (7)   Test questions, scoring keys and other examination data used to
administer a licensing examination, examination for employment or academic
examination before the exam is given or if it is to be given again;
      (8)   Records of law enforcement agencies or agencies involved in
administrative adjudication that were compiled in the process of detecting and
investigating statutory or regulatory violations if the disclosure of the
information would harm the agency by revealing the identity of informants not
otherwise known or by premature release of information to be used in a
prospective law enforcement action or administrative adjudication. Unless
exempted by other provisions of this chapter, public records exempted under
this provision shall be open after enforcement action is completed or a
decision is made to take no action; however, records or information compiled
and maintained by county attorneys or commonwealth’s attorneys pertaining to
criminal investigations or criminal litigation shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter and shall remain exempted after enforcement action,
including litigation, is completed or a decision is made to take no action. The
exemptions provided by this division (A)(8) shall not be used by the custodian
of the records to delay or impede the exercise of rights granted by this
chapter;
      (9)   Preliminary drafts, notes or correspondence with private
individuals, other than correspondence which is intended to give notice of
final action of a public agency;
      (10)   Preliminary recommendations and preliminary memoranda in which
opinions are expressed or policies formulated or recommended;
      (11)   All public records or information, the disclosure of which is
prohibited by federal law or regulation;
      (12)   Public records or information, the disclosure of which is
prohibited or restricted or otherwise made confidential by enactment of the
General Assembly;
      (13)   (a)   Public records the disclosure of which would have a
reasonable likelihood of threatening the public safety by exposing a
vulnerability in preventing, protecting against, mitigating or responding to a
terrorist act and limited to:
            1.   Criticality lists resulting from consequence assessments;
            2.   Vulnerability assessments;
            3.   Antiterrorism protective measures and plans;
            4.   Counterterrorism measures and plans;
            5.   Security and response needs assessments;
            6.   Infrastructure records that expose a vulnerability referred to
in this division (A)(13) through the disclosure of the location, configuration
or security of critical systems, including public utility critical systems.
These critical systems shall include, but not be limited to, information
technology, communication, electrical, fire suppression, ventilation, water,
wastewater, sewage and gas systems;
            7.   The following records when their disclosure will expose a
vulnerability referred to in this division (A)(13): detailed drawings,
schematics, maps or specifications of structural elements, floor plans and
operating, utility or security systems of any building or facility owned,
occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency; and
            8.   Records when their disclosure will expose a vulnerability
referred to in this division (A)(13) and that describe the exact physical
location of hazardous chemical, radiological or biological materials.
         (b)   As used in this division (A)(13), TERRORIST ACT means a criminal
act intended to:
            1.   Intimidate or coerce a public agency or all or part of the
civilian population;
            2.   Disrupt a system identified in division (A)(13)(a)6. above; or
            3.   Cause massive destruction to a building or facility owned,
occupied, leased or maintained by a public agency.
         (c)   On the same day that a public agency denies a request to inspect
a public record for a reason identified in this division (A)(13), that public
agency shall forward a copy of the written denial of the request, referred to
in KRS 61.880(1), to the Executive Director of the State Office of Homeland
Security and the Attorney General;
         (d)   Nothing in this division (A)(13) shall affect the obligations of
a public agency with respect to disclosure and availability of public records
under state environmental, health and safety programs; and
         (e)   The exemption established in this division (A)(13) shall not
apply when a member of the State General Assembly seeks to inspect a public
record identified in this division (A)(13) under the Open Records Law.
      (14)   Public or private records, including books, papers, maps,
photographs, cards, tapes, discs, diskettes, recordings, software or other
documentation regardless of physical form or characteristics, having historic,
literary, artistic or commemorative value accepted by the archivist of a public
university, museum or government depository from a donor or depositor other
than a public agency. This exemption shall apply to the extent that
nondisclosure is requested in writing by the donor or depositor of such
records, but shall not apply to records the disclosure or publication of which
is mandated by another statute or by federal law;
      (15)   Records of a procurement process under KRS Chapter 45A or 56. This
exemption shall not apply after:
         (a)   A contract is awarded; or
         (b)   The procurement process is canceled without award of a contract
and there is a determination that the contract will not be resolicited.
      (16)   Records confidentially maintained by a law enforcement agency in
accordance with a wellness program, including an early intervention system, as
described in KRS 15.409; and
      (17)   Communications of a purely personal nature unrelated to any
governmental function.
(KRS 61.878(1))
   (B)   (1)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to prohibit
disclosure of statistical information not descriptive of any readily
identifiable person.
(KRS 61.878(2))
      (2)   In addition, if any public record contains material which is not
excepted under this section, the public agency shall separate the excepted and
make the nonexcepted material available for examination, subject to the
possible applicability of §
34.18.
(KRS 61.878(4))
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall in no way prohibit or limit the
exchange of public records or the sharing of information between public
agencies when the exchange is serving a legitimate governmental need or is
necessary in the performance of a legitimate government function.
(KRS 61.878(5))
   (D)   No exemption under this section shall be construed to deny, abridge or
impede the right of a municipal employee, an applicant for employment or an
eligible on a register to inspect and copy any record, including preliminary
and other supporting documentation, that relates to him or her. These records
shall include but not be limited to work plans, job performance, demotions,
evaluations, promotions, compensation, classification, reallocation, transfers,
layoffs, disciplinary actions, examination scores and preliminary and other
supporting documentation. A city employee, applicant or eligible shall not have
the right to inspect or copy any examination or any documents relating to
ongoing criminal or administrative investigations by any agency.
(KRS 61.878(3))
§ 34.27 NOTIFICATION OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
   The official custodian shall notify the Attorney General of any actions
filed against the city in circuit court regarding the enforcement of the Open
Records Law, KRS 61.870 to 61.884.
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
   
35.01   County assessment adopted
   
35.02   Due date; payment
   
35.03   Delinquency
   
35.04   Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles
   
35.05   Disposition of funds
   
35.06   Assessment date
   
35.07   Adoption of city assessment
   
35.08   Tax bills
   
35.09   Collection of taxes
   
35.10   Ad valorem tax rate
   
35.11   Recovering costs
   
35.12   Usage of proceeds
§ 35.01 COUNTY ASSESSMENT ADOPTED.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted in KRS 132.285, the city hereby
adopts the Jefferson County assessment for all real and personal property
situated within the city as the basis of all ad valorem tax levies ordered or
approved by the City Council.
   (B)   The assessment as finally determined for county tax purposes shall
serve as the basis for all city levies for the fiscal year commencing after the
assessment date.
§ 35.02 DUE DATE; PAYMENT.
   (A)   All taxes, except ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles, shall become due
on December 1.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who pays his or her city taxes before December 1 after
they become due shall be entitled to a 2% discount thereon, and the Clerk shall
allow the discount and give a receipt in full to the taxpayer.
§ 35.03 DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   All city taxes, except ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles, shall
become delinquent on January 1 following their due dates.
   (B)   Any taxes not paid by the date when they become delinquent shall be
subject to a penalty of 10% on the taxes due and unpaid. The delinquent
taxpayer shall also pay all costs and expenses incidental to any action taken
by the city for collection of the delinquent tax bill.
   (C)   Delinquent taxes shall be collectable under the provisions of the
state law relating to the collection of delinquent taxes by cities.
§ 35.04 AD VALOREM TAXES ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   All ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles shall be collected by the
Jefferson County Clerk in accordance with KRS 134.800.
   (B)   Ad valorem taxes on motor vehicles shall become due and delinquent as
set forth in KRS 134.810, and any taxes not paid by the date when they become
delinquent shall be subject to the penalty and interest specified in KRS
134.810.
§ 35.05 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All monies collected from the taxes levied in this chapter shall be paid
into the General Fund of the city to be used for the payment of proper
expenditures as determined by the City Council.
§ 35.06 ASSESSMENT DATE.
   January 1, 2024 is hereby set for the assessment date for all real property
subject to the city taxation within the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 2 series 2024-2025, passed 6-
17-2024)
§ 35.07 ADOPTION OF CITY ASSESSMENT.
   The Jefferson County assessment of property situated within the city is
hereby adopted as the city assessment for the city ad valorem taxes for the
period of July 1, 2024 through June 30, 2025.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 2 series 2024-2025, passed 6-
17-2024)
§ 35.08 TAX BILLS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer is directed to obtain a true copy of the county
assessment of property within the corporate limits of the city and make out tax
bills therefrom and mail the same no later than July 10, 2024.
   (B)   Each tax bill shall show the lot, assessment of real property and
improvements thereon separately, the name of the supposed owner, the ad valorem
tax rate and the total tax amount due.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 2 series 2024-2025, passed 6-
17-2024)
§ 35.09 COLLECTION OF TAXES.
   Upon delivery of such bills, the City Treasurer shall have the
responsibility of supervising the collection of same and all remittances shall
be made to the city in care of the City Treasurer. Collection of delinquent
taxes shall be made in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022)
§ 35.10 AD VALOREM TAX RATE.
   (A)   The ad valorem tax rate for the period July 1, 2024 through June 30,
2025 is hereby fixed at $0.112 cents per $100 of assessed valuation of property
as assessed for taxation.
   (B)   Said tax shall be due and payable as follows:
      (1)   July 10, 2024 to September 30, 2024 - face amount.
      (2)   October 1, 2024 to October 31, 2024 - face amount, plus penalty of
15%.
      (3)   November 1, 2024 or after - face amount plus attorney fees, penalty
of 15%, plus interest at the rate of 1.5% per month from November 1, 2024 until
paid.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 2 series 2024-2025, passed 6-
17-2024)
§ 35.11 RECOVERING COSTS.
   The city shall be entitled to recover all reasonable attorney’s fees and
other costs incurred by it in collecting delinquent taxes owed pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 2 series 2024-2025, passed 6-
17-2024)
§ 35.12 USAGE OF PROCEEDS.
   All proceeds of such tax are to be used for the general operating purposes
of the city.
(Ord. 2 series 2022-2023, passed 6-20-2022; Ord. 2 series 2024-2025, passed 6-
17-2024)
CHAPTER 36: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Zoning and Planning Commission; Board of Adjustment
   
36.01   Creation of Zoning and Planning Commission
   
36.02   Appointment to Commission
   
36.03   Commission to study and survey; reporting
   
36.04   Creation of Board of Adjustment
Code Enforcement Board
   
36.15   Definitions
   
36.16   Creation and membership
   
36.17   Powers
   
36.18   Appointment of members; term of office; removal from office; oath; and
compensation
   
36.19   Organization of Board; meetings; quorum; and alternate Board members
   
36.20   Conflict of interest
   
36.21   Jurisdiction
   
36.22   Board composition
   
36.23   Collection of fines, filing liens and levying of same
   
36.24   Copy of procedures
   
36.25   Procedures
ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION; BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 36.01 CREATION OF ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created by the city a zoning and planning commission
to consist of seven members, one of whom shall be the Chairperson of the Board
of Trustees, one of whom shall be an administrative official of the city
selected by the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees, one of whom shall be a
member of the Board of Trustees selected by the Board of Trustees, all of whom
shall serve as members ex officio, and four members appointed by the
Chairperson of the Board of Trustees, which members shall hold no other city
office, except that one of such appointed members may be a member of the City
Board of Zoning Adjustment and Appeals.
   (B)   The terms of the ex officio members shall correspond to their
respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative
official selected by the Chairperson of the Board of Trustees shall terminate
with the term of the Chairperson selecting him or her. The term of each
appointed member shall be six years, and until his or her successor takes
office, except that the original terms of the four appointed members shall be
one, two, three and four years respectively.
(Ord. 4, passed 3-17-1955)
§ 36.02 APPOINTMENT TO COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among the appointed
members and shall appoint such other officers as it may determine are
necessary.
   (B)   No member of the Commission shall receive any compensation for his or
her services as a member of such Commission.
(Ord. 4, passed 3-17-1955)
§ 36.03 COMMISSION TO STUDY AND SURVEY; REPORTING.
   The Commission shall immediately proceed to make a study and survey so that
regulations may be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan regarding the
use of land, the construction and remodeling of buildings, and the division of
the city into districts, all as provided in KRS 100.500 through 100.530, and
shall promptly make a preliminary report and hold public hearings on said
preliminary report in accordance with the aforementioned statutes. As soon as
such preliminary report has been made and public hearings are held, a final
report shall be made to the Board of Trustees recommending the regulations to
be made by the city as to the use of land, the construction of buildings
thereon and the division of the land into districts.
(Ord. 4, passed 3-17-1955)
§ 36.04 CREATION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   There is also hereby created by the city a Board of Zoning Adjustment and
Appeals to consist of five members, each to be appointed for a term of three
years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges
and after public hearings. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in
accordance with the provisions of KRS 100.500 to 100.600. The Board of
Adjustment may hear and decide appeals with reference to zoning matters of the
city, hear and decide special exceptions to ordinances regarding city zoning
and perform other functions authorized by law. The Board of Adjustment shall
arrange for a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, give public notice to
the parties in interest and to the public and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse, affirm or modify any order or decision of an
administrative official. The Board of Adjustment may appoint temporary officers
for the purpose of assisting it in carrying out its functions or enforcing its
decisions.
(Ord. 4, passed 3-17-1955)
CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD
§ 36.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD. An administrative body created and acting under the
authority of the Local Government Code Enforcement Act.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT CHAIRPERSON. The member of the Code Enforcement Board who
is elected to serve as Chairperson by the members of the Board and who serves
as the presiding officer and full voting member of the Board.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A citation officer, safety officer, city police
officer or other public law enforcement officer with the authority to issue a
citation.
   ORDINANCE. An official action of a local government body, which is a
regulation of a general and permanent nature and enforceable as a local law,
and shall include any provision of a code of ordinances adopted by the City
Council which embodies all or part of an ordinance.
(Ord. 4, series 1997-1998, passed 6-16-1997; Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed
8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-2004)
§ 36.16 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   There is hereby created pursuant to KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839 within the city a
Code Enforcement Board, which shall be composed of three members, all of whom
shall be residents of the city for a period of at least one year prior to the
creation of the Board and shall reside in the city throughout the term in
office.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.17 POWERS.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to issue remedial
orders and imposed civil fines as a method of enforcing city ordinances when a
violation of the ordinance has been classified as a civil offense.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Board shall not have the authority to enforce any
ordinance the violation of which constitutes an offense under any provision of
the Kentucky Revised Statutes, including specifically any provision of the
Kentucky Penal Code and any moving motor vehicle offense.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.18 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; OATH; AND
COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be appointed by the
executive authority of the city, subject to approval of the legislative body.
   (B)   (1)   The initial appointment to a three member Code Enforcement Board
shall be as follows:
         (a)   One member appointed to a one-year term; and
         (b)   Two members appointed to a two-year term.
      (2)   All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of three years. A
member may be reappointed, subject to the approval of the legislative body.
   (C)   The executive authority may appoint, subject to the approval of the
legislative body, two alternate members to serve on the Code Enforcement Board
in the absence of regular members. Alternate members shall meet all of the
qualifications and shall be subject to all of the requirements that apply to
regular members of the Code Enforcement Board.
   (D)   Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the executive authority,
subject to approval of the legislative body within 60 days of the vacancy. If
the vacancy is not filled within that time period, the remaining Code Board
members shall fill the vacancy.
   (E)   A Code Board member may be removed from office by the executive
authority for misconduct, inefficiency or willful neglect of duty. The
executive authority must submit a written statement to the member and the
legislative body setting forth the reasons for removal.
   (F)   The Chief of Police, or any member of the City Police Department,
shall serve as the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
not be compensated for duties rendered in his or her capacity as such, however,
he or she shall be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred.
   (G)   The Code Enforcement Chairperson shall be compensated at the rate of
$200 per monthly meeting for all service rendered and shall be reimbursed for
any actual expenses incurred. Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall be
compensated at the rate of $50 per monthly meeting for all services rendered
and shall be reimbursed for any actual expenses incurred.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004; Ord. 4, series 2017, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 36.19 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; MEETINGS; QUORUM; AND ALTERNATE BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Board shall annually elect a Chairperson from among its members.
The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and full voting member of the
Board.
   (B)   Regular meetings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held on the
first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the City Hall at 4327 Wingate Road,
Louisville, Kentucky 40207. Regular and special meetings shall comply with the
Kentucky Open Meetings Act.
   (C)   All meetings and hearings of the Code Enforcement Board shall be held
in accordance with the requirements of KRS 65.8815(5) and the Kentucky Open
Meetings Act.
   (D)   The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the Board shall be
necessary for any official action to be taken.
   (E)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Code Enforcement
Board and the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be
recorded in the minutes.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004; Ord. 4, series 2016-2017, passed 12-19-2016)
§ 36.20 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Code Enforcement Board who has any direct or indirect
financial or personal interest in any matter to be decided shall disclose the
nature of the interest and shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on
the matter in which he or she has an interest and shall be counted for purposes
of establishing a quorum.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.21 JURISDICTION.
   The Code Enforcement Board shall have jurisdiction to enforce and shall
enforce those city ordinances and code provisions which specially provide for
Code Board Enforcement.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.22 BOARD COMPOSITION.
   The city shall not discriminate on the basis of sex, age, race or religious
affiliation in selecting the composition of the Code Enforcement Board.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.23 COLLECTION OF FINES, FILING LIENS AND LEVYING OF SAME.
   This shall be determined by the City Council in cooperation with the three-
member Board.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.24 COPY OF PROCEDURES.
   A copy of the procedures shall be permanently attached and filed with the
ordinance.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 3, series 2004, passed 11-15-
2004)
§ 36.25 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The procedures listed below are to be used in setting up the operating
procedures of the Code Enforcement Board.
   (B)   These procedures are not part of the ordinance; therefore, the Board
is hereby authorized to add or delete from these procedures upon a majority
quorum vote.
      (1)   Members of the Code Enforcement Board shall volunteer their time
and talents, but the City Council is authorized to reimburse the Board members
for actual out of pocket expenses incurred in the carrying out of their
official responsibilities and duties.
      (2)   The Mayor shall hire a Code Enforcement Officer to issue violations
listing the penalty as set forth in the ordinances with civil penalties. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall be paid a per citation fee as set forth by the
City Council.
      (3)   An ordinance may provide by its express terms that violation shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the city in a civil
action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a
prescribed period of time after he or she has been cited for the violation of
the ordinance.
      (4)   A city ordinance may provide, when appropriate, that each day a
violation of the ordinance continues shall be a separate and distinct offense.
The ordinance with a civil penalty shall also designate as to when a lien will
be placed on the property in violation. Motor parking violations can be
dismissed. The penalty for land and structures may be reduced, but not
dismissed. This will include, but not be limited to, the following ordinances,
nuisance, fence, grass and/or debris, garages, storage sheds, house additions
or remodeling.
      (5)   When a motor vehicle parking violation is issued, the alleged
violator may either contest or pay the fine to the city. If the alleged
violator contests the citation, the Board decides the case. If the Board
decides no violation was committed, the citation is dismissed. If the Board
decides a violation was committed, the vehicle owner is ordered to pay the
fine. The Board has the authority to order the vehicle impounded and allows the
city to place a lien on the impounded vehicle for all fines, penalties and fees
related to the violation and impoundment of the vehicle.
      (6)   A complete copy of KRS 65.8801 to 65.8839 shall be made available
to all members of the Code Enforcement Board and the Code Violation Officer.
KRS 65.8825 through 65.8839 shall be the enforcement proceedings and/or
procedures of the Board.
(Ord. 5, series 1997-1998, passed 8-18-1997)
CHAPTER 37: PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Police Department
   
37.01   Establishment
   
37.02   Composition of Police Department
   
37.03   Terms and removal
   
37.04   Appointments
   
37.05   Car allowances
   
37.06   Authority of Chief of Police
   
37.07   Duties of Chief of Police
   
37.08   Carrying concealed weapons
   
37.09   Court costs
Safety Standards
   
37.20   Adoption of Standards of Safety
   
37.21   Safety Inspector created; duties and authority
   
37.22   Copy on file
 
   
37.99   Penalty
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 37.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a police department to be known as the City
Police Department.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.02 COMPOSITION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The City Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, an Assistant
Chief of Police and such other officers and police officers, not to exceed ten,
which the City Council shall appoint as herein provided.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.03 TERMS AND REMOVAL.
   The term of office for the Chief of Police, Assistant Chief of Police,
officers and police officers shall be coincident to the term of office of the
City Council members subject, however, to removal for cause by the City
Council.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.04 APPOINTMENTS.
   The Chief of Police and Assistant Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
officers and police officers shall be appointed by the City Council after being
recommended to the City Council by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.05 CAR ALLOWANCES.
   The Chief of Police, the Assistant Chief of Police and all members of the
Police Department shall be compensated for their services as set by resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.06 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
give orders to the Assistant Chief, officers and police officers who shall take
their orders from the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.07 DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, the Assistant Chief and the
entire Police Department to enforce all laws and regulations of the city, the
state and the United States, and such other duties as may from time to time be
assigned to them.
(Ord. 38, passed 9-19-1966; Ord. 1, series 1985, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 37.08 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   The City Council does authorize all police officers directly employed by the
city as members of the City Police Department to carry concealed deadly weapons
on or about his or her person, at all times, within the state.
(Ord. 1-1975, passed 1-20-1975)
§ 37.09 COURT COSTS.
   The police court judge may assess, in addition to any fine or imprisonment,
court costs against any defendant convicted in the police court of the city of
violating any statute or ordinance wherein the fine assessed against said
defendant does not exceed the sum of $50, the sum of $10 court costs or wherein
the fine imposed against the said defendant does exceed the sum of $50, the sum
of $20 court costs. The police court judge shall account for and pay over all
court costs collected to the City Treasurer and said costs shall become a part
of the general fund of the city.
(Ord. 2-1975, passed 9-22-1975)
SAFETY STANDARDS
§ 37.20 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS OF SAFETY.
   The Kentucky Standards of Safety, 1963 Edition, are hereby adopted and made
a part hereof the same as if fully copied herein, and they shall hereafter be
the Standards of Safety of the city.
(Ord. 42, passed 3-15-1968)
§ 37.21 SAFETY INSPECTOR CREATED; DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   The office of Safety Inspector of the city is hereby created, which office
shall be filled by the Chairman of Code Enforcement Board. It shall be the duty
of the Safety Inspector to enforce the provisions of said Standards of Safety.
He or she shall have authority to enter all buildings and premises, at
reasonable times, within the city for the purpose of inspection to determine
whether said Safety Standards are being complied with.
(Ord. 42, passed 3-15-1968)
§ 37.22 COPY ON FILE.
   A copy of said Standards of Safety shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk at all times.
(Ord. 42, passed 3-15-1968)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions,
requirements or specifications of said Standards of Safety shall be fined not
less than $10 nor more than $500, or confined in jail for not more than 60
days, or both. Each day such violation exists shall, in the discretion of the
courts, be considered as a separate offense.
(Ord. 42, passed 3-15-1968)
CHAPTER 38: POLICIES
Section
Code of Ethical Conduct
   
38.01   Title
   
38.02   Findings
   
38.03   Purpose and authority
   
38.04   Definitions
   
38.05   Conflicts of interest in general
   
38.06   Conflict of interest in contracts
   
38.07   Receipt of gifts
   
38.08   Use of city property, equipment and personnel
   
38.09   Representation of interests before city government
   
38.10   Misuse of confidential information
   
38.11   Post-employment restriction
   
38.12   Honoraria
   
38.13   Who must file
   
38.14   When to file statements; amended statements
   
38.15   Form of the statement of financial interests
   
38.16   Control and maintenance of the statement of financial interests
   
38.17   Contents of the financial interests statement
   
38.18   Noncompliance with filing requirement
   
38.19   Nepotism prohibited
   
38.20   Board of Ethics created
   
38.21   Alternate members
   
38.22   Facilities and staff
   
38.23   Power and duties of the Board of Ethics
   
38.24   Filing and investigation of complaints
   
38.25   Notice of hearings
   
38.26   Hearing procedure
   
38.27   Appeals
   
38.28   Limitation of actions
   
38.29   Advisory opinions
   
38.30   Reprisals against persons disclosing violations prohibited
Policy Prohibiting Racial Profiling
   
38.45   Policy
   
38.46   Definition
   
38.47   Training
   
38.48   Discipline
 
   
38.99   Penalty
CODE OF ETHICAL CONDUCT
§ 38.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Woodlawn Park
Code of Ethics.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.02 FINDINGS.
   The legislative body of the city finds and declares that:
   (A)   Public office and employment with the city are public trusts;
   (B)   The vitality and stability of the government of this city depends upon
the public’s confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed officers
and employees. Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private
interests and public duties of a city officer or employee, that confidence is
imperiled; and
   (C)   The government of this city has a duty to provide its citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are being
faithfully performed, and to make its officers and employees aware of the
standards which the citizenry rightfully expects them to comply with while
conducting their public duties.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.03 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide a method of assuring
that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the city shall be clearly established, uniform in
their application and enforceable, and to provide the officers and employees of
the city with advice and information concerning potential conflicts of interest
which might arise in the conduct of their public duties.
   (B)   It is the further purpose of this ordinance to meet the requirements
of KRS 65.003, as enacted by the 1994 Kentucky General Assembly.
   (C)   This ordinance is enacted under the power vested in the city by KRS
82.082 and pursuant to requirements of KRS 65.003.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual,
holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust, professional service
corporation or any legal entity through which business is conducted for profit.
   BOARD OF ETHICS. The City Board of Ethics which is created and vested by
this subchapter with the responsibility of enforcing the requirements of the
city’s Code of Ethics.
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who seeks nomination or election to a city office.
An individual is a CANDIDATE when the individual files a notification and
declaration for nomination for office with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State, or is nominated for office by a political party, or files a declaration
of intent to be a write-in candidate with the County Clerk or Secretary of
State.
   CITY. Refers to the city of Woodlawn Park, Kentucky.
   CITY AGENCY. Any board, commission, authority, nonstock corporation or other
entity created, either individually or jointly, by this city.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is employed by or provides service to the city. The term EMPLOYEE
shall not include any contractor or subcontractor or any of their employees.
   FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandparent or grandchild.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. A spouse, an unemancipated child residing in the
officer’s or employee’s household, or a person claimed by the officer or
employee, or the officer’s or employee’s spouse, as a dependent for tax
purposes.
   OFFICER. Any person, whether full-time or part-time, and whether paid or
unpaid, who is one of the following:
      (1)   The Mayor;
      (2)   A legislative body member;
      (3)   The City Clerk;
      (4)   The Treasurer;
      (5)   Any person who occupies a nonelected office created under KRS
83A.080; and
      (6)   A member of the governing body of any city agency who has been
appointed to the governing body of the agency by the city.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.05 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN GENERAL.
   Every officer and employee of the city and every city agency shall comply
with the following standards of conduct.
   (A)   No officer or employee, or any immediate family member of any officer
or employee, shall have an interest in a business or engage in any business,
transaction or activity, which is in substantial conflict with the proper
discharge of the officer’s or employee’s public duties.
   (B)   No officer or employee shall intentionally use or attempt to use his
or her official position with the city to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself or herself or others.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall intentionally take or refrain from taking
any discretionary action, or agree to take or refrain from taking any
discretionary action, or induct or attempt to induce any other officer or
employee to take or refrain from taking any discretionary action, on any matter
before the city in order to obtain a financial benefit for any of the
following:
      (1)   The officer or employee;
      (2)   A family member;
      (3)   An outside employer;
      (4)   Any business in which the officer or employee, or any family member
has a financial interest; and
      (5)   Any business with which the officer or employee or any family
member is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other business or
professional relationship.
   (D)   No officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of any provision
in this section if, by reason of the officer’s or employee’s participation,
vote, decision, action or inaction, no financial benefit accrues to the officer
or employee, a family member, an outside employer or a business, as defined in
divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) above, as a member of any business, occupation,
profession or other group, to any greater extent than any gain could reasonably
be expected to accrue to any other member of the business, occupation,
profession or other group.
   (E)   Every officer or employee who has a prohibited financial interest
which the officer or employee believes or has reason to believe may be affected
by his or her participation, vote, decision or other action taken within the
scope of his or her public duties shall disclose the precise nature and value
of the interest, in writing, to the governing body of the city or city agency
served by the officer or employee, and the disclosure shall be entered on the
official record of the proceedings of the governing body. The officer or
employee shall refrain from taking any action with respect to the matter that
is the subject of the disclosure.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.06 CONFLICT OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall directly
or through others undertake, execute, hold or enjoy, in whole or in part, any
contract made, entered into, awarded or granted by the city or a city agency,
except as follows.
      (1)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply to contracts
entered into before an elected officer filed as a candidate for city office,
before an appointed officer was appointed to a city or city agency office or
before an employee was hired by the city or a city agency. However, if any
contract entered into by a city or city agency officer or employee before he or
she became a candidate, was appointed to office or was hired as an employee, is
renewable after he or she becomes a candidate, assumes the appointed office or
is hired as an employee, then the prohibition in this division (A) shall apply
to the renewal of the contract.
      (2)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply if the
contract is awarded after public notice and competitive bidding, unless the
officer or employee is authorized to participate in establishing the contract
specifications, awarding the contract or managing contract performance after
the contract is awarded. If the officer or employee has any of the authorities
set forth in the preceding sentence, then the officer or employee shall have no
interest in the contract, unless the requirements set forth in division (A)(3)
below are satisfied.
      (3)   The prohibition in this division (A) shall not apply in any case
where the following requirements are satisfied:
         (a)   The specific nature of the contract transaction and the nature
of the officer’s or employee’s interest in the contract are publicly disclosed
at a meeting of the governing body of the city or city agency;
         (b)   The disclosure is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed;
         (c)   A finding is made by the governing body of the city or city
agency that the contract with the officer or employee is in the best interests
of the public and the city or city agency because of price, limited supply or
other specific reasons; and
         (d)   The finding is made a part of the official record of the
governing body of the city or city agency before the contract is executed.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, the court may void any contract entered into in violation
of this section. Additionally, a violation of this section shall be ground for
removal from office or employment with the city in accordance with any
applicable provisions of state law and ordinances, rules or regulations of the
city.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.07 RECEIPT OF GIFTS.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall, directly or
indirectly, through any other person or business, solicit or accept any gift
having a fair market value of more than $100, whether in the form of money,
service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise or any
other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that
the gift was intended to influence, or could reasonably be expected to
influence the officer or employee in the performance of his or her public
duties.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.08 USE OF CITY PROPERTY, EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.
   No officer or employee of the city shall use or permit the use of any city
time, funds, personnel, equipment or other personal or real property for the
private use of any person, unless:
   (A)   The use is specifically authorized by a stated city policy; or
   (B)   The use is available to the general public, and then only to the
extent and upon the terms that such use is available to the general public.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.09 REPRESENTATION OF INTERESTS BEFORE CITY GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall represent
any person or business, other than the city, in connection with any cause,
proceeding, application or other matter pending before the city or any city
agency.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an employee from representing
another employee or employees where the representation is within the context of
official labor union or similar representational responsibilities.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any officer or employee from
representing himself or herself in matters concerning his or her own interests.
   (D)   No elected officer shall be prohibited by this section from making any
inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent, if no compensation, reward
or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer,
whether directly or indirectly, in return for the inquiry.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.10 MISUSE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall intentionally
use or disclose information acquired in the course of his or her official
duties, if the primary purpose of the use or disclosure is to further his or
her personal financial interest or that of another person or business.
Information shall be deemed confidential, if it is not subject to disclosure
pursuant to the Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.872 to 61.884, at the time of
its use or disclosure.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.11 POST-EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTION.
   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall appear or
practice before the city or any city agency with respect to any matter on which
the officer or employee personally worked while in the service of the city or
city agency for a period of one year after the termination of the officer’s or
employee’s service with the city or city agency.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.12 HONORARIA.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall accept any
compensation, honorarium or gift with a fair market value greater than $100 in
consideration of an appearance, speech or article unless the appearance, speech
or article is both related to the officer’s or employee’s activities outside of
municipal service and is unrelated to the officer’s or employee’s service with
the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer or employee of the
city or any city agency from receiving and retaining from the city or on behalf
of the city actual and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
officer or employee in connection with an appearance, speech or article,
provided that the officer or employee can show by clear and convincing evidence
that the expenses were incurred or received on behalf of the city or city
agency and primarily for the benefit of the city or city agency and not
primarily for the benefit of the officer or employee or any other person.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.13 WHO MUST FILE.
   The following classes of officers and employees of the city and city
agencies shall file an annual statement of financial interest with the Board of
Ethics:
   (A)   Elected city officials;
   (B)   Candidates for elected city office;
   (C)   Members of the City Planning and Zoning Commission and Board of
Adjustment;
   (D)   Members of the Board of Ethics created by this subchapter; and
   (E)   Nonelected officers and employees of the city or any city agency who
are authorized to make purchases of materials or services, or award contracts,
leases or agreements involving the expenditure of more than $2,500.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.14 WHEN TO FILE STATEMENTS; AMENDED STATEMENTS.
   (A)   The initial statement of financial interest required by this section
shall be filed with the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official
designated as the custodian of its records by the Board of Ethics, no later
than 4:00 p.m. January 15, 1995. All subsequent statements of financial
interest shall be filed no later than 4:00 p.m. on January 15th each year,
provided that:
      (1)   An officer or employee newly-appointed to fill an officer or
position of employment with the city or a city agency shall file his or her
initial statement no later than 30 days after the date of the appointment; and
      (2)   A candidate for city office shall file his or her initial statement
no later than 30 days after the date on which the person becomes a candidate
for elected city office.
   (B)   The Board of Ethics may grant a reasonable extension of time for
filing a statement of financial interests for good cause shown.
   (C)   In the event there is a material change in any information contained
in a financial statement that has been filed with the Board, the officer or
employee shall, no later than 30 days after becoming aware of the material
change, file an amended statement with the Board.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.15 FORM OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official designated by
the Board of Ethics. The Board, or the designated administrative official,
shall deliver a copy of the form to each officer and employee required to file
the statement, by first class mail or hand delivery, no later than February 15
of each year.
   (B)   The failure of the Board, or the designated administrative official,
to deliver a copy of the form to any officer or employee shall not relieve the
officer or employee of the obligation to file the statement.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.16 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall be the “official custodian” of the
statements of financial interests and shall have control over the maintenance
of the statements of financial interests. The statements of financial interests
shall be maintained by the Board of Ethics, or the administrative official
designated by the Board of Ethics as the “custodian”, as public documents,
available for public inspection immediately upon filing.
   (B)   A statement of financial interests shall be retained by the Board, or
the designated administrative official, for a period of five years after
filing, provided that the following applies.
      (1)   Upon the expiration of three years after a person ceases to be an
officer or employee of the city or a city agency, the Board shall cause to be
destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of those statements
filed by the person.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of three years after any election at which a
candidate for elected city office was not elected or nominated, the Board shall
cause to be destroyed any statements of financial interests or copies of those
statements filed by the person.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.17 CONTENTS OF THE FINANCIAL INTERESTS STATEMENT.
   (A)   The statement of financial interests shall include the following
information for the preceding calendar year:
      (1)   The name, current business address, business telephone number and
home address of the filer;
      (2)   The title of the filer’s office, office sought or position of
employment;
      (3)   The occupation of the filer and the filer’s spouse;
      (4)   Any income received from any company or person doing business with
the city;
      (5)   The name and address of any business located within the state in
which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had, at any time
during the preceding calendar year, an interest of $10,000 at fair market value
or 5% ownership interest or more;
      (6)   The name and address of any business located outside of the states
if the business has engaged in any business transactions with the city during
the past three years, or which is anticipated to engage in any business
transactions with the city, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s
immediate family had, at any time during the preceding calendar year, an
interest of $10,000 at fair market value or 5% ownership interest or more;
      (7)   A designation as commercial, residential or rural, and the location
of all real property within the county, other than the filer’s primary
residence, in which the filer or any member of the filer’s immediate family had
during the preceding calendar year an interest of $10,000 or more;
      (8)   Each source by name and address of gifts or honoraria having an
aggregate fair market value of $100 or more from any single source, excluding
gifts received from family members, received by the filer or any member of the
filer’s immediate family during the preceding calendar year; and
      (9)   The name and address of any creditor owed more than $10,000 except
debts arising from the purchase of a primary residence or the purchase of
consumer goods which are bought or used primarily for person, family or
household purposes.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any officer or
employee to disclose any specific dollar amounts nor the names of individual
clients or customers of businesses listed as sources of income.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994; Ord. 4 series 1994-1995, passed 12-19-1994)
§ 38.18 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH FILING REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics, or the designated administrative official, shall
notify by certified mail each person required to file a statement of financial
interests who fails to file the statement by the due date, files an incomplete
statement or files a statement in a form other than that prescribed by the
Board. The notice shall specify the type of failure or delinquency, shall
establish a date by which the failure or delinquency shall be remedied and
shall advise the person of the penalties for a violation.
   (B)   Any person who fails or refuses to file the statement or who fails or
refuses to remedy a deficiency in the filing identified in the notice under
division (A) above within the time period established in the notice shall be
guilty of a civil offense and shall be subject to a civil fine imposed by the
Board in an amount not to exceed $25 per day, up to a maximum total civil fine
of $500. Any civil fine imposed by the Board under this section may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
fails or refuses to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.
   (C)   Any person who intentionally files a statement of financial interests
which he or she knows to contain false information or intentionally omits
required information shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.19 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall advocate,
recommend or cause the: (1) employment; (2) appointment; (3) promotion; (4)
transfer; or (5) advancement of a family member to an office or position of
employment with the city or a city agency.
   (B)   No officer or employee of the city or a city agency shall supervise or
manage the work of a family member.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall participate in any action relating to the
employment or discipline of a family member, except that this prohibition shall
not prevent an elected or appointed official from voting on or participating in
the development of a budget which includes compensation for a family member,
provided that the family member is included only as a member of a class of
persons or a group, and the family member benefits to no greater extent than
any other similarly situated member of the class or group.
   (D)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any relationship
or situation that would violate the prohibition, but which existed prior to
January 1, 1995.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994) Penalty, see §
38.99
§ 38.20 BOARD OF ETHICS CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall have the
authorities, duties and responsibilities as set forth in this subchapter to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)    The Board of Ethics shall consist of three members who shall be
appointed by the executive authority of the city, subject to the approval of
the legislative body (if different from the executive authority). The initial
members of the Board of Ethics shall be appointed within 60 days of the
effective date of this subchapter. No member of the Board of Ethics shall hold
any elected or appointed office, whether paid or unpaid, or any position of
employment with the city or any city agency. The members shall serve for a term
of three years; except that with respect to the members initially appointed,
one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members shall be
appointed for a term of two years and two members shall be appointed for a term
of three years. Each member of the Board of Ethics shall have been a resident
of the city for at least one year prior to the date of the appointment and
shall reside in the city throughout the term in office. The members of the
Board of Ethics shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent
reputation for integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs. The
members may be re-appointed for any number of consecutive terms.
   (C)   A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed by the executive
authority, subject to the approval of the legislative body (if different from
the executive authority) for misconduct, inability or willful neglect of
duties. Before any member of the Board of Ethics is removed from office under
this section, the member shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before
the executive authority and the legislative body (if different from the
executive authority).
   (D)   Vacancies on the Board of Ethics shall be filled within 60 days by the
executive authority, subject to the approval of the legislative body (if
different from the executive authority). If a vacancy is not filled by the
executive authority within 60 days, the remaining members of the Board of
Ethics shall fill the vacancy. All vacancies shall be filled for the remainder
of the unexpired term.
   (E)   Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without compensation,
unless otherwise approved by the legislative body, but shall be reimbursed for
all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties.
   (F)   The Board of Ethics shall, upon the initial appointment of its
members, and annually thereafter, elect a Chairperson from among the
membership. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and a full voting
member of the Board.
   (G)   Meetings of the Board of Ethics shall be held, as necessary, upon the
call of the Chairperson or at the written request of a majority of the members.
   (H)   The presence of three or more members shall constitute a quorum and
the affirmative vote of three or more members shall be necessary for any
official action to be taken. Any member of the Board of Ethics who has a
conflict of interest with respect to any matter to be considered by the Board
shall disclose the nature of the conflict, shall disqualify himself or herself
from voting on the matter and shall not be counted for purposes of establishing
a quorum.
   (I)   Minutes shall be kept for all proceedings of the Board of Ethics and
the vote of each member on any issue decided by the Board shall be recorded in
the minutes.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994; Ord. 1, series 2024-2025, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 38.21 ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
   The executive authority of the city, with the approval of the legislative
body (if different than the executive authority), may appoint two alternate
members of the Board of Ethics who may be called upon to serve when any regular
member of the Board is unable to discharge his or her duties. An alternate
member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Alternate members shall meet
all qualifications and be subject to all of the requirements of this subchapter
that apply to regular members.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.22 FACILITIES AND STAFF.
   Within the limits of the funds appropriated by the legislative body in the
annual budget, the city shall provide the Board of Ethics, either directly or
by contract or agreement, with the facilities, materials, supplies and staff
needed for the conduct of its business.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.23 POWER AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ETHICS.
   The Board of Ethics shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To initiate on its own motion, receive and investigate complaints,
hold hearings and make findings of fact and determinations with regard to
alleged violations of the provisions of this subchapter;
   (B)   To issue orders in connection with its investigations and hearings
requiring persons to submit in writing and under oath reports and answers to
questions that are relevant to the proceedings and to order testimony to be
taken by deposition before any individual designated by the Board who has the
power to administer oaths;
   (C)   To administer oaths and to issue orders requiring the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating to
an investigation or hearing being conducted by the Board;
   (D)   To refer any information concerning violations of this subchapter to
the executive authority of the city, the city legislative body, the governing
body of any city agency, the county attorney or other appropriate person or
body, as necessary;
   (E)   To render advisory opinions to city and city agency officers and
employees regarding whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of this subchapter;
   (F)   To enforce the provisions of this subchapter with regard to all
officers and employees of the city and city agencies who are subject to its
terms by issuing appropriate orders and imposing penalties authorized by this
subchapter;
   (G)   To control and maintain all statements of financial interests that are
required to be filed by this subchapter and to ensure that the statements are
available for public inspection in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter and the Kentucky Open Records Act;
   (H)   To develop and submit any reports regarding the conduct of its
business that may be required by the executive authority or legislative body of
the city; and
   (I)   To adopt rules and regulations and to take other actions, as
necessary, to implement the provisions of this subchapter, provided that the
rules, regulations and actions are not in conflict with the provisions of this
subchapter or any state or federal law.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.24 FILING AND INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   All complaints alleging any violation of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be submitted to the Board of Ethics, or the administrative
official designated by the Board of Ethics. All complaints shall be in writing,
signed by the complainant and shall meet any other requirements established by
the Board of Ethics. The Board of Ethics shall acknowledge receipt of a
complaint to the complainant within ten working days from the date of receipt.
The Board shall forward, within ten working days, to each officer or employee
of the city or city agency who is the subject of the complaint a copy of the
complaint and a general statement of the applicable provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a proper complaint, the Board of
Ethics shall conduct a preliminary inquiry concerning the allegations contained
in the complaint. The Board shall afford a person who is the subject of the
complaint an opportunity to respond to the allegations in the complaint. The
person shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear and be
heard under oath and to offer evidence in response to the allegations.
   (C)   All proceedings and records relating to a preliminary inquiry being
conducted by the Board of Ethics shall be confidential until a final
determination is made by the Board, except the following.
      (1)   The Board may turn over to the commonwealth’s attorney or county
attorney evidence which may be used in criminal proceedings.
      (2)   If the complainant or alleged violator publicly disclose the
existence of a preliminary inquiry, the Board may publicly confirm the
existence of the inquiry and, at its discretion, make public any documents
which were issued to either party.
   (D)   The Board shall make a determination based on its preliminary inquiry
whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction and, if so, whether it alleges
a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation of this subchapter if the
Board concludes that the complaint is outside of its jurisdiction, frivolous or
without factual basis, the Board shall immediately terminate the inquiry,
reduce the conclusion to writing and transmit a copy of its decision to the
complainant and to all officers or employees against whom the complaint was
filed.
   (E)   If the Board of Ethics concludes, based upon its preliminary inquiry,
that the complaint is within its jurisdiction and contains allegations
sufficient to establish a minimal factual basis to constitute a violation, the
Board shall notify the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint
and may:
      (1)   Due to mitigating circumstances such as lack of significant
economic advantage or gain by the officer or employee, lack of economic loss to
the city and its taxpayers or lack of significant impact on public confidence
in city government issue, in writing, a confidential reprimand to the officer
or employee concerning the alleged violation and provide a copy of the
confidential reprimand to the executive authority and governing body of the
city or city agency; and
      (2)   Initiate a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation.
   (F)   Any person who knowingly files with the Board a false complaint
alleging a violation of any provision of this subchapter by an officer or
employee of the city or any city agency shall be guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.25 NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   If the Board of Ethics determines that a hearing regarding allegations
contained in the complaint is necessary, the Board shall issue an order setting
the matter for a hearing within 30 days of the date the order is issued, unless
the alleged violator petitions for and the Board consents to a later date. The
order setting the matter for hearing, along with a copy of any pertinent
regulations of the Board relating to the hearing shall be sent to the alleged
violator within 24 hours of the time the order setting a hearing is issued.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.26 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Kentucky Rules of Civil Procedure and the Kentucky Rules of
Evidence shall not apply to hearings conducted by the Board of Ethics; however,
the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with this section and in
accordance with any additional rules and regulations adopted by the Board so as
to afford all parties the full range of due process rights required by the
nature of the proceedings.
   (B)   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, the alleged violator, or his
or her representative, shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine all
documents and records obtained or prepared by the Board in connection with the
matter to be heard. The Board shall inform the alleged violator, or his or her
representative, of any exculpatory evidence in its possession.
   (C)   All testimony in a Board hearing shall be taken under oath,
administered by the presiding officer. All parties shall have the right to call
and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses, to
submit evidence and to be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall have the
right to be represented by counsel.
   (D)   Any person whose name is mentioned during the hearing and who may be
adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the Board, with or
without counsel, to give a statement regarding the adverse mention, or may file
a written statement regarding the adverse mention for incorporation into the
record of the proceeding.
   (E)   All hearings of the Board of Ethics shall be public, unless the
members vote to go into executive session in accordance with KRS 61.810.
   (F)   After the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Ethics shall, as
soon as practicable, begin deliberations in executive session for the purpose
of reviewing the evidence before it and making a determination whether a
violation of this subchapter has been proven. Within 30 days after completion
of the hearing, the Board shall issue a written report of its findings and
conclusions.
   (G)   If the Board concludes in its report that no violation of this
subchapter has occurred, it shall immediately send written notice of this
determination to the officer or employee who was the subject of the complaint
and to the party who filed the complaint.
   (H)   If the Board concludes in its report that in consideration of the
evidence produced at the hearing there is clear and convincing proof of a
violation of this subchapter, the Board may:
      (1)   Issue an order requiring the violator to cease and desist the
violation;
      (2)   In writing, publicly reprimand the violator for the violations and
provide a copy of the reprimand to the executive authority and governing body
(if different than the executive authority) of the city or city agency with
which the violator serves;
      (3)   In writing, recommend to the executive authority and the governing
body (if different than the executive authority) that the violator be
sanctioned as recommended by the Board, which may include a recommendation for
discipline or dismissal, or removal from office;
      (4)   Issue an order requiring the violator to pay a civil penalty of not
more than $1,000; and
      (5)   Refer evidence of criminal violations of this subchapter or state
laws to the county attorney or commonwealth’s attorney of the jurisdiction for
prosecution.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.27 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person who is found guilty of a violation of any provision of this
subchapter by the Board of Ethics may appeal the finding to the circuit court
of the county within 30 days after the date of the final action by the Board of
Ethics by filing a petition with the court against the Board.
   (B)   The Board shall transmit to the Clerk of the court all evidence
considered by the Board at the public hearing.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.28 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   Except when the period of limitation is otherwise established by state law,
an action for a violation of this subchapter must be brought within one year
after the violation is discovered.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.29 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics may render advisory opinions concerning matters
under its jurisdiction, based upon real or hypothetical facts and
circumstances, upon its own initiative, or when requested by any officer or
employee of the city or a city agency who is covered by this subchapter.
   (B)   An advisory opinion shall be requested in writing and shall state
relevant facts and ask specific questions. The request for an advisory opinion
shall remain confidential unless confidentiality is waived, in writing, by the
requestor.
   (C)   The Board may adopt regulations, consistent with the Kentucky Open
Records Law, to establish criteria under which it will issue confidential
advisory opinions. All other advisory opinions shall be public documents,
except that before an advisory opinion is made public, it shall be modified so
that the identity of any person associated with the opinion shall not be
revealed.
   (D)   The confidentiality of an advisory opinion may be waived either:
      (1)   In writing by the person who requested the opinion; and
      (2)   By majority vote of the members of the Board, if a person makes or
purports to make public the substance or any portion of an advisory opinion
requested by or on behalf of the person. The Board may vote to make public the
advisory opinion request and related materials.
   (E)   A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be binding on the
Board in any subsequent proceeding concerning the facts and circumstances of
the particular case if no intervening facts or circumstances arise which would
change the opinion of the Board if they had existed at the time the opinion was
rendered. However, if any fact determined by the Board to be material was
omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion, the Board shall not be
bound by the opinion. A written advisory opinion issued by the Board shall be
admissible in the defense of any criminal prosecution or civil proceeding for
violations of this subchapter for actions taken in reliance on that opinion.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
§ 38.30 REPRISALS AGAINST PERSONS DISCLOSING VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall subject to
reprisal, or directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any official
authority or influence in any manner whatsoever which tends to discourage,
restrain, deter, prevent, interfere with, coerce or discriminate against any
person who in good faith reports, discloses, divulges or otherwise brings to
the attention of the Board of Ethics or any other agency or official of the
city or the commonwealth any facts or information relative to an actual or
suspected violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting disciplinary or
punitive action if an officer or employee of the city or any city agency
discloses information which he or she knows:
      (1)   To be false or which he or she discloses with reckless disregard
for its truth or falsity;
      (2)   To be exempt from required disclosure under the provisions of the
Kentucky Open Records Act, KRS 61.870 to 61.884; and
      (3)   Is confidential under any other provision of law.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
POLICY PROHIBITING RACIAL PROFILING
§ 38.45 POLICY.
   The protection of, and the preservation of, the constitutional and civil
rights of individuals remains one of the paramount concerns of government, and
law enforcement in particular. To safeguard these rights, law enforcement
personnel shall not engage in any behavior or activity that constitutes racial
profiling. The decision of an officer to make a stop or detain an individual,
or conduct a search, shall not be solely motivated by consideration of race,
color or ethnicity. Stops, detentions or searches shall be based on
articulable, reasonable suspicions; observed violations of law; or probable
cause, and shall comply with accepted constitutional and legal provisions and
with the Code and Cannon of Ethics adopted by the State Law Enforcement Council
through Peace Officer Professional Standards.
(Ord. passed 8-20-2001)
§ 38.46 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RACIAL PROFILING. A process that motivates the initiation of a stop,
detention or search which is solely motivated by consideration of an
individual’s actual or perceived race, color or ethnicity, or making
discretionary decisions during the execution of law enforcement duties based on
the above stated considerations. Nothing shall preclude an officer from relying
on an individual’s actual or perceived race, color or ethnicity as an element
in the identification of a suspect or in the investigation of a crime, a
possible crime or violation of law or statute.
(Ord. passed 8-20-2001)
§ 38.47 TRAINING.
   All officers shall complete the State Law Enforcement Council approved
training related to racial profiling. Such training shall comply with federal
law, state statutory provisions, case law and other applicable laws,
regulations and established rules.
(Ord. passed 8-20-2001)
§ 38.48 DISCIPLINE.
   An officer who violates a provision of this policy shall be subject to the
agency’s disciplinary procedures, which shall be consistent with other
penalties imposed for similar officer misconduct.
(Ord. passed 8-20-2001)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Except when another penalty is specifically set forth in §§
38.01 through
38.30, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found by
the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of §§
38.01 through
38.30 shall be deemed guilty of a civil offense and may be subject to a civil
fine imposed by the Board of Ethics not to exceed $1,000, which may be
recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender
fails to pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time.
      (2)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under §§
38.01 through
38.30, any officer or employee of the city or any city agency who is found by
the Board of Ethics to have violated any provision of §§
38.01 through
38.30 shall forfeit to the city or the city agency an amount equal to the
economic benefit or gain which the officer or employee is determined by the
Board to have realized as a result of the violation. The amount of any
forfeiture may be recovered by the city in a civil action in the nature of
debt, if the offender fails to pay the amount of the forfeiture within a
prescribed period of time.
      (3)   In addition to all other penalties which may be imposed under §§
38.01 through
38.30, a finding by the Board of Ethics that an officer or employee of the city
or any city agency is guilty of a violation of §§
38.01 through
38.30 shall be sufficient cause for removal, suspension, demotion or other
disciplinary action by the executive authority of the city or city agency, or
by any other office or agency having the power of removal or discipline. Any
action to remove or discipline any officer or employee for a violation of §§
38.01 through
38.30 shall be taken in accordance with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the city and all applicable laws of the commonwealth.
(Ord. 3, passed 8-15-1994)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Provision of garbage collection
   
50.02   Garbage collection tax
   
50.03   Tax bills and use of taxes
   
50.04   Ownership of recyclable material
   
50.05   Removal and collection of material prohibited
   
50.06   Dumping garbage within the city limits
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 PROVISION OF GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   The city shall provide garbage collection service to all residents within
the city on a basis of two pickups per week with each residence limited to not
more than three 20-gallon cans per collection, said collection to be made at
the rear of each residence.
(Ord. 44, passed 12-16-1968)
§ 50.02 GARBAGE COLLECTION TAX.
   The owner-occupant or, in the event the premises are now owner occupied, the
occupant of each residence shall pay to the Treasurer of the city an annual tax
of $12 for said garbage collection service. The city shall contract for said
garbage collection service and shall bear the expense of such charge. Payment
of said garbage collection tax shall be annual, beginning with the year 1969
and shall be due on February 1 of each year. There shall be a 10% penalty added
May 1 of each year on any tax which has not been paid by that time.
(Ord. 44, passed 12-16-1968)
§ 50.03 TAX BILLS AND USE OF TAXES.
   The City Treasurer shall issue tax bills for said garbage collection tax,
said tax bills to be rendered at the same time that the ad valorem property tax
bills are rendered. The garbage collection tax bills shall list the names of
the owner or occupant, the amount due, the due date, penalty provision and name
and address of City Treasurers to which payment is to be sent. Proceeds from
said garbage collection taxes shall be paid into the General Fund account of
the city and shall be used to defray the expenses of garbage collection service
furnished to the residents of the city.
(Ord. 44, passed 12-16-1968)
§ 50.04 OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
   Each person, firm or organization that places recyclable material with his,
her or it’s disposable garbage and trash to be carried away by the city’s
contract garbage collector for disposal outside the city shall transfer
ownership of all of said recyclable material to the city.
(Ord. 1 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 REMOVAL AND COLLECTION OF MATERIAL PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm other than the city’s contract
garbage carrier, employed by the city to collect and dispose of said garbage
and other recyclable materials and to remove said recyclable materials from the
collection area of any resident or firm within the city.
(Ord. 1 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 DUMPING GARBAGE WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization to dump any
garbage or other waste material within the city limits.
(Ord. 18, passed 2-6-1958) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or firm violating §
50.05 hereof shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §
50.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(Ord. 18, passed 2-6-1958; Ord. 1 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Regulations
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Required obedience to traffic directions
   
70.03   Powers and duties of Police Department
   
70.04   Authority for enforcement
   
70.05   Temporary regulations
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Signal legends
   
70.21   Establishment and maintenance of traffic-control devices
   
70.22   Obedience to signals
   
70.23   Interference with signals
   
70.24   Unauthorized signals or markings
   
70.25   Device to be legible and in proper position
   
70.26   Temporary disregard of devices by police officers
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department or Police
Department, vehicles of the Commonwealth Attorney’s office when on official
business and ambulances on an authorized emergency run.
   BOULEVARD. Any legally designated street at which cross traffic is required
to stop before entering or crossing the BOULEVARD.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any portion of any street between two consecutive
intersections in which 50% or more of the frontage on either side of the street
is used for business purposes.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of the roadway included within the extension of the
sidewalk across any intersection, and other portions of the roadway between two
intersections that may be legally designated as crossing places and marked by
stanchions, paint lines or otherwise.
   CURB. The boundary of that portion of the street used for vehicles, whether
marked by curbstones or not.
   INTERSECTION. The part of the public way embraced within the extensions of
the street lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not
one street crosses the other.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, warnings, directions,
markings and devices placed or erected or maintained by authority of the Chief
of Police.
   ONE-WAY STREET. A street on which vehicles are permitted to move in one
direction only.
   OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of the guidance,
starting and stopping of a vehicle.
   PARK. When applied to vehicles, to leave a vehicle standing, whether
occupied or not, for a period of time longer than is necessary to receive or
discharge passengers or property.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PLAY STREET. Any street or portion thereof so designated by the Chief of
Police and reserved as a play area for children, from which all traffic is
barred, except vehicles to and from abutting properties.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department or other persons or agency
authorized to perform the duties of §
70.03 or any other acts necessary to implement and enforce this traffic code.
   PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between property lines of every way, dedicated
passway or street set aside for public travel, except bridle paths and
footpaths.
   REVERSE TURN. To turn a vehicle on any street in such a manner as to proceed
in the opposite direction.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate and preferential use of the
street.
   ROADWAY. The portion of any street, improved, designated or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb and the property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STOPPING. As applied to vehicles, to stop a vehicle longer than is actually
necessary to receive or discharge passengers.
   STREET. Every public way, including alleys.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, buses and other
conveyances, individually or collectively, while using any street for the
purpose of travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on any street, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order, signal or direction given by a uniformed police officer, or
to fail or refuse to comply with any of the traffic regulations of this traffic
code.
   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owned or used in the service of the United States government, this
state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any
of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in this
traffic code or by state statute.
   (C)   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
on any roadway, and every person driving any animal on any roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of
this traffic code applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this traffic code which by their very nature can have no
application.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to direct all traffic in
conformance with this traffic code and to enforce the traffic regulations as
set forth in this traffic code, to make arrest for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions.
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   Authority to direct and enforce all traffic regulations of this city in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code and to make arrests for
traffic violations is given to the Police Department and, except in case of
emergency, it shall be unlawful for any other person to direct or attempt to
direct traffic by voice, hand, whistle or any other signal.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 TEMPORARY REGULATIONS.
   When required for the convenience and safety of the public and to alleviate
unusual traffic problems, the Chief of Police, or other authorized city
official, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to impose traffic
regulations as he or she may deem necessary for temporary periods not to exceed
two weeks. If these temporary regulations are necessary for a period longer
than two weeks, the City Clerk shall be notified in writing of the extended
order.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 SIGNAL LEGENDS.
   Whenever traffic is regulated or controlled exclusively by a traffic-control
sign or signs exhibiting the words “Go”, “Caution” or “Stop”, or exhibiting
different colored lights for purposes of traffic control, the following colors
only shall be used, and these terms and lights shall indicate and be obeyed as
follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go”. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at that place prohibits
either turn. However, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the
signal is exhibited.
   (B)   Steady yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or
“Go” signal. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication
will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter
the intersection. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal may enter and
clear the intersection.
   (C)   Red alone or double red or “Stop”. Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at
another point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain
standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
   (D)   Flashing red alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at another point as
may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall not again proceed until
it can do so without danger.
   (E)   Flashing amber alone. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall reduce
its speed and proceed cautiously across the intersection controlled by the
signal.
   (F)   “Yield Right-of-Way”. Vehicular traffic facing the “Yield Right-of-
Way” sign shall bear the primary responsibility of safely entering the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. All traffic facing the sign shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians within the primary
intersecting or merging right-of-way. No vehicle facing a “Yield Right-of-Way”
sign shall enter the merging or intersecting right-of-way at a speed in excess
of 15 mph, except that this speed limit shall not apply to vehicles entering an
expressway.
   (G)   Lane lights. When lane lights are installed over any street for the
purpose of controlling the direction of flow of traffic, vehicular traffic
shall move only in traffic lanes over which green arrows appear. However, when
flashing amber lights appear above a lane, all left turns shall be made from
that lane. Where red arrows appear above the lanes, vehicles shall not move
against them. If flashing amber lights show above a lane, that lane shall be
used only for passing and for left turns unless a sign at that place prohibits
the turn.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Traffic-control signals, see KRS 189.338
§ 70.21 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The city shall establish and maintain all official traffic-control devices
necessary within the city. All traffic-control devices, including signs, shall
be employed to indicate one particular warning or regulation, shall be uniform
and, as far as possible, shall be placed uniformly. All traffic-control devices
and signs shall conform to required state specifications.
§ 70.22 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
signal of any official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code or of a traffic barrier or sign erected by any
of the public departments or public utilities of the city, or any electric
signal, gate or watchperson at railroad crossings, unless otherwise directed by
a police officer. However, the type and the right to or necessity for the
barrier or sign must be approved by the city.
   (B)   The sign, signal, marking or barrier shall have the same authority as
the personal direction of a police officer.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNALS.
   No person shall, without authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official control device or any railroad sign
or signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
Penalty see §
70.99
§ 70.24 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display on
or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device or
railroad sign or signal which attempts or purports to direct the movement of
traffic, or which conceals or hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. No
person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit on any
street, any traffic sign or signal or any commercial advertising. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as restricting any public department or public
utility of the city in any emergency or temporarily from marking or erecting
any traffic barrier or sign whose placing has been approved by the city.
   (B)   Every prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public
nuisance and the city is empowered forthwith to remove it or cause it to be
removed.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 DEVICE TO BE LEGIBLE AND IN PROPER POSITION.
   No provision of this traffic code for which signs or any other traffic-
control device is required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator if,
at the time and place of the alleged violation, the required device was not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person.
§ 70.26 TEMPORARY DISREGARD OF DEVICES BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   In an emergency, any police officer may, at his or her discretion, disregard
traffic-control lights or signals or established regulations in order to
facilitate the movement of traffic.
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this traffic code where no other
penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $20 nor more than $500.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
Operation Generally
   
71.01   Obstructing traffic
   
71.02   Reverse or U-turns
   
71.03   Backing vehicles
   
71.04   Vehicles crossing sidewalks
Accidents
   
71.15   Duty of operator
   
71.16   Accident report
Prohibitions
   
71.30   Operator of vehicle to drive carefully
   
71.31   Right-of-way of emergency vehicles; following emergency vehicles;
driving over fire hose
   
71.32   Smoke emission or other nuisance
   
71.33   Weight limits
   
71.34   Tractors and vehicles using lugs
Parades
   
71.45   Definitions
   
71.46   Permit required
   
71.47   Application for permit
   
71.48   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.49   Notice of rejection of permit
   
71.50   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.51   Alternative permit
   
71.52   Notice to city and other officials when permit issued
   
71.53   Contents of permit
   
71.54   Duties of permittee
   
71.55   Public conduct during parades
   
71.56   Revocation of permit
 
   
71.99   Penalty
OPERATION GENERALLY
§ 71.01 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or permit it to remain
standing in any street in such manner as to create an obstruction thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter any
intersection or crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding the indication of
any traffic-control signal which may be located at the intersection or
crosswalk.
   (C)   Any intersection deemed by the city to be of special or critical
importance to the movement of traffic shall be marked in a distinctive manner
in order to indicate its importance. Should the operator of any vehicle enter
any intersection so marked when there is insufficient room on the other side of
the intersection to accommodate the vehicle, the indication of any traffic-
control signal notwithstanding, he or she shall be deemed to have violated this
division rather than division (B) above.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 REVERSE OR U-TURNS.
   The operator of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety without
interfering with other traffic.
(KRS 189.330(8)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 BACKING VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back the vehicle at
any intersection for the purpose of executing a turning movement. A vehicle
from any parking position shall be backed by the operator in such manner as to
proceed on the same side of the roadway in the lawful direction of travel.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 VEHICLES CROSSING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive within
any sidewalk space except at a permanent or temporary driveway or by special
permit from the Chief of Police or other authorized city official.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the
vehicle out of any alley, driveway, building or lot and across a sidewalk, or
its extension across the alley, unless the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop immediately prior to crossing the sidewalk or its extension. On
entering the roadway from the alley, driveway or building, the operator shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. The operator
of any vehicle intending to cross a sidewalk and turn into an alley from the
roadway may do so at low speed and with caution.
Penalty, see §
71.99
ACCIDENTS
§ 71.15 DUTY OF OPERATOR.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of, operator of or passenger in any motor
vehicle which is involved in an accident, in which any person is injured or
property damaged, to stop immediately and ascertain the extent of the injury or
damage and render any assistance as may be needed.
Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Duty in case of accident, see KRS 189.580
§ 71.16 ACCIDENT REPORT.
   The operator, owner or passenger involved in an accident resulting in the
injury or death of any person, or an accident in which property is damaged,
shall immediately report the accident or property damage to the Police
Department.
Penalty, see §
71.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.30 OPERATOR OF VEHICLE TO DRIVE CAREFULLY.
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle upon a highway shall operate the vehicle
in a careful manner, with regard for the safety and convenience of pedestrians
and other vehicles upon the highway.
   (B)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure the highway.
   (C)   A person shall not willfully operate any vehicle on any highway in
such a manner as to injure vehicles or equipment located in or near a highway
work zone.
   (D)   A person shall not operate any vehicle in a reckless or negligent
manner as to endanger persons or property in or near a highway, or in or near a
highway work zone.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty, an operator who violates division
(C) or (D) of this section shall be subject to revocation of his or her
operator’s license under KRS 186.560.
(KRS 189.290) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES;
DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle equipped with, and
operating, one or more flashing, rotating or oscillating red or blue lights
visible under normal conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
emergency vehicle; or when the driver is giving audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as
possible to the edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and stop
and remain stopped until the emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer or firefighter.
   (B)   Upon the approach of any emergency vehicle operated in conformity with
the provisions of division (A) above, the operator of every vehicle shall
immediately stop clear of any intersection and shall remain stopped until the
emergency vehicle has passed, unless directed otherwise by a police officer or
firefighter.
   (C)   No operator of any vehicle, unless he or she is on official business,
shall follow any emergency vehicle being operated in conformity with the
provisions of division (A) above closer than 500 feet, nor shall he or she
drive into, park the vehicle into or park the vehicle within the block where
the vehicle has stopped in answer to an emergency call or alarm, unless he or
she is directed otherwise by a police officer or firefighter.
   (D)   No vehicle, train or other equipment shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of a Fire Department when the hose is laid down on any street,
private driveway or track for use at any fire alarm unless the Fire Department
official in command consents that the hose be driven over.
   (E)   The provisions of division (F) of this section shall apply to any
driver approaching a stationary:
      (1)   Emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately
flashing yellow, red, red and white, red and blue, or blue lights; or
      (2)   Disabled vehicle, when the disabled vehicle is displaying some type
of warning signal, such as emergency flashers, flares, or retroreflective
signals.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle that is approaching a vehicle described in
division (E) of this section shall, while proceeding with due caution:
      (1)   Yield the right-of-way by moving to a lane not adjacent to that of
the vehicle, if:
         (a)   The person is driving on a highway having at least four lanes,
with at least two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching
vehicle; and
         (b)   It is possible to make the lane change with due regard to safety
and traffic conditions; or
      (2)   Reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed to road
conditions, if the road has less than four lanes or if changing lanes would be
impossible or unsafe.
   (G)   This section does not operate to relieve the person who drives an
emergency vehicle from the duty to operate the vehicle with due regard for the
safety of all persons using the highway.
(KRS 189.930) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.32 SMOKE EMISSION OR OTHER NUISANCE.
   Every vehicle when on a highway shall be so equipped as to make a minimum of
noise, smoke or other nuisance; to protect the rights of other traffic; and to
promote the public safety.
(KRS 189.020) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.33 WEIGHT LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization to operate, or
cause to be operated, any vehicle on city streets within the city limits in
excess of 50,000 gross pounds on all streets within the corporate limits of the
city, except Ambridge Circle and Middlebrook Road on which the gross pounds
shall not exceed 18,000 pounds.
(Ord. 4 series 1993-1994, passed 8-16-1993) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.34 TRACTORS AND VEHICLES USING LUGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization to operate, or
cause to be operated, on the city streets within the city limits any tractor or
other vehicle employing the use of lugs.
(Ord. 4 series 1993-1994, passed 8-16-1993) Penalty, see §
71.99
PARADES
§ 71.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk, park or
other public place in the city.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
§ 71.46 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police, or other authorized city official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions; or
      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.47 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, on forms provided by
the official.
   (A)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   Application. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will
constitute the parade; the type of animals, if any; and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any assembly area or areas;
      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication, in writing, from the person authorizing the applicant to apply
for the permit on his or her behalf; and
      (13)   Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should issue.
   (C)   Fee. There shall be paid, at the time of filing an application for a
parade permit, a fee in an amount as established by the City Council.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.48 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, shall issue a permit
when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he or she finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the
city;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire; and
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.49 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, shall act on the
application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof. If he or she disapproves the
application, he or she shall mail to the applicant within the three days,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, after the date on which the
application was filed, a notice of his or her action stating the reasons for
his or her denial of the permit.
§ 71.50 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The City Council shall act on the appeal within 30 days after
its receipt.
§ 71.51 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his or her acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit
under this subchapter.
§ 71.52 NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the following persons:
   (A)   The Mayor;
   (B)   The City Attorney;
   (C)   The Fire Chief; and
   (D)   The general manager or responsible head of each public utility, the
regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed
parade.
§ 71.53 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park or other public place to be
traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
   (G)   Other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement of
this subchapter.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.54 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his or
her person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.55 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or
other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising
a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
Cross-reference:
   Parking on parade routes, see §
72.07
§ 71.56 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The city shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder
on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is specifically provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $20 nor more than $500.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
71.31 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $60 nor
more than $500, or be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30 days,
or both.
(KRS 189.993(8))
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§
71.33 or
71.34 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 or no more than $2,500 for each
offense.
(Ord. 4 series 1993-1994, passed 8-16-1993)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking Generally
   
72.01   Obstructional parking; double parking
   
72.02   Manner of parking
   
72.03   Limitations of stopping and parking
   
72.04   Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
   
72.05   Parking restricted to allow street cleaning
   
72.06   Parking in excess of certain number of hours prohibited; towing
authorized
   
72.07   Parking on parade route
   
72.08   Parking on off-street facility
   
72.09   Owner responsibility
   
72.10   Parking in parks
   
72.11   Display of parked vehicle for sale
   
72.12   Parking with handicapped permits
   
72.13   Parking certain vehicles on city streets prohibited
   
72.14   Off-street parking regulations
   
72.15   Off-street parking and loading requirements
   
72.16   Storage or parking of certain vehicles on any premises prohibited
Impounding
   
72.30   Impoundment of vehicles authorized; redemption
   
72.31   Required notice to owner
   
72.32   Sale of vehicle
Snow Emergency
   
72.45   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.46   Termination of emergency
   
72.47   Snow emergency routes
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Revenues from fees, fines and forfeitures related to parking, see KRS 65.120
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 72.01 OBSTRUCTIONAL PARKING; DOUBLE PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle or any other
thing that may be a nuisance, obstruction or hindrance in or on any street,
alley or sidewalk within the city either during the day or night.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle on the
roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop or park
the vehicle in a manner other than with its right-hand side toward and parallel
with the curb, except that where parking is permitted on the left side of a
one-way street, the left-hand side shall be so parked and except for commercial
loading and unloading on one-way streets.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street unless its
two right wheels are within six inches of and parallel with the curb, except
that on one-way streets where parking is permitted on the left side, the two
left wheels are to be within six inches of and parallel with the curb.
   (C)   (1)   No vehicle shall be backed to the curb on any street, except
that wagons and trucks may do so when loading and unloading provided that the
loading and unloading and delivery of property and material shall not consume
more than 30 minutes.
      (2)   This backing of trucks or wagons is prohibited at all times and on
all streets in the city where any truck or wagon so backed interferes with the
use of the roadway by moving vehicles or occupies road space within ten feet of
the center line of the street.
   (D)   (1)   The city may establish diagonal parking at certain places,
requiring the parking of vehicles at a certain angle to the curb and within a
certain portion of the roadway adjacent thereto. However, diagonal parking
shall not be established where the roadway space required therefor would be
within ten feet of the center line of any street.
      (2)   The diagonal parking places shall be designated by suitable signs,
and shall indicate by markings on the pavement the required angle and the width
of the roadway space within which the vehicle shall park.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to so park the
vehicle that any part thereof shall extend beyond the lines marking the side or
the rear of the space assigned for one vehicle.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 LIMITATIONS OF STOPPING AND PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of sidewalk ramps provided for persons with disabilities;
      (3)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (4)   Within an intersection or on a crosswalk;
      (5)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking;
      (6)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (7)   On any controlled access highway;
      (8)   Within a highway tunnel;
      (9)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; or
      (10)   On an area between the roadways of a divided highway.
(KRS 189.450(5))
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any prohibited area.
(KRS 189.450(6))
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section prohibiting the stopping and parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   The provisions of this section imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from his or her duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of
vehicles in specific places or at specified times.
   (C)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below, giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle, at any time,
on any street so marked by official signs.
   (D)   When a curb has been painted in compliance with the provisions of
division (F) below, no person shall park a vehicle at any time at or adjacent
to any curb so marked.
   (E)   When signs are erected in compliance with the provisions of division
(F) below, in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified by official signs on any day except Sundays on any
street so marked.
   (F)   (1)   The city shall determine on what streets or portions thereof
stopping or parking shall be restricted or prohibited. Whenever under authority
of or by this traffic code or any other ordinance any parking limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited on designated streets, or parking areas are restricted
to handicapped parking, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice
thereof. However, in lieu of erecting the signs or in conjunction therewith,
the face and top of a curb or curbs at or adjacent to which parking is
prohibited at all times may be painted a solid yellow color.
      (2)   No regulations or restrictions shall be effective unless the signs
have been erected and are in place or the curbs are painted yellow at the time
of any alleged offense, except in the case of those parking restrictions which,
by their very nature, would not require the signs and markings.
   (G)   When signs are erected in compliance with division (F) above in each
block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a time longer
than specified on official signs any day except Sunday and on any street so
marked.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 PARKING RESTRICTED TO ALLOW STREET CLEANING.
   The city is authorized to designate street cleaning areas and shall provide
suitable signs and markings on the street to be cleaned, restricting parking on
that particular day. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
stop on any street so designated.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 PARKING IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS PROHIBITED; TOWING
AUTHORIZED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in any one place any vehicle on any
of the public ways or streets of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer.
Any vehicle left parked in any one place on any of the public ways or streets
of the city for a period of 24 hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned, and
shall be subject to all existing regulations of the city pertaining to
abandoned motor vehicles.
Penalty, see §
72.99
Cross-reference:
   Removal of abandoned vehicles, see §§
72.30 through
72.32
§ 72.07 PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, shall have the
authority, whenever in his or her judgment it is necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or part thereof constituting a
part of the route of a parade or procession, to erect temporary traffic signs
to that effect and to prohibit and prevent parking.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of the signs or directions.
Penalty, see §
72.99
Cross-reference:
   Parades, see §§
71.45 through
71.56
§ 72.08 PARKING ON OFF-STREET FACILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to park or
abandon the vehicle or drive on or otherwise trespass on another’s property, or
on an area developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of
the owner, lessee or person in charge of the property or facility.
   (B)   If, at any time, a vehicle is parked, abandoned or otherwise
trespasses in violation of division (A) above, the owner, lessee or person in
charge of the property or facility may have the unauthorized motor vehicle
removed in accordance with the provisions of §§
72.30 through
72.32.
   (C)   Every property owner or operator of an off-street parking facility
shall post signs stating thereon that the property or parking lot or facility
is privately owned and that an unauthorized vehicle will be removed at the
owner’s expense before exercising the authority granted in division (B) above.
Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Removal of vehicles by owners of private parking lots; signs, see KRS
189.725
§ 72.09 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   If any vehicle is found illegally parked in violation of any provisions of
this subchapter regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles, and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name
the vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for the
violation.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in or on any
section of any public park, playground, play lot or tot lot within the city not
designed as a parking area or designed and regularly maintained as a roadway.
However, nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the parking of a motor vehicle parallel to a designated and regularly
maintained roadway in any park or playground where at least two wheels of the
motor vehicle are resting on the roadway.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 DISPLAY OF PARKED VEHICLE FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle displayed for sale or a motor
vehicle on which demonstrations are being made on any street.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 PARKING WITH HANDICAPPED PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Any other provision to the contrary notwithstanding, a motor
vehicle bearing a decal in its front windshield issued by the County Clerk
pursuant to appropriate county ordinances for handicapped persons, when
operated by a handicapped person or when transporting a handicapped person, may
be parked in a designated handicapped parking place, or when parked in a
metered parking space may be parked for two hours for no fee, or when parked
where any parking limit is imposed may be parked for two hours in excess of the
parking limit.
      (2)   The motor vehicle may be parked in a loading zone for that period
of time necessary to permit entrance or exit of the handicapped person to or
from the parked vehicle, but in no circumstances longer than 30 minutes.
   (B)   This section shall not permit parking in a “No Stopping” or “No
Parking” zone nor where parking is prohibited for the purpose of creating a
fire lane or to accommodate heavy traffic during morning, afternoon or evening
hours, nor permit a motor vehicle to be parked in such a manner as to
constitute a traffic hazard.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.13 PARKING CERTAIN VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be illegal for any person to park a motor vehicle, motor
home, trailer, boat or other personal property on any streets within the city.
   (B)   The city police is hereby empowered and directed to enforce this
subchapter and, to that end, any offending vehicle, motor home, trailer, boat
or other personal property illegally parked on any street within the city shall
be ticketed by the city police and shall be towed away to a holding lot
selected by the city and shall be held in said holding lot until the owner of
said property shall redeem said property by paying the towing and storage
charges incurred for removing said property from the city streets.
(Ord. I - series 1990, passed 6-18-1990) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.14 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Parking in residential districts.
      (1)   (a)   In the R-R, R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 districts,
vehicles may be parked or stored outdoors on each lot in the required front or
street side yard only on a hard surface driveway, not to exceed 20 feet in
width and which leads to a garage, carport or rear yard, provided that the
following limits are not exceeded:
            1.   Five passenger vehicles (pick-up trucks, vans and other
vehicles not exceeding 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight shall be considered as
a passenger vehicle);
            2.   One recreation vehicle (motor home, camper or travel trailer);
and
            3.   One boat/boat trailer.
         (b)   A passenger vehicle may be substituted for the recreation
vehicle and the boat/boat trailer for a total of seven passenger vehicles.
      (2)   In the R-5A and R-6 districts, outdoor parking of no more than
three vehicles shall be permitted on-site for each apartment unit.
      (3)   In all other districts, except R-5A and R-6 as noted above, in
which multi-family uses are permitted, outdoor parking of no more than two
vehicles shall be permitted on a parcel or property for each apartment unit.
      (4)   On property or parcels containing more than six apartment units,
recreational vehicles (motor home, camper or travel trailer and boat/trailer)
shall be parked or stored in an area set aside and screened for the parking or
storage of tenant-owned recreational vehicles and boat/boat trailers or other
equipment.
      (5)   Outdoor storage of inoperative vehicles or vehicles being scrapped
for salvage is prohibited in residential zones. Parking is limited to that
attendant to residential uses on-site; parking for off-site uses is prohibited.
   (B)   Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be
directed away from any adjoining residential use or uses and any public or
private right-of-way.
   (C)   Handicapped parking as required by local ordinances shall be provided.
   (D)   Minimum off-street parking requirements by use: Residential uses:
      (1)   Dwellings, one family - detached, attached or semi-detached: one
space for each dwelling unit on the premises.
      (2)   Dwellings, multiple family: one and one-half spaces for each
dwelling unit.
(Ord. I - series 1990, passed 6-18-1990) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.15 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on-site, except as
otherwise permitted by these regulations, for any building and for any use.
However, no parking spaces shall be required in the C-3 commercial district.
   (B)   The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be calculated
in accordance with this section, and all such uses and parking facilities shall
be governed by the following provisions.
      (1)   A use of building which is legally non-conforming due to inadequate
parking spaces may be altered if the additional spaces as required by these
regulations are provided.
         (a)   If a non-residential structure is altered in a manner that three
or less spaces are required by the alteration, no additional parking spaces
shall be required. This exemption does not apply to alterations that increase
the number of dwelling units.
         (b)   In addition to on-site parking spaces, required parking spaces
may be located on property under the same ownership (or a lease of at least 30
years following commencement of the use) within 500 feet for customers and
clientele and within 1,000 feet for employees and staff of the buildings or
uses to which it is assigned, provided the location is not in conflict with
other provision of these regulations.
         (c)   Parking in required yards are permitted as follows.
            1.    In the R-R, R-E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 districts,
parking is permitted in the required front or street side yard only, on a hard
surface driveway, not to exceed 20 feet in width and which leads to a garage,
carport or rear yard. Provided, however, parking pads which do not encroach
upon a city or other easement, and which are parallel to the existing driveway,
are permitted. No more than one parking pad per house shall be permitted.
Parking pads shall be a maximum width of ten feet and a maximum length of 20
feet.
            2.   In the R-5A, R-6, R-7, OR-1, OR-2, R-BA, OR-3, OTF and C-
N districts, parking areas shall not be permitted in a required front or street
side yard and off-street parking areas for non- residential uses in these
districts shall not be permitted in a required side yard.
            3.   Parking spaces in all other zones, except PRO, PEC and R-
T districts, may extend to the property lines unless they are within 100 feet
of a residential or multi-family/office district, in which case they shall
observe the front, side and street side yard requirements of the residential or
multi-family/office district.
      (2)   Appropriate measures shall be taken so that parking spaces shall
not cause any obstruction of, nor in any manner interfere with the free use of
an alley, street, sidewalk or adjoining property.
      (3)   Upon application by all parties involved, the Planning Commission
may authorize the joint use of off-street parking facilities for uses whose
peak hours of operation do not coincide or overlap. Joint use of off-street
parking shall be subject to the following.
(Ord. I - series 1990, passed 6-18-1990; Ord. 3, series 2025-2026, passed 9-15-
2025) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.16 STORAGE OR PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES ON ANY PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be illegal for any person, firm, corporation or other entity
to park or store more than a total of five motor vehicles, including cars,
motor home, camper, boats with or without trailer or unattached trailers on any
premises or lot within the city limits.
   (B)   Motor vehicles (cars or pick up trucks), motor homes, capers, boats
with or without trailer and unattached trailers must be kept on a paved area on
premises or lot driveway of such lot or premises of the owner thereof. No motor
home, camper, boat with or without trailer or trailer may be parked closer to
the street on which the lot fronts than the front of any residence situated
therein or than the established setback line of such lot. For the purposes of
this subchapter, a PAVED AREA shall mean a solid, unbroken surface consisting
of concrete or asphalt. Loose gravel or rock shall not be considered a PAVED
AREA.
   (C)   In the event the owner has not complied with the terms of this
subchapter within 72 hours after being cited for being in violation of this
subchapter, the city may cause any vehicle in violation of this subchapter to
be removed from the premises on which it has been parked and shall have said
vehicle stored at a town-in lot, all at the expense of such an owner.
(Ord. 1x series 1994-1995, passed 8-15-1994; Ord. 4, series 2003, passed 12-15-
2003) Penalty, see §
72.99
IMPOUNDING
§ 72.30 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   All police officers are empowered to authorize the impoundment of a
vehicle violating vehicle-related ordinances after a citation has been issued.
   (B)   A vehicle slated for impoundment will be tagged and placed under
control of the Police Department. Should a vehicle be moved without the consent
and approval of the Police Department, a warrant shall be issued immediately
for the violator’s arrest.
   (C)   All fines, fees and charges must be paid in full before a release of
impoundment can be issued for the vehicle’s release.
§ 72.31 REQUIRED NOTICE TO OWNER.
   (A)   Any person engaged in the business of storing or towing motor
vehicles, who has complied with the notification requirements of KRS 281.928,
shall have a lien on the motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in
division (E) below for the applicable and reasonable charges assessed in
accordance with KRS 281.926 and 281.932, as long as it remains in his or her
possession.
   (B)   If, after a period of 45 days, the applicable and reasonable charges
assessed in accordance with KRS 281.926 and 281.932 have not been paid, the
motor vehicle and its contents, except as set forth in division (E) below, may
be sold to pay the charges after the owner and any lienholder have been
notified by certified mail at the addresses specified in KRS 281.928(1), ten
days prior to the time and place of the sale. If the proceeds of the sale of
any vehicle pursuant to this section are insufficient to satisfy accrued
charges, the sale and collection of proceeds shall not constitute a waiver or
release of responsibility for payment of unpaid charges by the owner or
responsible casualty insurer of the vehicle. A lien on a vehicle under this
division shall be subject to prior recorded liens, unless released by any
existing lienholder pursuant to division (C) below.
   (C)   (1)   A lienholder having a prior recorded lien listed on the title
issued by the state shall be notified by certified mail within the first ten
days of impoundment in accordance with KRS 281.928.
      (2)   The notification, in addition to the requirements of KRS 281.928,
shall include the make, model, license number, vehicle identification number,
owner’s name and last known address and tentative date of sale for the vehicle,
and state that the towing company or storage facility seeks to obtain a new
title free and clear of any liens, excluding tax liens.
      (3)   If the certified letter required under this division (C) is not
sent within the ten days by the towing and storage company, then only ten days
of storage may be charged.
      (4)   The lienholder has the right to take possession of the motor
vehicle after showing proof of lien still enforced, and paying the reasonable
or agreed towing and storage charges on the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a lienholder does not exercise the right to take possession of
the motor vehicle under this division (C) within 45 days of notification, the
tow company or storage facility may obtain a new title under KRS 186A.145 free
and clear of any liens, excluding tax liens.
      (6)   Nothing in this section shall allow the transfer of a vehicle
subject to a lien, except as provided in KRS 186A.190 or in division (C)(5) of
this section.
   (D)   If there are no lienholders required to be notified under KRS 281.920
to 281.936 and 359.230 and this section, and the owner does not exercise the
right to take possession of the motor vehicle under this section within 45 days
of notification required under KRS 281.928, the towing company or storage
facility may obtain a new title under KRS 186A.145 free and clear of any liens,
excluding tax liens.
(KRS 376.275(1))
   (E)   Divisions (A) through (D) above shall not apply to the following
contents of a motor vehicle, which shall be released to the vehicle owner or
the owner’s designated agent upon request, if the request is made within 45
days of the date the vehicle was towed:
      (1)   Prescription medication in its proper container;
      (2)   Personal medical supplies and equipment or records;
      (3)   Educational materials, including, but not limited to, calculators,
books, papers and school supplies;
      (4)   Documents, files, electronic devices or equipment which may be able
to store personal information or information relating to a person’s employment
or business;
      (5)   Firearms and ammunition. Notwithstanding the provisions of §
72.32 below, firearms and ammunition which are not claimed by the owner of the
vehicle within 45 days of the date the vehicle was towed shall be transferred
to the Department of Kentucky State Police for disposition as provided by KRS
16.220;
      (6)   Cargo in the possession of persons engaged in transportation in
interstate commerce as registered under KRS 186.020;
      (7)   Cargo in the possession of an integrated intermodal small package
carrier, as defined by KRS 281.605(12);
      (8)   Child restraint systems or child booster seats; and
      (9)   Checks, checkbooks, debit or credit cards, money orders, stocks or
bonds.
(KRS 376.275(2))
§ 72.32 SALE OF VEHICLE.
   Except as provided in §
72.31(E)(5), any contents exempted under §
72.31(E)(3), (E)(4),(E)(6) and (E)(7) that are not claimed by the owner of the
vehicle within 45 days of the date the vehicle was towed may be sold or
otherwise legally disposed of by the storage or towing company. Any contents
exempted under §
72.31(E)(1), (E)(2), (E)(8) and (E)(9) that are not claimed by the owner of the
vehicle within 45 days of the date the vehicle was towed shall not be sold, but
shall be otherwise legally disposed of by the storage or towing company.
(KRS 376.275(3))
Statutory reference:
   Provisions concerning disposition of contents of motor vehicle, see KRS
376.275(4)
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 72.45 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, finds that
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain will create a condition which makes it
necessary that the parking of motor vehicles on snow emergency routes be
prohibited, or whenever he or she finds on the basis of a firm forecast of
snow, sleet or freezing rain that the weather conditions so forecasted may
create a condition making it necessary that parking be prohibited, he or she is
authorized to announce the prohibition, to become effective at a time specified
by him or her. After the effective time of the prohibition, no person shall
park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain parked on a snow emergency
route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain occurs after 11:00
p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Chief of Police, or other authorized city
official, has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on snow emergency
routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle parked on a snow
emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following the fall. The
prohibition of parking announced by the Chief of Police, or other authorized
city official, under the authority of this section shall remain in effect until
he or she announces the termination of the snow emergency, in part or in which
the prohibition of parking authorized by this section shall no longer be in
effect.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.46 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Chief of Police, or other authorized city official, shall find
that some or all of the conditions which gave rise to the snow emergency
prohibition no longer exist, he or she is authorized to declare the termination
of the emergency, in part or in whole, effective immediately on announcement.
If the announcement is made other than between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it
shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.47 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Chief
of Police, or other authorized city official. On a street or highway designated
as a snow emergency route, special signs shall be posted to this effect.
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person receiving a citation for any parking violation in the city
shall be deemed to have committed a violation and shall be fined in an amount
not less than $20 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(KRS 189.990(1))
   (C)   Any person violating any provisions of §§
72.13 through
72.15 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $15 nor more than $50 for their first offense and a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $100 for any subsequent offenses.
   (D)   Any violation of §
72.16 hereof shall be fined for the first offense not less than $50 nor more
than $150 or for any subsequent violation not less than $100 nor more than
$300.
   (E)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
72.15(B)(2)(c)1. shall have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a
maximum fine of $250 for each violation thereof, subject to the following
schedule of civil fines for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations.
            1.   First offense: $100;
            2.   Second offense: $150; and
            3.   All others: $200.
         (b)   Contested violations.
            1.   First offense: $150;
            2.   Second offense: $200; and
            3.   All others: $250.
      (2)   In the event any person who has violated §
72.15(B)(1)(c)1. fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after issuance
of a citation for violation thereof, or within 30 days after any and all
appeals therefrom have been exhausted, the city may recover the amount of the
civil penalty and court costs in a civil action in any court of appropriate
jurisdiction.
(Ord. I - series 1990, passed 6-18-1990 ; Ord. 1x series 1994-1995, passed 8-
15-1994; Ord. 3, series 2025-2026, passed 9-15-2025)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
Section
   
73.01   Operation of bicycles
   
73.02   Operation of motorcycles and motorscooters
   
73.03   Skating and coasting
   
73.04   Clinging to vehicles
 
   
73.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Required obedience to traffic directions, see §
70.02(C)
§ 73.01 OPERATION OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalks of the city.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any section of a public park,
playground, play lot or tot lot, except on a roadway or in a parking area.
   (C)   No operator of any bicycle shall carry another person on the bicycle.
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Bicycles; safety regulations and standards, see KRS 189.287
§ 73.02 OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES AND MOTORSCOOTERS.
   (A)   No operator of any motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall carry another person except on a seat attached thereto or in a side car
attached to the vehicle.
   (B)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate the vehicle in any public park, except on a roadway or in a
parking area.
   (C)   No operator of a motorcycle, motorscooter or power-driven bicycle
shall operate the vehicle in any play lot or tot lot.
Penalty, see §
73.99
Statutory reference:
   Operating and riding on motorcycles, see KRS 189.285
§ 73.03 SKATING AND COASTING.
   Except on streets which may be declared from time to time as “play streets”
by the city and protected by barriers or official signs, it shall be unlawful
for any person on skates or riding on a coaster sled or toy vehicle of any kind
to go on any roadway except at a crosswalk.
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person while riding on a bicycle, coaster sled, roller skates or
any toy vehicle shall cling to any moving vehicle on any street, or fasten or
attach the vehicle on which he or she is riding thereto.
   (B)   No person shall ride on the projection, running board or fenders of
any vehicle.
Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have
committed a violation and shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense.
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits; stop and yield intersections
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS; STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby established a 25 mph speed limit for all vehicles
using the streets within the corporate limits, except Westport Road, which
street is a state maintained highway, and the speed limit thereon shall be
governed by the state. The speed limits herein established shall be posted.
   (B)    There is hereby established at intersections within the corporate
limits of the city boulevard stops, four-way stops and yield rights-of-way as
follows.
Road #1 Traffic Procedure Road #2
Road #1                     Traffic Procedure         Road #2
Ahland Road                 Stop at its intersection  Darbrook Road
                            with
Ahland Road                 Stop at its intersection  Westport Road
                            with
Ahland Road                 Stop at its intersection  Westport Terrace
                            with
Alicent Road                Stop at its intersection  Walser Road
                            with
Ambridge Circle             Stop at its intersections Westport Road and itself
                            with
Beechwood Road              Stop at its intersection  Westport Road
                            with
Darbrook Road               Stop at its intersection  Beechwood Road
                            with
Darbrook Road               Stop at its intersection  Stivers Road
                            with
Green Meadow Court          Stop at its intersection  Green Meadow Circle
                            with
Kinloch Road                Stop at its intersection  Walser Road
                            with
Middlebrook Road            Stop at its intersection  Perryman Road
                            with
Middlebrook Road            Stop at its intersection  Stivers Road
                            with
Perryman Road               Stop at its intersection  Darbrook Road
                            with
Perryman Road               Stop at its intersection  Westport Road
                            with
Perryman Road               Stop at its intersection  Westport Terrace
                            with
Schuwey Court               Stop at its intersection  Perryman Road
                            with
Stivers Road                Stop at its intersection  Darbrook Road
                            with
Stivers Road                Stop at its intersection  Westport Terrace
                            with
Walser Road                 Stop at its intersection  Green Meadow Circle
                            with
Walser Road                 Stop at its intersection  Westport Road
                            with
Westport Road-Frontage Road Stop at its intersection  Ambridge Circle
                            with
Westport Terrace            Stop at                   Beechwood Road
Westport Terrace            Stop at its intersection  Westport Road
                            with
Wingate Road                Stop at its intersection  Walser Road
                            with
 
   (C)   Stop signs and yield right-of-way signs at the above intersections
shall be posted in a conspicuous manner.
   (D)   Any person who violates the speed limit established under division (A)
above or by the state on Westport Road shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
in accordance with the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of division (B) above
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in accordance with the applicable laws
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
(Ord. 45, passed 3-17-1969; Ord. 4-1977, passed 11-21-1977; Ord. 4, series
2025-2026, passed 12-15-2025)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   LITTERING
      
95.   GRASS AND WEEDS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Animals running at large
   
90.03   Cruelty to animals in the second degree
   
90.04   Torture of dogs or cats
   
90.05   Dyeing or selling dyed chicks or rabbits
   
90.06   Abandoning domestic animals prohibited
   
90.07   Destruction of abandoned and suffering animal
   
90.08   Keeping of livestock prohibited
Dogs
   
90.20   Definition
   
90.21   License required
   
90.22   Registration and issuance of license
   
90.23   License tag to be attached to dog
   
90.24   Dogs running at large
   
90.25   Noise disturbance
   
90.26   Impoundment
   
90.27   Reclaiming impounded dog
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. To forsake entirely, or to neglect or refuse to provide or perform
the legal obligations for care and support of an animal by its owner, or his or
her agent.
(KRS 257.010)
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the
owner, or his or her agent, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
   OWNER. Every person having a right of property to an animal and every person
who keeps or harbors an animal, has it in his or her care or permits it to
remain on or about the premises owned or occupied by him or her.
§ 90.02 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner of any animal shall permit it to run at
large in any public road, highway, street, lane or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or permit it to go on any private yard, lot or enclosure without the
consent of the owner of the yard, lot or enclosure.
   (B)   The owner of an animal who permits it to run at large in violation of
this section is liable for all damages caused by the animal upon the premises
of another.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.
   (A)   A person is guilty of cruelty to animals in the second degree when,
except as authorized by law, he or she intentionally or wantonly:
      (1)   Subjects any animal to or causes cruel or injurious mistreatment
through abandonment, participates other than as provided in KRS 525.125 in
causing it to fight for pleasure or profit (including, but not limited to,
being a spectator or vendor at an event where a four-legged animal is caused to
fight for pleasure or profit), mutilation, beating, torturing any animal other
than a dog or cat, tormenting, failing to provide adequate food, drink, space
or health care, or by any other means;
      (2)   Subjects any animal in his or her custody to cruel neglect; or
      (3)   Kills any animal other than a domestic animal killed by poisoning.
This division (A)(3) shall not apply to intentional poisoning of a dog or cat.
Intentional poisoning of a dog or cat shall constitute a violation of this
section.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the killing of animals:
      (1)   Pursuant to a license to hunt, fish or trap;
      (2)   Incident to the processing as food or for other commercial
purposes;
      (3)   For humane purposes;
      (4)   For veterinary, agricultural, spaying or neutering or cosmetic
purposes;
      (5)   For purposes relating to sporting activities, including, but not
limited to, horse racing at organized races and training for organized races,
organized horse shows or other animal shows;
      (6)   For bona fide animal research activities of institutions of higher
education; or a business entity registered with the United States Department of
Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act or subject to other federal laws
governing animal research;
      (7)   In defense of self or another person against an aggressive or
diseased animal;
      (8)   In defense of a domestic animal against an aggressive or diseased
animal;
      (9)   For animal or pest control; or
      (10)   For any other purpose authorized by law.
   (C)   (1)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense under
division (A) above arising from the person’s treatment of an equine, the court
may impose one or both of the following penalties against the person, in
addition to fines and imprisonment:
         (a)   An order that the person pay restitution for damage to the
property of others and for costs incurred by others, including reasonable
costs, as determined by agreement or by the court after a hearing, incurred in
feeding, sheltering, veterinary treatment and incidental care of any equine
that was the subject of the offense resulting in conviction; or
         (b)   An order terminating or imposing conditions on the person’s
right to possession, title, custody or care of any equine that was the subject
of the offense resulting in conviction.
      (2)   If a person’s ownership interest in an equine is terminated by a
judicial order under division (C)(1)(b) above, the court may order the sale,
conveyance or other disposition of the equine that was the subject of the
offense resulting in conviction.
(KRS 525.130) Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Torture of dogs or cats, see §
90.04
Statutory reference:
   Cruelty to animals in the first degree, a Class D felony, see KRS 525.125
§ 90.04 TORTURE OF DOGS OR CATS.
   (A)   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires,
TORTURE means the intentional infliction of or subjection to extreme physical
pain or injury, motivated by an intent to increase or prolong the pain of the
animal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of torture of a dog or cat when he or she, without
legal justification, intentionally tortures a domestic dog or cat.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the killing or injuring of a
dog or cat:
      (1)   In accordance with a license to hunt, fish or trap;
      (2)   For humane purposes;
      (3)   For veterinary, agricultural, spaying or neutering or cosmetic
purposes;
      (4)   For purposes relating to sporting activities, including, but not
limited to, training for organized dog or cat shows, or other animal shows in
which a dog or a cat, or both, participate;
      (5)   For bona fide animal research activities, using dogs or cats, of
institutions of higher education; or a business entity registered with the
United States Department of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act or subject
to other federal laws governing animal research;
      (6)   In defense of self or another person against an aggressive or
diseased dog or cat;
      (7)   In defense of a domestic animal against an aggressive or diseased
dog or cat;
      (8)   For animal or pest control; or
      (9)   For any other purpose authorized by law.
   (D)   Activities of animals engaged in hunting, field trials, dog training
other than training a dog to fight for pleasure or profit and other activities
authorized either by a hunting license or by the Department of Fish and
Wildlife Resources shall not constitute a violation of this section.
   (E)   The acts specified in this section shall not constitute cruelty to
animals under KRS 525.125 or 525.130.
Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Torture of dogs and cats, see KRS 525.135
   Torture of dogs and cats resulting in physical injury, second and subsequent
offenses, a Class D felony, see KRS 525.135
   Torture of dogs and cats resulting in serious physical injury or death, a
Class D felony, see KRS 525.135
§ 90.05 DYEING OR SELLING DYED CHICKS OR RABBITS.
   No person shall sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange, display or
possess living baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits which have been
dyed or colored; nor dye or color any baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl or
rabbits; nor sell, exchange, offer to sell or exchange or to give away baby
chicks, ducklings or other fowl or rabbits under two months of age in any
quantity less than six, except that any rabbit weighing three pounds or more
may be sold at an age of six weeks.
(KRS 436.600) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 ABANDONING DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No owner of a domestic animal shall abandon the animal.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 DESTRUCTION OF ABANDONED AND SUFFERING ANIMAL.
   (A)   Any peace officer, animal control officer or any person authorized by
the city may destroy or kill, or cause to be destroyed or killed, any animal
found abandoned and suffering and not properly cared for, or appearing to be
injured, diseased or suffering past recovery for any useful purpose.
   (B)   Before destroying the animal, the officer shall obtain the judgment to
that effect of a veterinarian or of two reputable citizens called by him or her
to view the animal in his or her presence, or shall obtain consent to the
destruction from the owner of the animal.
   (C)   Any animal placed in the custody of a licensed veterinarian for
treatment, boarding or other care, which shall be unclaimed by its owner, or
his or her agent, for a period of more than ten days after written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, is given the owner or his or her
agent at his or her last known address, shall be deemed to be abandoned and may
be turned over to the nearest humane society or animal shelter or disposed of
as the custodian may deem proper. The giving of notice to the owner, or the
agent of the owner of the animal, by the licensed veterinarian shall relieve
the licensed veterinarian and any custodian to whom the animal may be given of
any further liability for disposal. Abandonment shall constitute the
relinquishment of all rights and claims by the owner to the animal.
(KRS 257.100)
§ 90.08 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the corporate
limits of the city any horse, cow, sheep, goat or hog, or any other animal,
domestic or otherwise, which may constitute a danger or nuisance to the
residents of the city.
(Ord. 41, passed 2- -1968) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG. Any member of the canine family, six months of age or over, male or
female.
§ 90.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog or dogs in the city
without first obtaining a license for each dog. This section and §
90.22 shall not apply to dogs whose owners are non-residents temporarily within
the city for a period less than 30 days.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 REGISTRATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All dogs kept in the city shall be registered as to sex, breed, name
and address of the owner and name of the dog. At the time of the registration,
the owner shall obtain a license tag for the dog and shall pay a fee as
established by City Council for each dog.
   (B)   The license tag shall be valid for one year from the date of issue. A
new tag shall be obtained each year by every owner and a new fee paid.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 LICENSE TAG TO BE ATTACHED TO DOG.
   The license tag shall be fastened to the collar of the dog and shall be worn
continuously, and the failure to have the tag so attached shall subject the
owner or keeper thereof to the penalties provided herein.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, either licensed or
unlicensed, regardless of the age of the dog, to allow the dog to be at large
and unattended or to run in any street, park, lawn, garden, schoolyard,
playground or on any other public or private property.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.25 NOISE DISTURBANCE.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the city which, by
frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud
and disturbing noises of a character, intensity and duration as to disturb the
peace, quiet and good order of one or more of the inhabitants of two or more
separate residences.
   (B)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or
fed within any dwelling, yard or enclosure which he or she occupies or owns
shall be considered as harboring the dog.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every police officer, peace officer or other authorized official shall have
the authority to apprehend any dog running at large in violation of this
chapter and any unlicensed dog in the city, and to impound the dog or have the
dog impounded in the appropriate place.
§ 90.27 RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOG.
   The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim the dog upon the payment of
all appropriate fees and after fulfilling any and all other requirements.
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already otherwise provided shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day
the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
90.03 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$500, imprisoned for not more than 12 months or both for each offense.
(KRS 525.130)
   (C)   Any person who violates §
90.04 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor for the first offense if the dog
or cat suffers physical injury as a result of the torture.
Statutory reference:
   Torture of dogs and cats, see KRS 525.135
   (D)   Any person who violates § 90.05 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(KRS 436.600)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Excavations and Construction
   
91.01   Opening permit required
   
91.02   Application and cash deposit
   
91.03   Restoration of pavement
   
91.04   Barriers around excavations
   
91.05   Warning lights
   
91.06   Sidewalk construction
Road and Bridge Projects
   
91.20   Public hearing required
   
91.21   Notice requirements
   
91.22   Public may testify; effect of testimony
   
91.23   Hearing to be held prior to construction
   
91.24   Separate hearing for each project not required
   
91.25   Exemptions from hearing requirement
Obstructions
   
91.40   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
91.41   Street and sidewalk obstruction
   
91.42   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
91.43   Removal of ice and snow
 
   
91.99   Penalty
EXCAVATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 91.01 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city official,
to make any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or public way of the city
unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to commencement of
the work.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and
shall be issued by the authorized city official. Application shall be made on a
form prescribed by the City Council, giving the exact location of the proposed
opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth to be excavated and other facts
as may be provided for. The permit shall be issued only after a cash deposit
sufficient to cover the cost of restoration has been posted with the authorized
city official, conditioned upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of
excavations and restoration of all surfaces disturbed.
§ 91.03 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of a pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of the authorized city
official, and in accordance with rules, regulations and specifications approved
by the Council.
   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill the
excavation, restore the surface and remove all excess materials within the time
specified in the permit or, where not specified therein, within a reasonable
time after commencement of the work, the city may proceed without notice to
make the fill and restoration and the deposit referred to in §
91.02 shall be forfeited. Thereupon the deposit shall be paid into the
appropriate city fund, except that part demanded and paid to the permittee as
the difference between the deposit and the charges of the city for restoration
services performed by it. If the amount of the services performed by the city
should exceed the amount of the deposit, the Clerk, or other proper
administrative officer, shall proceed to collect the remainder due from the
permittee.
§ 91.04 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded, at all times, to prevent injury to persons or
animals.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any
manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, at all times during the night, shall install and maintain at least
two illuminated red lamps which shall be securely and conspicuously posted on,
at or near each end of the obstruction or excavation, and if the space involved
exceeds 50 feet in extent, at least one additional lamp for each added 50 feet
or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be the duty of the authorized city official to supervise
construction or repair of sidewalks within the city. He or she shall cause
specifications to be prepared for the construction of the various kinds of
pavements and transmit the specifications to the City Council for approval.
When the specifications are approved, the City Council shall advertise for
proposals to do all the work which may be ordered by the city in construction
and repair of sidewalks, and shall authorize the Mayor to contract therefor,
for a period not exceeding one year, with the lowest responsible bidder, who
shall furnish good and sufficient sureties for the faithful performance of the
work. The Mayor, if authorized by City Council, may make separate contracts for
the different kinds of work with different parties.
Statutory references:
   Sidewalks; construction along public roads; specifications, see KRS 178.290
   Sidewalks; ramps for wheelchairs, see KRS 66.660
ROAD AND BRIDGE PROJECTS
§ 91.20 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   Before the city expends state-derived tax revenues on a municipal highway,
road, street or bridge, it shall provide an opportunity to the public to
provide input in a public meeting for which notice has been given under KRS
61.823(2) to (4) with regard to the project and to priorities for use of tax
monies for road and bridge purposes.
(KRS 174.100)
§ 91.21 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to the contemplated date of expenditure of state-derived tax revenues
on a road or bridge by the city, the city shall include the topic as a specific
item on the public meeting agenda and shall allow any person to speak with
regard to any proposed project, any project which he or she feels should be
built or done which has not been proposed, priorities for completion of
projects and any other matter related to road or bridge projects, and any other
matter related to road or bridge projects.
(KRS 174.100(1))
§ 91.22 PUBLIC MAY TESTIFY; EFFECT OF TESTIMONY.
   The city shall not be bound by the comments and input provided at the
meeting but shall give due consideration to them.
(KRS 174.100(2))
§ 91.23 HEARING TO BE HELD PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION.
   The city shall not begin construction on a road or bridge project wherein
state-derived tax revenues are involved until the meeting as provided in this
subchapter has been held.
(KRS 174.100(3))
§ 91.24 SEPARATE HEARING FOR EACH PROJECT NOT REQUIRED.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to require a separate meeting for
each project. A single meeting encompassing the entire road and bridge program,
provided all projects subsequently undertaken have been identified at the
meeting, shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(KRS 174.100(4))
§ 91.25 EXEMPTIONS FROM HEARING REQUIREMENT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to emergency repair or
replacement of roads or bridges necessitated by natural or human-caused
disasters, nor to street cleaning or snow removal operations.
(KRS 174.100(5))
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 91.40 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the city by
throwing or letting the material fall upon the pavement of any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public way without first placing some sufficient protection
over the pavement.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.41 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way
within the city by erecting thereon any fence or building, or permitting any
fence or building to remain thereon. Each day that any fence or building is
permitted to remain upon the public way shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.42 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant or
person having the care of any building or lot of land, bordering on any street
or sidewalk, shall permit it to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles or substances of any kind, so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
Penalty, see §
91.99
Cross-reference:
   Littering on streets or sidewalks, see
Chapter 94 of this code of ordinances
§ 91.43 REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or of the occupant of each and every
parcel of real estate in the city abutting upon any sidewalk to keep the
sidewalk abutting his or her premises free and clear of snow and ice to the
extent feasible under the prevailing weather conditions, and to remove
therefrom all snow and ice, to the extent feasible under the prevailing weather
conditions, accumulated thereon within a reasonable time which will ordinarily
not exceed 12 hours after the abatement of any storm during which the snow and
ice may have accumulated.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500.
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Common law and statutory nuisances
   
92.03   Certain conditions declared a nuisance
   
92.04   Abatement procedure
   
92.05   Nuisance created by others
   
92.06   Suspension of license
   
92.07   Vacant lot nuisances
   
92.08   Collection of water
   
92.09   Treatment of the collection of water
   
92.10   Presence of mosquitos
   
92.11   Failure to take measure for prevention
   
92.12   Enforcement
   
92.13   Responsibility for nuisance
Noise
   
92.25   General prohibitions
   
92.26   Specific prohibitions
   
92.27   Exemptions
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Private nuisances, see KRS 411.500 through 411.570
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE COLLECTOR. A person who collects and restores motor vehicles.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(b))
   AUTOMOBILE PARTS. Any portion or parts of any motor-driven vehicle as
detached from the vehicle as a whole.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which is likely to cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(e))
   INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Unable to move under its own power due to defective
or missing parts, and which has remained in that condition for a period of not
less than ten consecutive days.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any style or type of motor-driven vehicle used for the
conveyance of persons or property.
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. A sight line within normal visual range by a person on
a public street or sidewalk adjacent to real property.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(h))
   PARTS CAR. An automobile that is not intended to be operated along streets
and roads, but is used to provide parts for the restoration of other
automobiles.
(KRS 65.8840(1)(j))
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any act, thing, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for a length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
      (2)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
stream, ditch or drainage; or
      (3)   Essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property or tend to depreciate the value of property of others.
   SCRAP METAL. Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper, aluminum or
any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any other material,
whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness in its original
form and can no longer be used for its originally intended purpose.
   UNFIT FOR FURTHER USE. In a dangerous condition, having defective or missing
parts or in a condition generally as to be unfit for further use as a
conveyance.
§ 92.02 COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.
   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public nuisance,
those offenses which are known to the common law and statutes of the
commonwealth as public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded
against as is provided in this chapter or in accordance with any other
provision of law.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person having control
or management of any land within the city to permit a public nuisance to
develop thereon.
   (B)   The following conditions are declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   Dangerous trees or stacks adjoining street. Any tree, stack or
other object standing in such a condition that it will, if the condition is
allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb or property of, or cause hurt,
damage or injury to persons or property upon the public streets or public ways
adjacent thereto, by the falling thereof or of parts thereof;
      (2)   Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation on any premises of filth,
refuse, trash, garbage or other waste material which endangers the public
health, welfare or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful enjoyment
by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger that it will
catch or communicate fire, attract and propagate vermin, rodents or insects, or
blow rubbish into any street, sidewalk or property of another;
      (3)   Storage of explosives. The storage of explosive material which
creates a safety hazard to other property or persons in the vicinity;
      (4)   Weeds and grass. The excessive growth of weeds, grass or other
vegetation. Unless otherwise provided, EXCESSIVE shall mean growth to a height
of 12 inches or more;
      (5)   Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered or insecurely
covered cistern, cellar, well, pit, excavation or vault situated upon private
premises in any open or unfenced lot or place;
      (6)   Trees and shrubbery obstructing streets, sidewalks and drainage.
The growing and maintenance of trees or shrubbery which in any way interfere
with the use, construction or maintenance of streets or sidewalks, cause injury
to streets or sidewalks or constitute an obstruction to drainage;
      (7)   Keeping of animals. The failure to keep an animal’s pen, yard, lot
or other enclosure in a sanitary condition and free from preventable offensive
odors; and
      (8)   Junk; scrap metal; motor vehicles. The storage of motor vehicles in
an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use, automobile
parts or scrap metal within the city limits except on premises authorized by
the city for those purposes.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, it shall be unlawful for the
owner, occupant or person having control or management of any premises within a
local government to permit a public nuisance, health hazard or source of filth
to develop thereon through the accumulation of:
      (1)   Junked or wrecked automobiles, vehicles, machines or other similar
scrap or salvage materials, excluding inoperative farm equipment;
      (2)   One or more mobile or manufactured homes, as defined in KRS
227.550, that are junked, wrecked or inoperative and which are not inhabited;
      (3)   Rubbish; or
      (4)   The excessive growth of weeds or grass.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A)(1) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   Junked, wrecked or inoperative automobiles, vehicles, machines or
other similar scrap or salvage materials located on the business premises of a:
         (a)   Licensed automotive recycling dealer, as described in KRS
190.010(8);
         (b)   Used motor vehicle dealer, as defined in KRS 190.010(6); or
         (c)   Motor vehicle auction dealer, as defined in KRS 190.010(11).
      (2)   Junked, wrecked or inoperative motor vehicles, including parts
cars, stored on private premises by automobile collectors, whether as a hobby
or a profession, if these motor vehicles and parts cars are stored out of
ordinary public view by means of suitable fencing, trees, shrubbery or other
means; and
      (3)   Any motor vehicle, as defined in KRS 281.010, that is owned,
controlled, operated, managed or leased by a motor carrier.
   (C)   An owner shall not permit any structure upon his or her premises to
become unfit and unsafe for human habitation, occupancy or use or to permit
conditions to exist on the structure or premises which are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of the structure, the
occupants of neighboring structures or other residents of the local government.
   (D)   A local government may provide by ordinance for the abatement and
decontamination of a property where a methamphetamine contamination notice has
been posted as provided in KRS 224.1-410. Pursuant to divisions (E) and (F)
below, notice and an opportunity to request a hearing shall be afforded to an
owner prior to decontamination of the property. A lien for all fees, charges
and costs incurred by the local government in the enforcement of an ordinance
related to decontaminating a property where a methamphetamine contamination
notice has been posted pursuant to KRS 224.1-410 shall be placed on the
property pursuant to division (G) below. Notwithstanding divisions (J) and (K)
below, the costs of abatement and decontamination of a property where a
methamphetamine contamination notice has been posted are recoverable throughout
the county.
   (E)   The city may establish by ordinance reasonable standards and
procedures for the enforcement of this section. The procedures shall comply
with all applicable statutes, administrative regulations or codes. Any
ordinance establishing these procedures may be enforced by any means authorized
by law. Proper notice shall be given to owners before any action is taken
pursuant to this section, and, prior to the decontamination of a property where
a methamphetamine contamination notice has been posted pursuant to KRS 224.1-
410 or the demolition of any unfit or unsafe structure, the opportunity to
request a hearing shall be afforded the owner.
   (F)   Unless imminent danger exists on the subject premises that
necessitates immediate action, the local government shall send, within 14 days
of a final determination after hearing or waiver of hearing by the owner, a
copy of the determination to any lien holder of record of the subject premises
by first-class mail with proof of mailing. The lien holder of record may,
within 45 days from receipt of that notice, correct the violations cited or
elect to pay all civil fines assessed for the violation and all charges and
fees incurred by the local government in connection with the enforcement of the
ordinance, including abatement costs, as permitted by division (G) below.
   (G)   The city shall have a lien against the property for all civil fines
assessed for the violation and for all charges and fees incurred by the city in
connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including abatement costs.
The affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the amount of the lien and the regularity of the proceedings
pursuant to this section, and shall be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk. The lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording
and shall bear interest thereafter until paid. The lien created shall take
precedence over all other liens, except state, county, school board and city
taxes, except as provided in division (H) below. The city shall possess the
lien for ten years following the date of the final, nonappealable order of a
Code Enforcement Board or final judgment of the court. The lien may be enforced
by judicial proceeding.
   (H)   The lien provided in division (G) above shall not take precedence or
priority over a previously recorded lien if:
      (1)   The city failed to provide the lien holder a copy of the
determination in accordance with division (F) above; or
      (2)   The lien holder received a copy of the determination as required by
division (F) above, and the lien holder corrected the violations or paid all
civil fines assessed for the violation and all charges and fees incurred by the
local government in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance, including
abatement costs.
   (I)   In addition to the remedy prescribed in division (E) above or any
other remedy authorized by law, the owner of a premises upon which a lien has
been attached pursuant to this section shall be personally liable for the
amount of the lien, including all civil fines assessed for the violation and
all charges, fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in connection with
the enforcement of the ordinance. The city may bring a civil action against the
owner and shall have the same remedies as provided for the recovery of a debt
owed. The failure of the city to comply with division (F) above, and the
failure of a lien to take precedence over previously filed liens as provided in
division (H) above, shall not limit or restrict any remedies that the city has
against the owner of the premises.
   (J)   The provisions of divisions (E), (G) and (I) above shall not apply to
an owner, occupant or person having control or management of any land located
in an unincorporated area if the owner, occupant or person is not the generator
of the rubbish or is not dumping or knowingly allowing the dumping of the
rubbish and has made reasonable efforts to prevent the dumping of rubbish by
other persons onto the premises.
   (K)   The right to request a hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to a period of 30 days after notice has been placed on the property and
has been sent by certified mail return receipt requested.
(KRS 65.8840(3) - (14))
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 NUISANCE CREATED BY OTHERS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by the owner, occupant or person having
control or management of the premises, but merely that the nuisance is created
or contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests or other persons for whose
conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for whose conduct
the owner or operator is not responsible, but by the exercise of reasonable
care ought to have become aware of.
§ 92.06 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Whenever it is shown that a nuisance is associated with or caused by
the conduct of a business or activity licensed by the city and that the
existence of the nuisance presents an immediate threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, the City Council may suspend the license of the person or
persons conducting the business or activity.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause a notice of the suspension to be served
personally upon the licensee, or upon any responsible agent of the licensee, at
the premises where the licensed business or activity is being conducted. The
notice shall clearly inform the licensee of the reason for the suspension, and
the conditions that must be met for the suspension to be removed.
   (C)   Upon application of the licensee, and upon a showing that the nuisance
has been satisfactorily abated and that any other reasonable conditions set
forth in the notice have been met, the City Council may remove the suspension.
§ 92.07 VACANT LOT NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain any vacant lot or other premises within the
municipality of the city on which the rubbish is allowed to accumulate, weeds
or long grass allowed to grow or any water is allowed to collect and lie
stagnant, in which mosquitoes breed, or are likely to breed, and any such
premises or vacant lot on which such rubbish, weeds, long grass or stagnant
water is allowed to remain is hereby declared a nuisance and dangerous to the
health of the people in the city.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 COLLECTION OF WATER.
   The collection of water referred to in §
92.07 shall be held to be those contained in ditches, ponds, pools,
excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains,
cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, except horse troughs in
frequent use, eaves troughs, urns, urn cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets or
other similar containers.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 TREATMENT OF THE COLLECTION OF WATER.
   (A)   The method of treatment of the collection of water specified in §
92.08, so as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, shall be any one or more of
the following:
      (1)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each
way or any other material which would prevent the ingress or egress of
mosquitoes;
      (2)   Complete emptying every seven days of the unscreened containers;
      (3)   Using a larvicide approved by and applied under the direction of
the Health Department;
      (4)   Covering completely every seven days the surface of the water with
per off in oil, kerosene or petroleum in sufficient quantities to remain
covered at least 12 hours each time;
      (5)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free from vegetable growth and
other obstructions and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish, absence of half-
grown or larger mosquito larvae to be evidence of compliance with this measure;
      (6)   Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the Louisville and
Jefferson County Health Department; and
      (7)   The removal of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and
similar articles likely to hold water at least once in seven days.
   (B)   If not removed, it must be so completely destroyed as not to be able
to hold water.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.10 PRESENCE OF MOSQUITOS.
   The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall
be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such
breeding within the 24 hours or such reasonable period as may be specified, in
writing, by the Louisville and Jefferson County Health Department shall be
deemed a violation of the ordinance and regulation.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 FAILURE TO TAKE MEASURE FOR PREVENTION.
   Should a person or persons responsible for conditions giving rise to
breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the
same within 24 hours or such reasonable period as may be specified, in writing,
by the Louisville and Jefferson County Health Department, the Louisville and
Jefferson County Health Department is hereby authorized to do so, and all
necessary costs incurred by the Louisville and Jefferson County Health
Department shall be a charge against the property owner or other person
offending as the case may be.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958)
§ 92.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Louisville and Jefferson County Health Department shall enforce the
provisions of §§
92.07 through
92.13, and for this purpose may, at all reasonable times, enter in and upon any
premises within its jurisdiction and any person or persons charged with any of
the duties imposed by §§
92.07 through
92.13 falling within the time specified by the Louisville and Jefferson County
Health Department to comply with any order thereof to comply with §§
92.07 through
92.13 shall be deemed guilty of a violation and each day after the expiration
of this time that said persons fails to comply with §§
92.07 through
92.13 shall be deemed a separate offense of §§
92.07 through
92.13.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958)
§ 92.13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCE.
   The owner of the premises, and, in his or her absence, the agent or
occupant, shall be held under §§
92.07 through
92.13 to be responsible for the prevention or correction of conditions giving
rise to the breeding of mosquitoes; provided any tenant, trespasser or other
person causing said condition without the consent of the owner or agent shall
be held responsible therefor.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958)
NOISE
§ 92.25 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, firm or association
to make, create or continue or cause, permit, maintain or suffer to be made or
continued, any loud, raucous, unnecessary, excessive or unusual noise which
disturbs the peace or quiet of any others or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing within the
city.
   (B)   The standard for determining whether a violation of the provisions of
this subchapter exists includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The volume, level and intensity of the noise;
      (2)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
      (3)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
      (4)   The proximity of the noise to residential dwellings;
      (5)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
      (6)   The duration of the noise;
      (7)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, over a cumulative
period or constant;
      (8)   Whether the noise can be heard more than 50 feet away from any
adjoining property boundary line in a residential district; and
      (9)   The intrusiveness of the noise.
(Ord. 3, series 2017-2018, passed 7-17-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   In addition to and separate from any provision of this subchapter, the
following acts and the causing, suffering or permitting thereof, which produce
excessive and unnecessary noises creating a nuisance and disturbing the peace
shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   The listing of the following specific prohibited acts is not intended
to limit the city’s authority to regulate any and all loud, unnecessary and
unusual noises and even if not included herein, such noise disturbances shall
be subject to regulation pursuant to this subchapter:
      (1)   Mechanical or electronic devices. Using any mechanical or
electronic device for the intensification of any sound or noise into the public
streets which produces excessive or annoying noise;
      (2)   Advertisement. Using any instrument, whistle, drum or bell or
making any other unnecessary noise for the purpose of advertising, announcing
or otherwise calling attention to any goods, wares, merchandise or to any show,
entertainment or event;
      (3)   Burglar or fire alarm. Sounding of any exterior burglar or fire
alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm which is not terminated within 15
minutes of activation;
      (4)   Music. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of
any radio, television set, tape player, compact disc player, stereo, drum,
musical instrument or similar device which reproduces sound so as to create a
noise disturbance or cause any violation of this subchapter;
      (5)   Sound amplifier. Using, operating or permitting the use or
operation, for any purpose, a sound amplifier so as to create a noise
disturbance or cause any violation of this subchapter; and
      (6)   Animals. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal which howls,
barks, meows or makes other annoying noises for an unreasonable period of time.
For the purposes of this subchapter, the animal noise shall not be deemed
excessive if a person is trespassing or legally entering upon private property
in or upon which the animal is situated or is using any other means to provoke
or tease the animal, provided that the owner or possessor of the animal makes
reasonable efforts to calm the animal.
(Ord. 3, series 2017-2018, passed 7-17-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.27 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   Train bells, sirens, horns, whistles or similar audible warning
devices;
   (B)   Noises relating to the use of lawn mowers or other equipment used for
landscaping purposes between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.;
   (C)   Noises resulting from necessary activities designed to serve the best
interests of the city, including, but not limited to, street repairs, debris
and tree limb removal, restoring electrical service, snow removal and
sanitation services;
   (D)   Noises from activities conducted on public parks or playgrounds and
public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to, school
athletic and school entertainment events; and
   (E)   Noises from activities conducted on property owned or operated by
civic, charitable or religious organizations, including, but not limited to,
neighborhood or church festivals and entertainment events.
(Ord. 3, series 2017-2018, passed 7-17-2017)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500
for each offense. Each day’s continued violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   Any person or persons violating or assisting in the violation of any
part or parts of §§
92.07 through
92.13 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $5 or not more than $20.
   (D)   (1)   A violation of §§
92.25 through
92.27 shall be a civil offense and shall be enforced through the Code
Enforcement Board. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§
92.25 through
92.27 shall be fined in an amount not less than $25 nor more than $100. Each
day a violation continues shall be a separate offense and a separate penalty
may be imposed therefor. The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b)
that may be imposed for each separate offense and violation of §§
92.25 through
92.27 is hereby established as $100.
      (2)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 68.8808(2)(c) that shall be
imposed for each separate offense and violation of §§
92.25 through
92.27 if the person who has committed the violation and offense does not
contest the citation is hereby established as $25.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately issuing a
civil citation, give notice that the violation of §§
92.25 through
92.27 shall be remedied within a specific period of time.
(Ord. 23, passed 8-7-1958; Ord. 3, series 2017-2018, passed 7-17-2017)
CHAPTER 93: FIREWORKS; FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
   
93.01   Definitions; legality of items
   
93.02   Sale or use prohibited; exception for public display
   
93.03   Consumer fireworks; restrictions on sale
   
93.04   Bond or liability insurance requirement
   
93.05   Exempted sales and uses
   
93.06   Destruction of fireworks
Fire Prevention
   
93.20   Blasting permit
   
93.21   Storage of flammables and other matter
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS; LEGALITY OF ITEMS.
   (A)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, FIREWORKS means any composition or
device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and which meets the definition of
CONSUMER FIREWORKS as defined in division (B) below or DISPLAY FIREWORKS as
defined in division (D) below and as set forth in the U.S. Department of
Transportation’s (DOT) hazardous materials regulations. FIREWORKS does not
include:
      (1)   Exception number one. Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps manufactured in accordance with DOT
regulations, and packed and shipped according to those regulations, are not
considered to be FIREWORKS and shall be allowed to be used and sold at all
times;
      (2)   Exception number two. Model rockets and model rocket motors
designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models
are not considered to be FIREWORKS; and
      (3)   Exception number three. Propelling or expelling charges consisting
of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal and saltpeter are not considered as being
designed for producing audible effects.
(KRS 227.700)
   (B)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, CONSUMER FIREWORKS means fireworks
that are suitable for use by the public, designed primarily to produce visible
effects by combustion and that comply with the construction, chemical
composition and labeling regulations of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission. The types, sizes and amount of pyrotechnic contents of these
devices are limited as enumerated in this section. Some small devices designed
to produce audible effects are included, such as whistling devices, ground
devices containing 50 milligrams or less of explosive composition and aerial
devices containing 130 milligrams or less of explosive composition. CONSUMER
FIREWORKS are further defined by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in
CPSC, 16 C.F.R. pts. 1500 and 1507, are classified as Division 1.4G Class C
explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation and include the following:
      (1)   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices.
         (a)   Dipped stick-sparkler or wire sparkler. These devices consist of
a metal wire or wood dowel that has been coated with pyrotechnic composition.
Upon ignition of the tip of the device, a shower of sparks is produced.
Sparklers may contain up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition per item.
Those devices containing any perchlorate or chlorate salts may not exceed five
grams of pyrotechnic composition per item. Wire sparklers which contain no
magnesium and which contain less than 100 grams of composition per item are not
included in this category, in accordance with DOT regulations;
         (b)   Cylindrical fountain. Cylindrical tube containing not more than
75 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, a shower of colored sparks,
and sometimes a whistling effect or smoke, is produced. This device may be
provided with a spike for insertion into the ground (spike fountain), a wood or
plastic base for placing on the ground (base fountain) or a wood or cardboard
handle, if intended to be hand-held (handle fountain). When more than one tube
is mounted on a common base, total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200
grams, or 500 grams if the tubes are separated from each other on the base by a
distance of at least one-half inch;
         (c)   Cone fountain. Cardboard or heavy paper cone containing up to 50
grams of pyrotechnic composition. The effect is the same as that of a
cylindrical fountain. When more than one cone is mounted on a common base, the
total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams, or 500 grams if the
tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-
half inch;
         (d)   Illuminating torch. Cylindrical tube containing up to 100 grams
of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, colored fire is produced. May be
spike, base or hand-held. When more than one tube is mounted on a common base,
total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed 200 grams or 500 grams if the
tubes are separated from each other on the base by a distance of at least one-
half inch;
         (e)   Wheel. A device attached to a post or tree by means of a nail or
string. A wheel may have one or more drivers, each of which may contain not
more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic composition. No wheel may contain more than
200 grams total pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, the wheel revolves,
producing a shower of color and sparks and, sometimes, a whistling effect;
         (f)   Ground spinner. Small device containing not more than 20 grams
of pyrotechnic composition, similar in operation to a wheel but intended to be
placed on the ground and ignited. A shower of sparks and color is produced by
the rapidly spinning device;
         (g)   Flitter sparkler. Narrow paper tube attached to a stick or wire
and filled with not more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that
produces color and sparks upon ignition. The paper at one end of the tube is
ignited to make the device function; and
         (h)   Toy smoke device. Small plastic or paper item containing not
more than 100 grams of pyrotechnic composition that, upon ignition, produces
white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      (2)   Aerial devices.
         (a)   Sky rockets and bottle rockets. Cylindrical tube containing not
more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic composition. Sky rockets contain a wooden
stick for guidance and stability and rise into the air upon ignition. A burst
of color or noise or both is produced at the height of flight;
         (b)   Missile-type rocket. A device similar to a sky rocket in size,
composition and effect that uses fins rather than a stick for guidance and
stability;
         (c)   Helicopter, aerial spinner. A tube containing up to 20 grams of
pyrotechnic composition. A propeller or blade is attached which, upon ignition,
lifts the rapidly spinning device into the air. A visible or audible effect is
produced at the height of flight;
         (d)   Roman candles. Heavy paper or cardboard tube containing up to 20
grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition, up to ten stars (pellets of
pressed pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color) are individually
expelled at several-second intervals;
         (e)   Mine, shell. Heavy cardboard or paper tube usually attached to a
wood or plastic base and containing up to 60 grams of total chemical
composition (lift charge, burst charge and visible or audible effect
composition). Upon ignition, “stars”, components producing reports containing
up to 130 milligrams of explosive composition per report, or other devices are
propelled into the air. The term MINE refers to a device with no internal
components containing a bursting charge, and the term SHELL refers to a device
that propels a component that subsequently bursts open in the air. A mine or
shell device may contain more than one tube provided the tubes fire in sequence
upon ignition of one external fuse. The term CAKE refers to a dense-packed
collection of mine or shell tubes. Total chemical composition including lift
charges of any multiple tube devices may not exceed 200 grams. The maximum
quantity of lift charge in any one tube of a mine or shell device shall not
exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quantity of break or bursting charge in any
component shall not exceed 25% of the total weight of chemical composition in
the component. The tube remains on the ground; and
         (f)   Aerial shell kit, reloadable tube. A package kit containing a
cardboard, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) or equivalent launching tube with
multiple-shot aerial shells. Each aerial shell is limited to a maximum of 60
grams of total chemical composition (lift charge, burst charge and visible or
audible effect composition), and the maximum diameter of each shell shall not
exceed one and three-quarter inches. In addition, the maximum quantity of lift
charge in any shell shall not exceed 20 grams, and the maximum quantity of
break or bursting charge in any shell shall not exceed 25% of the total weight
of chemical composition in the shell. The total chemical composition of all the
shells in a kit, including lift charge, shall not exceed 400 grams. The user
lowers a shell into the launching tube, at the time of firing, with the fuse
extending out of the top of the tube. After the firing, the tube is then
reloaded with another shell for the next firing. All launching tubes shall be
capable of firing twice the number of shells in the kit without failure of the
tube. Each package of multiple-shot aerial shells must comply with all warning
label requirements of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
      (3)   Audible ground devices.
         (a)   Firecrackers, salutes. Small paper-wrapped or cardboard tube
containing not more than 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic composition. Those used
in aerial devices may contain not more than 130 milligrams of explosive
composition per report. Upon ignition, noise and a flash of light is produced;
and
         (b)   Chaser. Small paper or cardboard tube that travels along the
ground upon ignition. A whistling effect, or other noise, is often produced.
The explosive composition used to create the noise may not exceed 50
milligrams.
(KRS 227.702)
   (C)   Items listed below are classified as NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS
and are not classified as common fireworks by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, and their transportation, storage, retail sale, possession,
sale and use shall be allowed throughout the state at all times.
      (1)   Snake, glow worm. Pressed pellet of pyrotechnic composition that
produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning. The ash expands in length as the
pellet burns. These devices may not contain mercuric thiocyanate.
      (2)   Smoke device. Tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      (3)   Wire sparkler. Wire coated with pyrotechnic composition that
produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. These items may not contain
magnesium and must not exceed 100 grams of composition per item. Devices
containing any chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five grams of
composition per item.
      (4)   Trick noisemaker. Item that produces a small report intended to
surprise the user. These devices include:
         (a)   Party popper. Small plastic or paper item containing not more
than 16 milligrams of explosive composition that is friction sensitive. A
string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it, expelling paper
streamers and producing a small report;
         (b)   Booby trap. Small tube with string protruding from both ends,
similar to a party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled to
ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small report;
         (c)   Snapper. Small, paper-wrapped item containing a minute quantity
of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped, the device
explodes, producing a small report;
         (d)   Trick match. Kitchen or book match that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition of the
match, a small report or a shower of sparks is produced;
         (e)   Cigarette load. Small wooden peg that has been coated with a
small quantity of explosive composition. Upon ignition of a cigarette
containing one of the pegs, a small report is produced; and
         (f)   Auto burglar alarm. Tube which contains pyrotechnic composition
that produces a loud whistle or smoke, or both, when ignited. A small quantity
of explosive, not exceeding 50 milligrams, may also be used to produce a small
report. A squib is used to ignite the device.
(KRS 227.704)
   (D)   As used in KRS 227.700 to 227.750, DISPLAY FIREWORKS means pyrotechnic
devices or large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible
effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. This term includes, but is
not limited to, firecrackers containing more than two grains (130 milligrams)
of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of
pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits for
classification as consumer fireworks. DISPLAY FIREWORKS are defined by the
Consumer Product Safety Commission in CPSC, 16 C.F.R. pts. 1500 and 1507, and
are classified as Class B explosives by the U.S. Department of Transportation.
(KRS 227.706)
   (E)   Legality of items is as follows.
      (1)   Items described in division (B) above are legal for retail sale,
provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect thereto are
met.
      (2)   Items described in division (D) above are not legal for retail sale
but are legal under permits granted pursuant to this chapter for the purposes
specified in this chapter for public displays and may be sold at wholesale as
provided in this chapter.
      (3)   Items described in division (C) above are legal for retail sale,
provided all applicable federal and state requirements with respect thereto are
met.
(KRS 227.708)
§ 93.02 SALE OR USE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   No person, firm, copartnership or corporation shall offer for sale, expose
for sale, sell at retail or keep with intent to sell, possess, use or explode
any display fireworks, except as follows:
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department, or other authorized city official,
may grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by the city, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals.
Every display shall be handled by a competent display operator to be approved
by the public official by whom the permit is granted, and shall be of a
character, and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the
official, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to property or endanger
any person. COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR shall be defined as the person with
overall responsibility for the operation and safety of a fireworks display. The
competent display operator shall have a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives (ATF) license and have participated as an assistant in firing at
least five public displays. A COMPETENT DISPLAY OPERATOR is also an employee
possessor. A permit under this division (A) shall be issued only to a competent
display operator holding an ATF license. At least one competent display
operator shall be on-site during display set-up and firing. This competent
display operator shall maintain a copy of the permit application, as signed by
the local authority having jurisdiction as identified in this section, on-site
and at all times the display is in place, and shall be presented on demand of
the State Fire Marshal or local Fire Chief. All public displays that require
issuance of a permit shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1123 – Code for Fireworks Display
(adopted edition). Permits shall be filed with the State Fire Marshal at least
15 days in advance of the date of the display. After the privilege is granted,
sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for the display shall be
lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted under this division (A) shall
be transferable. For the purposes of this division (A), PUBLIC DISPLAY OF
FIREWORKS shall include the use of pyrotechnic devices or pyrotechnic materials
before a proximate audience, whether indoors or outdoors. Any person remaining
within the display area shall be identified as licensed by the ATF, or an
employee thereof, or be an assistant in training to become a competent display
operator. All persons remaining within the display area shall be at least 18
years of age. The Commissioner of the Department of Housing, Buildings and
Construction with recommendation from the State Fire Marshal shall promulgate
administrative regulations in accordance with KRS Chapter 13A to administer the
provisions of this division (A). The regulations shall address the process by
which permits are issued and any other procedures that are reasonably necessary
to effectuate this division (A);
   (B)   The sale, at wholesale, of any display fireworks for permitted
displays by any resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer or jobber, in
accordance with regulations of the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives if the sale is to the person holding a display permit as
outlined in division (A) above. The permit holder shall present the permit
along with other verifiable identification at the time of sale;
   (C)   The sale of display fireworks in accordance with a license issued by
the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives;
   (D)   The sale and use in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling
devices and distress signals for marine, aviation and highway use;
   (E)   The use of fuses and railway torpedoes by railroads;
   (F)   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater or
for signal or ceremonial purpose in athletics or sports;
   (G)   The use of any pyrotechnic device by military organizations;
   (H)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under the direct
supervision of the U.S. Department of the Interior or any equivalent or local
agency; and
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person, firm, co-partnership,
nonprofit or corporation from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling at
retail, keeping with intent to sell, possessing or using consumer fireworks, as
defined in KRS 227.702 and as permitted pursuant to KRS 227.715.
(KRS 227.710) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 CONSUMER FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE.
   Except as provided in §
93.02, the consumer fireworks described in §
93.01(B) may be offered for sale, sold at retail or kept with the intent to
sell, only if the following requirements are met.
   (A)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, nonprofit or business intending to
sell consumer fireworks described in §
93.01(B) shall register annually with the State Fire Marshal, who may assess a
fee of no more than $25 for each site at which fireworks shall be sold. The
registration requirement under this division (A) shall not apply to permanent
business establishments which are open year round and in which the sale of
fireworks is ancillary to the primary course of business. Each location shall
be required to charge sales tax at the current rate imposed on retailers in KRS
139.200.
   (B)   Permanent business establishments open year-round and in which the
sale of consumer fireworks is ancillary to the primary course of business shall
only be permitted to sell those consumer fireworks described in §
93.01(B), or shall meet the criteria for “seasonal retailer” described in
division (C) below.
   (C)   SEASONAL RETAILERS shall be defined as any person, firm, co-
partnership, nonprofit or corporation intending to sell “consumer fireworks”
between June 10 and July 7, or December 26 and January 4 of each year or both,
and shall include permanent businesses, temporary businesses, stores, stands or
tents. A seasonal retailer shall register with the State Fire Marshal, who may
assess a fee of no more than $250 for each site at which fireworks shall be
sold. Each location shall be required to charge sales tax at the current rate
imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200.
   (D)   Any person, firm, co-partnership, nonprofit or corporation intending
to sell consumer fireworks, as defined in §
93.01(B) as the primary source of business, that is not a seasonal retailer as
defined in division (C) above, shall register with the State Fire Marshal, who
may assess a fee of no more than $500 for each site at which fireworks will be
sold. Each location shall be required to charge sales tax at the current rate
imposed on retailers in KRS 139.200.
   (E)   The annual registration required by this section shall be received by
the State Fire Marshal at least 15 days prior to offering fireworks for sale at
the site for which the registration is intended. Evidence that a sales and use
tax permit has been obtained from the Department of Revenue shall be presented
to the State Fire Marshal as a condition of registration. If the registration
is received less than 15 days prior to offering fireworks for sale at the site
for which registration is intended, an additional assessment of $100 shall be
added to the initial fee.
   (F)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall have its
registration certificate displayed in a conspicuous location at the site.
   (G)   Each site at which fireworks are offered for sale shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the International Building Code, with Kentucky
Amendments (adopted edition) and NFPA 1124 (National Fire Protection
Association) – Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Retail
Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles (adopted edition).
   (H)   No person or business shall give, offer for sale or sell any consumer
fireworks listed in §
93.01(B) to any person under 18 years of age.
   (I)   No person under 18 years of age may be employed by a fireworks
distribution facility or manufacturing facility. No person under 18 years of
age shall sell consumer fireworks at a consumer fireworks retail sales facility
registered under this section unless the individual is supervised by a parent
or guardian.
   (J)   The State Fire Marshal may revoke the registration of any site which
is in violation of a requirement of this section, or any other requirement
provided pursuant to this chapter. If the violation renders any property
especially susceptible to fire loss, and there is present such hazard to human
life or limb that the public safety imperatively requires emergency action, the
State Fire Marshal may take that action, as provided in KRS 227.330(6).
   (K)   A person lawfully possessing consumer fireworks, as defined in §
93.01(B), may use those items if:
      (1)   He or she is at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Fireworks are not ignited within 200 feet of any structure, vehicle
or any other person; and
      (3)   Use of the fireworks does not place him or her in violation of any
lawfully enacted local ordinance.
(KRS 227.715) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   No permit shall be issued under §
93.02 unless the applicant shall give bond or evidence of liability insurance
deemed adequate by the official to whom application for the permit is made, in
a sum not less than $1,000,000. However, the appropriate city official or the
State Fire Marshal may require a larger amount if, in his or her judgment, the
situation requires it, conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be
caused thereby either to a person or to property by reason of the permitted
display, and arising from any acts of the licensee, his or her agents,
employees or subcontractors.
(KRS 227.720) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 EXEMPTED SALES AND USES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the retail sale and use of explosives
or signaling flares used in the course of ordinary business or industry; gold
star producing sparklers, which contain no magnesium or chlorate; toy snakes,
which contain no mercury; smoke novelties and party novelties, which contain
less than twenty-five hundredths grain of explosive mixture; shells or
cartridges, used as ammunition in firearms; blank cartridges for a show or
theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for
use by military organizations; or the sale of any kind of fireworks, provided
the same are to be shipped by the seller directly out of the state.
(KRS 227.730)
§ 93.06 DESTRUCTION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The State Fire Marshal, or any fire department having jurisdiction
which has been deputized to act on behalf of the State Fire Marshal, shall
cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks which
are stored and held in violation of this chapter. After a period of 60 days,
the seized fireworks may be offered for sale by closed bid to a properly
certified fireworks wholesaler.
   (B)   After a period of 60 days, the seized fireworks may be offered for
sale by closed bid to a properly certified manufacturer, distributor or
wholesaler. All seized fireworks or explosives with a Class 1.3G or “display”
designation shall require the notification of the United States Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The State Fire Marshal shall provide
the owner or possessor a receipt containing the complete inventory of any
fireworks seized within five business days of the seizure.
   (C)   Before any seized fireworks may be disposed of:
      (1)   If the owner of the seized fireworks is known to the State Fire
Marshal, the State Fire Marshal shall give notice by registered mail or
personal service to the owner of the State Fire Marshal’s intention to dispose
of the fireworks. The notice shall inform the owner of the State Fire Marshal’s
intent. The State Fire Marshal shall conduct an administrative hearing in
accordance with KRS Chapter 13B concerning the disposal of fireworks; or
      (2)   If the identity of the owner of any seized fireworks is not known
to the State Fire Marshal, the State Fire Marshal shall cause to be published,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the seizure was
made, notice of the seizure and of the State Fire Marshal’s intention to
dispose of the fireworks. The notice shall be published once each week for
three consecutive weeks. If no person claims ownership of the fireworks within
ten days of the date of the last publication, the State Fire Marshal may
proceed with disposal of the fireworks. If the owner does claim the fireworks
within ten days of the date of the last publication, a hearing as set out in
division (C)(1) above shall be held.
   (D)   Nothing in KRS 227.700 to 227.750 shall restrict a local government
from enacting ordinances that affect the sale or use of fireworks within its
jurisdiction.
(KRS 227.750)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 93.20 BLASTING PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the city without making
application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation and receiving a permit to blast from the authorized city
official.
   (B)   The authorized city official, before granting the permit, may require
the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the city and all other persons
against injury or damages which might result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.21 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES AND OTHER MATTER.
   (A)   All flammable or combustible materials shall be arranged and stored in
a manner which affords reasonable safety against the danger of fire.
   (B)   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior or any material of
a similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for these hazardous materials.
   (C)   No matter shall be stored or arranged in a manner which impedes or
prevents access to or exit from any premises in case of fire.
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
93.02 or
93.03, the regulations issued thereunder or any order issued thereunder or who
knowingly induces another, directly or indirectly, to violate the provisions of
those sections, shall be fined not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days, or both.
(KRS 227.990(4))
CHAPTER 94: LITTERING
Section
   
94.01   Throwing litter from vehicle
   
94.02   Tracking foreign matter on streets
   
94.03   Hauling loose material
   
94.04   Sweeping litter into gutters
   
94.05   Litter on private property
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE.
   No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private
property.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 TRACKING FOREIGN MATTER ON STREETS.
   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit upon any street, alley or other
public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 HAULING LOOSE MATERIAL.
   Every person hauling, or causing to be hauled, dirt, sand, gravel, cement,
fill dirt or loose material of any kind in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place shall haul it, or cause it to be hauled, in vehicles
provided with tight boxes or beds so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of
the contents from falling or being thrown, blown or deposited upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place. Any materials which fall from or which
are thrown, blown or deposited from any vehicle upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place shall be removed immediately by the person in
charge of the vehicle.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon streets, sidewalks or other
public places, or upon any private property.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city, whether owned by that person or not.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 95: GRASS AND WEEDS
Section
Deposit of Debris
   
95.01   Prohibiting disposal into public easements
   
95.02   Prima facie evidence
   
95.03   Notice and order
Maintenance of Grass and Weeds
   
95.15   Requirement to maintain
   
95.16   Warning citation and notice
   
95.17   Abating nuisances
   
95.18   Lien
Regulations for Trimming and Removal of Trees
   
95.30   Establishment of City Forester
   
95.31   Application
   
95.32   Application approval and hearing
   
95.33   Permit approval
   
95.34   Injunctive relief
 
   
95.99   Penalty
DEPOSIT OF DEBRIS
§ 95.01 PROHIBITING DISPOSAL INTO PUBLIC EASEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization to dispose of
grass clippings, plant or tree clippings, tree limbs, miscellaneous debris and/
or other waste products, including, but not limited to, throw away household
items, toys, furniture, appliances and the like into public easements within
the city or into public easements adjacent to said corporate limits.
(Ord. 5, series 1993-1994, passed 10-12-1993) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   It shall be prima facie evidence that any of the items described in §
95.01 hereof which are found in any public easement adjacent to the property of
any resident or tenant within the city were put there by the resident or tenant
living closest to such items illegally put there.
(Ord. 5, series 1993-1994, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 95.03 NOTICE AND ORDER.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties provided in §
95.99 hereof, the City Clerk may issue notice and order to the registered owner
or tenant in possession of the property, from which it is determined, that the
items constituting the violation came from.
   (B)   The notice and order described above shall give ten days’ notice to
remove all material constituting the violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   The notice and order may be served in person or by registered mail. If
served by registered mail, the ten-day notice period shall not begin to run
until two days from the mailing of said notice and order.
   (D)   In the event that the person or persons on whom the notice and order
is served fails to comply with the order to remove the materials placed in the
public easement, which constitutes a violation hereof, the city, or its
designated agent, shall remove, at the expense of the resident or tenant in
possession, all such material constituting the violation of §
95.01 hereof. The cost for such removal shall be assessed and become a lien
against the registered owner or tenant in possession.
   (E)   Any person aggrieved by the order issued by the City Clerk may request
a hearing before the City Council by application to said City Clerk. Such
request must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk within five days from
receipt of said order. There shall be a $50 fee for filing said hearing
request. The hearing shall be before the City Council at its next designated
regular meeting. Removal as provided in division (D) above shall be suspended
pending a hearing before the City Council. The $50 fee for a hearing shall be
refunded should the City Council by majority vote determine the party on whom
the notice was served did not violate this subchapter.
(Ord. 5, series 1993-1994, passed 10-12-1993)
MAINTENANCE OF GRASS AND WEEDS
§ 95.15 REQUIREMENT TO MAINTAIN.
   (A)   No owner, occupant or person having control or management of any land
within the city shall permit or maintain on any such premises or adjacent
rights-of-way any growth of noxious weeds; nor any growth of grass or other
rank vegetation to a greater height than eight inches; nor any accumulation of
dead weeds, grass or brush. Any grass or weeds or brush exceeding such height
are declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   WEEDS shall include, but not be limited to, poison ivy, poison oak,
sumac, jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like
kind; provided, however, cultivated flowers, ornamentals, food plants and food
items normally cultivated for personal consumption, such as tomatoes, radishes
or other crop-like vegetation shall be presumed to be managed vegetation and
not weeds.
(Ord. 3, series 2013-2014, passed 3-17-2014) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.16 WARNING CITATION AND NOTICE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or other designee, shall serve, or cause to be
served, upon the owner, occupant or person having control or management of any
premises within the city, written notice in the form of a warning citation to
such person or persons, notifying said person or persons of the violation of
this subchapter and demanding the abatement of the nuisance within seven days
from the date of receipt of the warning citation. Service of the warning
citation may take place by personal delivery to the owner, occupant or person
having control or management of the property, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by leaving of the warning citation and notice to cut
grass and/or weeds at the person’s usual place of residence with any individual
residing therein who is 18 years of age or older and who is informed of the
contents of the warning citation and notice.
   (B)   The warning citation shall state:
      (1)   The location of the violation;
      (2)   The nature of the violation;
      (3)   The time within which the violation must be abated; and
      (4)   The remedy the city may seek to abate the violation and recover
costs for the same.
(Ord. 3, series 2013-2014, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 95.17 ABATING NUISANCES.
   In the event the owner, occupant or person having control or management of
any land within the city fails to abate the violation within seven days from
the date of receipt of the warning citation, the city may make arrangements for
the abatement of such nuisance and the cost for abating said nuisance shall be
charged to and paid by such owner, occupant or person having control or
management of the land by sending the said responsible party a statement of the
amount due and a description of the work performed.
(Ord. 3, series 2013-2014, passed 3-17-2014)
§ 95.18 LIEN.
   (A)   In the event the cost of abating the nuisance is not paid in full
within 30 days from the date of the statement described in §
95.17, the city shall have lien against the property for the reasonable value
of the labor and materials furnished in abating the nuisance and, in addition
thereto, all recording fees and attorney’s fees incurred in preparing,
recording and releasing the lien and otherwise enforcing the lien, and the lien
shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
   (B)   The lien shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the
date of its recordation until paid and shall take precedence over all other
subsequent liens, except state, county, school board and city taxes, and may be
enforced by judicial proceeding.
(Ord. 3, series 2013-2014, passed 3-17-2014)
REGULATIONS FOR TRIMMING AND REMOVAL OF TREES
§ 95.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY FORESTER.
   There is hereby established the office of City Forester. The City Council,
with the approval of the Mayor, shall appoint a city resident as City Forester.
The City Forester shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and the City
Council.
(Ord. 7, series 1993-1994, passed 2-21-1994)
§ 95.31 APPLICATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to remove or trim any tree in
excess of 12 inches in diameter, growing within any utility, drainage easement
or street right-of-way within the city, the City Forester shall review the
application in order to determine whether the permission requested would
diminish the beauty and/or enjoyment by the public of the area affected. The
City Forester shall report his or her recommendation to the City Council within
30 days from receipt of such application.
(Ord. 7, series 1993-1994, passed 2-21-1994)
§ 95.32 APPLICATION APPROVAL AND HEARING.
   The City Council with approval of the Mayor shall, at its next regular
Council meeting, approve or deny the application. The applicant shall be
notified of the time and place of the hearing by the City Council and may be
present at that hearing to explain his or her application.
(Ord. 7, series 1993-1994, passed 2-21-1994)
§ 95.33 PERMIT APPROVAL.
   If the relief requested does not diminish the beauty and/or enjoyment by the
public of the area affected, the permit shall be granted to the applicant. The
permit shall state in detail the conditions upon which the permit is granted.
(Ord. 7, series 1993-1994, passed 2-21-1994)
§ 95.34 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   The City Council may seek injunctive relief from the County Circuit Court
for any impending violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 7, series 1993-1994, passed 2-21-1994)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violate any provision of §§
95.01 through
95.03 shall have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to the
following schedule of civil fines for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations:
            1.   First offense: $25;
            2.   Second offense: $50; and
            3.   All others: $100.
         (b)   Contested violations:
            1.   First offense: $75;
            2.   Second offense: $150; and
            3.   All others: $300.
      (2)   Any continuing violation of §§
95.01 through
95.03 shall be considered a separate offense for each day that such violation
continues, and a separate penalty may be imposed therefor.
   (C)   Should any person, firm or corporation violate the terms of §§
95.30 through
95.34, such violator shall be fined no less than $100 and no more than $1,000
for each tree damaged by such violation.
(Ord. 5, series 1993-1994, passed 10-12-1993; Ord. 7, series 1993-1994, passed
2-21-1994; Ord. 9 - series 1997, passed 11-17-1997)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   PAWNBROKERS
      
113.   INSURANCE COMPANIES
      
114.   LEASING AND RENTALS
      
115.   CABLE TELEVISION
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   License required to engage in certain trades, businesses or
professions
   
110.02   Application for license
   
110.03   Standards; issuance of license
   
110.04   Date and duration of license
   
110.05   License not transferable
   
110.06   License certificate to be displayed
   
110.07   Revocation or suspension
   
110.08   Appeal and review
   
110.09   Exemptions
   
110.10   Tax for license
   
110.11   Use of taxes
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TRADES, BUSINESSES OR
PROFESSIONS.
   Within the corporate limits of the city, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, organization or corporation to engage in any business,
occupation, trade or profession, or to sell or offer for sale any article of
goods, wares or merchandise without first having procured a license so to do
and paid the required license tax therefor.
(Ord. 3, series 1992, passed 6-15-1992)
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be made to the City Clerk, in writing, upon forms to be
furnished by him or her and shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and of each officer, partner or business
associate;
      (2)   His or her present occupation and place of business;
      (3)   His or her place of residence for five years next preceding the
date of application;
      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;
      (6)   A description of the merchandise to be sold, if for a vendor; and
      (7)   Other information concerning the applicant and his or her business
as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the license
desired.
   (B)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in good
standing upon the original application, unless otherwise provided.
   (C)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall deposit
the fee required for the license requested.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful knowingly to make any false statement or
representation in the license application.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 STANDARDS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, accompanied by the
proper fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required, the
City Clerk shall forthwith deposit the fee in the General Fund of the city and
issue to the applicant a proper license certificate signed by the City Clerk
and any other appropriate city official. If for any reason the license is not
issued, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (C)   The application shall be approved unless the investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant has done or possesses any of
the following will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts; or
      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character.
§ 110.04 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein
specified and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31
of the year issued. However, at any time after December 14, licenses may be
issued for the ensuing calendar year. Unless otherwise specified, the full
annual fee will be required of licensees irrespective of the date of issue of
the license.
   (B)   In no event shall a license be granted to any business or any person
for a longer time than one year.
§ 110.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted,
in a prominent place upon the licensed premises, the license certificate. Other
licensees shall carry their license certificates at all times and, whenever
requested by any officer or citizen, shall exhibit the license.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Any license may be revoked by the City Council, at any time, for
conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the time of issuance,
would have been valid grounds for its denial; for any misrepresentation of a
material fact in the application discovered after issuance of the license; for
violation of any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance relating
to the operation of the business or enterprise for which the license has been
issued; or upon conviction of a licensee for any federal, state or municipal
law or ordinance involving moral turpitude.
   (B)   The revocation shall become effective upon notice served upon the
licensee or posted upon the premises affected.
   (C)   As a preliminary to revocation, the City Council may issue an order
suspending the license, which shall become effective immediately upon service
of written notice to the licensee. This notice shall specify the reason for
suspension and may provide conditions under which reinstatement of the license
may be obtained. Upon compliance with these conditions within the time
specified, the license may be restored.
§ 110.08 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   In case any applicant has been denied a license, or if his or her license
has been revoked or suspended, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be,
shall within three business days have the right to appeal to the City Council
from the denial, revocation or suspension. Notice of appeal shall be filed, in
writing, with the City Clerk who shall fix the time and place for a hearing,
which shall be held not later than one week thereafter. The City Clerk shall
notify the Mayor and all members of the City Council of the time and place of
the hearing not less than 24 hours in advance thereof. A majority of the City
Councilmembers shall constitute a quorum to hear the appeal. The appellant may
appear and be heard in person or by counsel. If, after hearing, a majority of
the members of the Council present at the meeting declare in favor of the
applicant, the license shall be issued or fully reinstated as the case may be;
otherwise, the order appealed from shall become final.
§ 110.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business, occupation
or profession which is exempt from municipal licensing and/or license taxes
pursuant to state or federal law.
§ 110.10 TAX FOR LICENSE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b9c8a38fe2a544cd3529f12458b892a14739246b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-977.png]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 5_-_Series_2023-2024, adopted 3-4-2024). The text of the
amendment will be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Each person, firm, organization or corporation owning, operating,
conducting or engaging in any business, occupation, trade or profession,
whether such be operated or conducted separately or in connection with another
business, occupation, trade or profession shall pay the amount of tax herein
provided for the required license.
   (B)   (1)   Each person, firm, organization or corporation owning,
operating, conducting or engaging in any business, whether such is operated or
conducted separately or in connection with another business, occupation, trade
or profession shall pay, except as hereinafter provided, the amount of $75.
Provided, however, no person who does not use his or her home as a principal
place of business or principal office for the purpose of conducting any
business, or who is employed by another person, firm, organization,
corporation, limited liability company or partnership shall be subject to the
license fee imposed by this chapter.
      (2)   Said sum shall be due from any such business as of January 1 of
each year and payment shall be due within 30 days from the date of mailing a
tax invoice therefor.
(Ord. 3, series 1992, passed 6-15-1992; Ord. 3, series 2005-2006, passed 8-15-
2005; Ord. 5, series 2018-2019, passed 5-20-2019) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 USE OF TAXES.
   All revenue received from the payment of license taxes and penalties
required by this chapter shall be paid into and become a part of the General
Fund of the city to be used for the general operation expenses of the city.
(Ord. 3, series 1992, passed 6-15-1992)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
110.01, 110.10 and 110.11 shall have committed a civil offense and shall be
subject to the following schedule of civil fines for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations:
            1.   First offense: $25;
            2.   Second offense: $50; and
            3.   All others: $100.
         (b)   Contested violations:
            1.   First offense: $75;
            2.   Second offense: $150; and
            3.   All others: $300.
      (2)   Any continuing violation of §§
110.01, 110.10 and 110.11 shall be considered a separate offense for each day
that such violation continues, and a separate penalty may be imposed therefor.
Payment of the fines imposed by this section shall not excuse the person who
violated this section from payment of the tax or fee imposed by §§
110.01, 110.10 and 110.11.
(Ord. 5 - series 2001, passed 8-20-2001)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Prohibitions
   
111.03   Exemption
   
111.04   Fees
   
111.05   Exemption from fees
   
111.06   Certain types of peddlers prohibited
   
111.07   Licenses paid into treasury
   
111.08   Peddlers license
   
111.09   Application for solicitation permit
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTI-SOLICITATION PROPERTY. Any property in the city, which has been either:
      (1)   Posted with signs with the words “no solicitors” or “no
trespassing”, or other words of similar import thereon; or
      (2)   Registered by an owner or occupant thereof with the City Clerk as
property to which uninvited solicitors are prohibited.
   PERSON. Any human being or organization, or combination thereof, in the form
of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association or
otherwise.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR. A solicitor who has registered with the city by
completing a solicitor registration form which is available online at
www.woodlawnpark.com and/or City Hall at 4327 Wingate Road, Louisville,
Kentucky 40207, and who has been issued a solicitation permit. The solicitor
registration form shall provide the following information about the solicitor:
      (1)   Legal name and all aliases;
      (2)   Date of birth;
      (3)   Residence address and telephone number;
      (4)   Name, address and telephone number of the principal for whom the
solicitation is sought;
      (5)   A copy of the solicitor’s license to operate a motor vehicle or
other acceptable photographic identification; and
      (6)   A description of the proposed soliciting activity, including the
goods or services to be sold, or contributions to be solicited.
   SOLICITATION. The solicitation of contributions, the attempted sale of goods
or services or pledges, orders or subscriptions therefor, including, without
limitation, the activities of those historically known and identified as
peddlers, hawkers, canvassers, itinerant vendors and transient merchants.
Visits by sales representatives pursuant to invitation, or as part of a
continuing business relationship, shall not be deemed solicitation.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who engages in solicitation.
   UNINVITED RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION. A solicitation at a residence in the
city without a prior appointment or other invitation therefor by an owner or
occupant of the residence.
(Ord. 3, series 2011-2012, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 111.02 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation in the
city without first obtaining a solicitation permit. Permits shall be issued by
the Mayor upon satisfactory completion of a solicitation registration form.
Permits shall be issued for one day only, and may be renewed upon application
and payment of the applicable permit fee.
   (B)   No person shall cause, permit, promote, allow, aid, assist, encourage
or engage in any of the following described solicitations:
      (1)   Uninvited residential solicitation by any person other than a
registered solicitor;
      (2)   Uninvited residential solicitation upon any anti-solicitation
property; or
      (3)   Uninvited residential solicitation between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. EST Monday through Friday, between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 4:
00 p.m. EST Saturdays and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. EST
Sundays.
(Ord. 3, series 2011-2012, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter which require a solicitation permit shall not
apply to any person or entity engaged in religious proselytizing, political
speech or distribution of handbills, leaflets or other printed advertisements
when such delivery of handbills, leaflets or advertisements is accomplished
without making contact with the owner or occupant of any residence within the
city, and all such persons or entities shall be exempt from the requirements
and penalties contained herein.
(Ord. 3, series 2011-2012, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 111.04 FEES.
   Solicitation permits for weekday solicitation shall cost $25 per day.
Saturday solicitation permits shall cost $50 per day. Sunday solicitation
permits shall cost $100 per day.
(Ord. 3, series 2011-2012, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 111.05 EXEMPTION FROM FEES.
   There shall be no fee for solicitation permits issued to persons making
solicitations for charitable or bona fide non-profit organizations.
(Ord. 3, series 2011-2012, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 111.06 CERTAIN TYPES OF PEDDLERS PROHIBITED.
   Hereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or agent to
engage in the peddling of ice cream, popsicles, candy, confectionary, popcorn
or other items designed to be sold primarily to children, unless said peddler
is operating from a human powered vehicle. This section is not designed to
prohibit the sale of such merchandise from a human powered contraption, such as
a bicycle or pushcart.
(Ord. 29, passed 5-8-1962; Ord. 4 - series 2001, passed 8-20-2001) Penalty, see
§
111.99
§ 111.07 LICENSES PAID INTO TREASURY.
   Hereafter, the following license shall be paid into the Treasury of the city
for general operating purposes by every person engaged in any of the
hereinafter business, callings, occupations or activities.
(Ord. 14, passed 4 - -1957)
§ 111.08 PEDDLERS LICENSE.
   (A)   Every person engaged in peddling any goods, wares, services or
merchandise of any kind in the city shall pay the City Clerk and obtain
therefrom an annual peddlers license for which he or she shall pay to said City
Clerk $10. No peddlers license shall give authority for more than one person to
peddle under said license, nor shall any person to which a license is granted
sell by agents or clerks or any other way than by himself or herself in person,
but each agent or clerk shall procure a separate license. Every peddler, while
engaged in peddling, shall carry his or her license and exhibit the same
whenever required to do so by any police office of the city.
   (B)   The term PEDDLER shall be construed to mean any person going from
place to place within the city selling to the consumer, goods, wares, services
or merchandise of any kind or description.
   (C)   No peddlers licenses shall be transferable nor shall any peddlers
license be prorated. All such licenses shall be dated to expire.
(Ord. 14, passed 4 - -1957) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 APPLICATION FOR SOLICITATION PERMIT.
   (A)   Every person engaged in solicitation of any kind in the city shall
first make application for, and obtain from, the City Clerk a solicitation
permit. The City Clerk shall furnished application form to all applicants for
said permits, which application forms shall give the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of principal for whom solicitation is made;
      (3)   Whether principal is a charity, non-profit organization or
otherwise;
      (4)   Period for which solicitation permit is requested and hours of day
of intended solicitation; and
      (5)   Remarks.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall not make any charge for the issuance of
solicitation permits to persons making solicitation for charitable or non-
profit organizations. The Clerk shall charge for all other solicitation
permits.
(Ord. 14, passed 4 - -1957)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Each violation of §§
111.02 through
111.05 shall be a Class B misdemeanor for which any person convicted thereof in
a court of competent jurisdiction shall be sentenced to pay a criminal tine not
to exceed the amount of $250.
      (2)   Each separate violation of §§
111.02 through
111.05 is hereby classified as a civil offense, for which:
         (a)   The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b) that may be
imposed for each separate violation of §§
111.02 through
111.05 is hereby established as $100;
         (b)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 68.8808(2)(c) that shall
be imposed for each separate offense and violation of §§
111.02 through
111.05 if the person who has committed the violation and offense does not
contest the citation is hereby established as $50; and
         (c)   Any law enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately issuing
a civil citation, give notice that the violation of §§
111.02 through
111.05 shall be remedied within a specific period of time.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
111.06 shall have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to the
following schedule of civil fines for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations:
            1.   First offense: $25;
            2.   Second offense: $50; and
            3.   All others: $100.
         (b)   Contested violations:
            1.   First offense: $75;
            2.   Second offense :$150; and
            3.   All others: $300.
      (2)   Any continuing violation of §
111.06 shall be considered a separate offense for each day that such violation
continues, and a separate penalty may be imposed therefor.
   (D)   Any person violating any provision of §§
111.07 through
111.09 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, or the
application thereof, to any taxpayer or class shall be held unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect or impair the remainder of §§
111.07 through
111.09, it being the legislative intent to ordain and enact each provision,
section, paragraph, sentence and part thereof, separately and independent of
each other.
(Ord. 14, passed 4 - -1957; Ord. 29, passed 5-8-1962; Ord. 4 - series 2001,
passed 8-20-2001; Ord. 3, series 2011-2012, passed 4-16-2012)
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Bond
   
112.03   Register to be kept; daily reports
   
112.04   Receipt to be given for each article; sale of article
   
112.05   Maximum interest, resale price
   
112.06   Receipt to be given for payment of loan
   
112.07   Prohibited activities
   
112.08   Enforcement
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property,
deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling the property
back again at a stipulated price, makes a public display at his or her place of
business of the sign generally used by PAWNBROKERS to denote their business or
who publicly exhibits a sign advertising money to loan on personal property or
deposit.
(KRS 226.010)
§ 112.02 BOND.
   (A)   Every person to whom a city license is granted to carry on the
business of a pawnbroker shall annually enter into bond to the city, with good
and sufficient surety to be approved by City Council, in the penal sum of
$1,000.
   (B)   This bond shall be conditioned that he or she will observe the
provisions of this chapter and all ordinances and laws in force in the city not
inconsistent with this chapter.
(KRS 226.020)
§ 112.03 REGISTER TO BE KEPT; DAILY REPORTS.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep a register of all loans and purchases of
all articles by the pawnbroker from the general public. The register shall:
      (1)   Be reported to an online, Internet-based transaction recording
service accessible to law enforcement agencies;
      (2)   Show the dates and the amounts of all loans or purchases by the
pawnbroker from the general public, and the names and: (a) a driver’s license
number; (b) another state or federally issued picture identification card
number; or (c) if the identification specified in divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) of
this section is not available, a Social Security number may be accepted of all
persons who have left any property that has been pawned or sold;
      (3)   At all times be available to the inspection of any law enforcement
officer of the city when in the discharge of his or her official duty; and
      (4)   Contain a full description of all property purchased by the
pawnbroker from the general public or received on deposit as collateral or
security. When requested by law enforcement and pertaining to an investigation,
a photograph of the merchandise shall be made available to law enforcement if
the property is still in the possession of the pawnbroker. For the purposes of
this division (A)(4), “full description” includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Make;
         (b)   Model;
         (c)   Color;
         (d)   Size;
         (e)   Manufacturer;
         (f)   Vintage; and
         (g)   Distinguishing marks or characteristics.
   (B)   When secondhand merchandise is sold to a pawnbroker, the merchandise
shall be held for a minimum of 12 days before being resold.
   (C)   Prior to the release of property to a representative of law
enforcement, the law enforcement representative shall provide to the pawnbroker
a case report or other documentation that the item has been reported as stolen.
(KRS 226.040)
   (D)   Every pawnbroker shall, by 11:00 a.m. each day, make available to the
Chief of Police a true and correct written report of all goods received by him
or her, whether by pawn or purchase, during the 24 hours preceding each report.
The report shall describe the goods as accurately as practicable. The Chief of
Police shall furnish blanks for these reports.
(KRS 226.070)
Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR EACH ARTICLE; SALE OF ARTICLE.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall give a plain written or printed ticket for the
loan to the person negotiating or selling, and a plain written or printed
receipt of the articles that have been purchased or upon which money is loaned,
having on each a copy of the entries required by §
112.03(A) to be kept in his or her register. He or she shall not make any
charge for the ticket or receipt.
   (B)   A pawnbroker may sell any article pawned after the expiration of 60
days from the maturity of the loan. However, not less than ten days before
making the sale, the pawnbroker shall give notice to the person by whom the
article was pawned, by mail addressed to the post office address of that person
as shown on the pawnbroker’s register, notifying the person that, unless he or
she redeems the article within ten days from the date of mailing of the notice,
the article will be sold.
(KRS 226.050) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 MAXIMUM INTEREST, RESALE PRICE.
   Any pawnbroker, as defined in §
112.01, may, in loaning money on deposit of personal property, charge, contract
for or receive interest at a rate not exceeding 2% per month on the unpaid
principal balance of the loan, and may charge, contract for and receive a
reasonable fee, not to exceed one-fifth of the value of the loan per month; for
investigating the title, storing and insuring the property; closing the loan;
making daily reports to local law enforcement officers; and for other expenses,
losses and incidental costs associated with servicing these loans. Further,
this fee, when made and collected, shall not be deemed as interest for any
purpose of law. No pawnbroker shall directly or indirectly charge, receive or
contract for any interest or consideration greater than that allowed by this
section.
(KRS 226.080) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 RECEIPT TO BE GIVEN FOR PAYMENT OF LOAN.
   Every pawnbroker, upon receiving any payment of money from a borrower, shall
give to that person a plain and complete receipt for the payment, specifying
separately the amount applied to principal and the amount applied to interest.
In a case where the pawnbroker has purchased personal property under an
agreement to sell it back at a stipulated price, the pawnbroker shall, on
receiving any payment of money from the person from whom the property was
purchased, give that person a receipt stating the original purchase price, the
stipulated resale price and the amount received.
(KRS 226.090) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No pawnbroker shall receive, by way of either pledge or pawn, any article
whatever from a minor at any time, nor from any person between 8:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m.
(KRS 226.030) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter,
unless otherwise provided by KRS 226.100.
   (B)   However, county police, for the purpose of locating stolen goods, may
carry out the provisions of KRS 226.060 within the city.
(KRS 226.100)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any pawnbroker or pawnbroker’s clerk who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500 and his or her license may be forfeited to the city.
(KRS 226.990(1))
   (B)   Any pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of §
112.03(D) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $20
nor more than $100.
(KRS 226.990(3))
CHAPTER 113: INSURANCE COMPANIES
Section
   
113.01   Imposition of license fee
   
113.02   Amount of fee for companies issuing policies other than life insurance
   
113.03   Due date; interest and refunds
   
113.04   Written breakdown of collections
   
113.05   Inspection of records and accounts
   
113.06   Liability of agents
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed on each insurance company a license fee for
the privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate
limits of the city, on a calendar-year basis, based upon the following:
      (1)   PREMIUMS is defined as premiums actually collected by an insurance
company within each calendar quarter by reason of the issuance of policies and
contracts of insurance on risks located within the city and includes premiums
on new policies and contracts of insurance and on renewal business, as well as
all other classes of premiums, less all premiums returned to policyholders.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) below, the license
fee imposed upon each insurance company which issues any insurance policy or
contract of insurance shall be the following percentage of premiums on those
classes of insurance which such company is authorized to issue (the BASE FEE):
 
             Fire and Casualty                                    All other
             allied   liability Vehicle Inland marine Health Life risks taxed
             perils   only
Initial rate 7%       7%        7%      7%            0%     7%   7%
The base fee shall not apply to premiums exempted by state or federal law.
 
      (3)   If the Louisville Metro LGPT is raised in excess of the city’s base
fee, an additional license fee is hereby imposed by the city, within each class
of insurance listed in division (A)(2) above, equal to the amount by which the
credit for the city LGPT is allowable under KRS 91A.080(12), against the
offsetting Metro LGPT, except for health, which is not taxed by city’s base
fee.
   (B)   Fees to be paid to the General Revenue Fund. The license fee or tax
established by this chapter is imposed and levied for the purpose of general
revenue funds and shall be paid into the General Fund of the city.
   (C)   The license fee or tax imposed by a city upon each insurance company
with respect to life insurance policies may be based upon the first year’s
premiums and shall be applied to the amount of the premiums actually collected
within each calendar quarter upon the lives of persons residing within the
corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 113.02 AMOUNT OF FEE FOR COMPANIES ISSUING POLICIES OTHER THAN LIFE
INSURANCE.
   (A)   The license fee or tax imposed upon each insurance company with
respect to any policy which is not a life insurance policy shall be of the
premiums actually collected by the insurance company within each calendar
quarter on risks located within the corporate limits of the city in those
classes of business which the insurance company is authorized to transact, less
all premiums returned to policyholders.
   (B)   The license fee or tax shall also not apply to premiums:
      (1)   Received on policies of group health insurance provided for state
employees under KRS 18A.225;
      (2)   Received on policies insuring employers against liability for
personal injuries to their employees or the death of their employees caused
thereby, under the provisions of KRS Ch. 342;
      (3)   Received on health insurance policies issued to individuals;
      (4)   Received on policies issued through Kentucky Access created in KRS
304.17B;
      (5)   Received on policies for high deductible health plans as defined in
26 U.S.C. 223(c)(2);
      (6)   Received on multi-state surplus lines, defined as non-admitted
insurance as provided in Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act Pub. L. no. 115-203; or
      (7)   Paid to insurance companies or surplus lines brokers by non-profit
self-insurance groups or self-insurance entities whose membership consists of
cities, counties, charter county government, urban-county government,
consolidated local government, unified local government, school districts, or
any other political subdivisions of the Commonwealth.
   (C)   No license fee or tax imposed under this section shall apply to
premiums paid to insurers of municipal bonds, leases, or other debt instruments
issued by or on behalf of a city, county, charter county government, urban-
county government, consolidated local government, special district, nonprofit
corporation, or other political subdivision of the Commonwealth. However, this
exemption shall not apply if the bonds, leases, or other debt instruments are
issued for profit or on behalf of for-profit or private organizations.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 113.03 DUE DATE; INTEREST AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be due no later than 30
days after the end of each calendar quarter;
   (B)   Any insurance company or agent that overpays any license fee or tax to
a city shall be refunded the amount overpaid. If it is determined that an
insurance company or agent paid a license fee or tax to a city based upon
premiums collected upon lives or risks which are discovered to be located
outside the legal corporate limits of the city which was paid the license fee
or tax, the insurance company or agent shall be refunded those license fees and
taxes within 90 days’ notice to the city paid.
   (C)   License fees which are not paid on or before the due date shall bear
interest at the tax interest rate as defined in KRS 131.010(6) from the date
due until paid.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 113.04 WRITTEN BREAKDOWN OF COLLECTIONS.
   Every insurance company subject to the license fees imposed by this chapter
shall annually, by March 31, furnish the city with a written breakdown of all
collections in the preceding calendar year for the following categories of
insurance:
   (A)   Casualty;
   (B)   Automobile;
   (C)   Inland marine:
   (D)   Fire and allied perils;
   (E)   Health; and
   (F)   Life.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 113.05 INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS.
   Every insurance company subject to license fees or tax shall maintain
records adequate to support the reports required to be filed under this
chapter. Authority is given to the city or a representative thereof to make
inspection of the books, accounts and records of the agent or insurance company
to verify the correctness of any report or breakdown of collections.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 113.06 LIABILITY OF AGENTS.
   This section applies to insurance agents and surplus lines brokers to the
extent they are responsible for collection, reporting, and payment of license
fees or taxes pursuant to KRS 91A.080.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Pursuant to KRS 91A.080, willful failure to properly collect and remit the
license fees or taxes imposed by this chapter may constitute grounds for the
revocation of the license issued to an insurance company or agent under the
provisions of KRS Ch. 304 or may result in other penalties being imposed by the
State Office of Insurance.
(Ord. 5 series 2023-2024, passed 3-4-2024)
CHAPTER 114: LEASING AND RENTALS
Section
Rentals
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Annual registration required
   
114.03   Annual registration fee
   
114.04   Compliance with federal, state and local laws and regulations
   
114.05   Duties of a host
Leasing
   
114.20   License required for leasing real property
   
114.21   Annual licenses required
   
114.22   Use of proceeds
 
   
114.99   Penalty
RENTALS
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOST. Any person who is the owner of record of residential real property, or
any person who is a lessee of residential real property pursuant to a written
agreement for the lease of such real property, who offers a dwelling unit or
portion thereof for short-term rental.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A dwelling unit that is rented, leased or otherwise
assigned for a tenancy for fewer than 30 days during a calendar year. This term
does not include hotel or motel rooms, extended stay lodging facilities, bed
and breakfast inns or boarding and lodging house rooms.
(Ord. 3, series 2018-2019, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 114.02 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate a short-term rental on
any premises within the county unless the short-term rental has been registered
annually with the city.
(Ord. 3, series 2018-2019, passed 6-18-2018) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION FEE.
   Each annual registration for a short-term rental shall include the
following:
   (A)   The name, address, phone number and email address of the host and the
person who shall be responsible for addressing any maintenance or safety
concerns;
   (B)   The location of the short term rental; and
    (C)   A non-refundable fee of $250 shall accompany the registration of a
short-term rental.
(Ord. 3, series 2018-2019, passed 6-18-2018; Ord. 4, series 2023-2024, passed
9-18-2023) Penalty, see §  
114.99
§ 114.04 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   Each separate short-term rental shall be in compliance with any currently
applicable laws and regulations of the federal, state or local governments, as
may be amended, from time to time, including, but not limited to, tax laws,
laws or regulations on nondiscrimination, zoning, building, safety, property
maintenance, health and sanitation, fire, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and
other applicable laws.
(Ord. 3, series 2018-2019, passed 6-18-2018) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.05 DUTIES OF A HOST.
   It shall be the duty of a host under this subchapter to ensure the
following.
   (A)   The short-term rental meets all smoke detector requirements set forth
in the Louisville Metro Code of Ordinances and a clearly marked evacuation plan
is posted in the premises.
   (B)   There shall be no more than one contract per short-term rental at a
time.
   (C)   No host shall permit short-term rentals which, in the aggregate,
exceed 30 days per calendar year.
   (D)   At no time shall more than six persons reside in the short-term
rental.
   (E)   There shall be no signage on the premises of the short-term rental
advertising or identifying the short-term rental.
   (F)   Short term rentals shall be permitted by only those hosts who, at the
time of the enactment of this division (F): (1) are registered for a short term
rental pursuant to §§ 114.02 and 114.03; and (2) are in compliance with all
federal, state, and local laws and regulations set forth in § 114.04, including
but not limited to, any and all federal, state, and local laws relating to
short term rentals as variously defined by any and all federal, state, and
local laws.
(Ord. 3, series 2018-2019, passed 6-18-2018; Ord. 4, series 2023-2024, passed
9-18-2023) Penalty, see §  
114.99
LEASING
§ 114.20 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR LEASING REAL PROPERTY.
    Each person, firm, organization or corporation that leases real property or
improvements to real property within the city is deemed to be engaged in
business and shall obtain a license from the city for each property leased
therein. For the annual license required for the period commencing April 1,
2026, the cost of said annual license shall be $750 per property leased. For
the annual license required for the period commencing April 1, 2027, the cost
of said annual license shall be $1,000 per property leased. For the annual
license required for the period commencing April 1, 2028 and thereafter, the
cost of said annual lease shall be $1,250 per property leased.
(Ord. 2 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990; Ord. 1, series 2025-2026, passed
8-18-2025)  Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 ANNUAL LICENSES REQUIRED.
    Annual licenses shall be obtained from the City Clerk by no later than
April 1 of each year.
(Ord. 2 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990; Ord. 1, series 2025-2026, passed
8-18-2025)
§ 114.22 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   The proceeds from such licenses are to be used for the general operating
purposes of the city.
(Ord. 2 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of §§
114.02 through
114.05 shall be a civil offense. The maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808
(2)(b) that may be imposed for each separate offense and violation of §§
114.02 through
114.05 is hereby established as $100. Each day a violation continues shall be a
separate offense and a separate penalty may be imposed therefor.
      (2)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(c) that shall be
imposed for each separate offense and violation of §§
114.02 through
114.05 if the person who has committed the violation and offense does not
contest the citation is hereby established as $25.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately issuing a
civil citation, give notice that the violation of §§
114.02 through
114.05 shall be remedied within a specific period of time.
      (4)   Any person who receives a citation for violating §§
114.02 through
114.05 may appeal the violation to the Code Enforcement Board.
      (5)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city is
authorized to pursue remedial civil actions for violations of §§
114.02 through
114.05 by civil complaint or petition for injunctive relief, declaration of
rights or other appropriate proceedings filed in the county circuit court.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
114.20 shall have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a maximum
fine of $250 for each violation thereof, subject to the following schedule of
civil fines for each offense:
      (1)   Uncontested violations:
         (a)   First offense: $100;
         (b)   Second offense: $150;
         (c)   All others: $200.
      (2)   Contested violations:
         (a)   First offense: $150;
         (b)   Second offense: $200; and
         (c)   All others: $250.
(Ord. 2 - series 1990/1991, passed 10-15-1990; Ord. 1 - series 2008, passed 3-
19-2008; Ord. 3, series 2018-2019, passed 6-18-2018)
CHAPTER 115: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   Charges for basic cable equipment and services
Conditions for Awarding Franchises
   
115.15   Definitions
   
115.16   Franchise term
   
115.17   Significance of franchise
   
115.18   Partial listing of rights reserved to the city
   
115.19   Application for a franchise
   
115.20   Acceptance and effective date of franchise
   
115.21   Indemnity
   
115.22   Bonds and insurance
   
115.23   Franchise consideration
   
115.24   Franchise territory
   
115.25   Time schedule after franchise is granted
   
115.26   Installation and extension of service
   
115.27   Service to customers
   
115.28   System design
   
115.29   Privacy
   
115.30   Interconnection
   
115.31   Emergencies
   
115.32   Rates
   
115.33   Police powers
   
115.34   Transfer and assignments
   
115.35   Abandonment
   
115.36   Conditions of street occupancy
   
115.37   Arrangement by franchise with others
   
115.38   Renewal, termination and cancellation
   
115.39   Revocation of franchise
   
115.40   Foreclosure-receivership
   
115.41   Books and records of the franchise
   
115.42   New developments
   
115.43   Time of essence
   
115.44   Franchise not to contest validity of franchise or ordinance
   
115.45   Violations
 
   
115.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 CHARGES FOR BASIC CABLE EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts by reference said “Regulations Governing the
Charges for Basic Cable Equipment and Services”, passed by the City Council on
September 20, 1993, which regulations are on file with the City Clerk.
   (B)   A detailed copy of said regulations on file with the City Clerk may be
obtained from the City Clerk upon application therefor and the payment of $10
made to the City Clerk at the time of said application.
(Ord. 6, series 1993-1994, passed 1-17-1994)
CONDITIONS FOR AWARDING FRANCHISES
§ 115.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter and any ordinance and agreement awarding
a franchise in accordance herewith, the following terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless
otherwise specifically provided in this subchapter, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise or unless such meaning would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the City Council when not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. Further, the word SHALL is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   ANNUAL GROSS RECEIPTS. Any and all compensation, revenue and other
consideration derived, directly or indirectly, in any form whatever, by a
franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, from or in connection with
the operation of a cable communications system in the city.
   APPLICANT. The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation
association, joint venture or organization of any kind which applies for a
franchise to be granted under this subchapter.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. Any facility that, in whole or in part,
receives, directly or indirectly, and amplifies or otherwise modifies signals
which transmit non-broadcast services, and/or programming broadcast or
furnished by one or more television or radio stations or similar facility and
distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public
who pay for such service. Such definition shall not include any similar
facility that serves only the residents of one or more apartment or condominium
dwelling under common ownership, control or management, or otherwise, and
commercial establishments located on the premises of such an apartment house or
condominium dwelling.
   CATV. A community antenna cable communications system composed of, without
limitation, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, laser beams or
any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed,
constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and
distributing coaxial cable audio and/or visual radio, television, electronics
or electrical signals to and from persons, subscribers and locations in the
city.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. The approval required by the FCC in order for a
franchisee to begin operation with the city.
   CITY. The City of Woodlawn Park, Kentucky, a municipal corporation in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   CITY COUNCIL. The present governing body of the city or any successor to the
legislative powers of the present City Council.
   CONVERTER. An interface device which may be furnished to subscribers in
order that non-standard television channels carried on the cable communications
system may be received on a conventional home television receiver, or to
prevent interference from strong broadcast signals.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE. The price that a willing buyer under no compulsion to buy
would pay to a willing seller under no compulsion to sell.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission as that agency is presently
constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor
agency.
   FRANCHISE. The non-exclusive rights granted hereunder to construct and
operate a cable communications system along the streets, alleys and public ways
in the city.
   FRANCHISEE. The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, joint venture or organization of any kind, and the
lawful successor, transferee or assignee of the same, granted a franchise by
the City Council under this subchapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, joint
venture, legal entity or organization of any kind.
   SERVICE. All communications, maintenance, repair and installation services
provided by the franchisee, including the delivery of broadcast signals and
programming covered by the regular monthly charge paid by all subscribers,
including such standard type of service that is normally furnished by CATV
franchisees for a regular monthly charge and such additional communications
services as are furnished as a part of the cable communications system in the
way of two-way, return-path services.
   STATE. The Commonwealth of Kentucky.
   STREET. The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive or other public right-of-way, including
public utility easements or right-of-way and any temporary or permanent
fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the city
which shall entitle the city and the franchisee to the use thereof for the
purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the franchisee’s
cable communications system. Said word shall also mean any easement now or
hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include
other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the
city, which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and
the franchisee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or
transmitting cable communications transmissions over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, compliances,
attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to
a cable communications system.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who contracts the purchase, orally or in writing, of
any service as may be provided by a franchisee’s cable communications system.
   SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION. The point at which sufficient distribution
facilities have been installed by the franchisee so as to provide service to at
least 90% of the dwelling units in the franchise territory as described in §
115.24.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.16 FRANCHISE TERM.
   The City Council hereby creates the right, privilege and franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a community antennae television system in the
streets of the city, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter
provided; and said right, privilege and franchise shall be offered to potential
applicants and granted by the City Council to the applicant presenting the best
legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications, and whose
construction plans and arrangements can be shown to be both feasible and
adequate to meet the minimum requirements herein established. The franchise
shall run for a period of 15 years commencing on the date the franchise is
awarded at the end of which time it may be renewed subject to the approval of
the City Council and the provisions of the constitution and the statutes of the
commonwealth governing term and sale of franchises then in force and effect.
Any such franchise hereunder shall designate and be conditioned upon the
acceptance by a franchisee of all the terms of this subchapter and any
amendments properly made thereto.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.17 SIGNIFICANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Any franchise granted hereafter by the city shall not be exclusive and
the city reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any other persons
or entities at any time.
   (B)   No privilege or exemption shall be inferred from the granting of any
franchise unless it is specifically prescribed.
   (C)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall give to the franchisee the right
and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon,
along, above, over and under the streets, alleys and public places of the
incorporated areas of the city, such towers, antennae, cables, electronic
equipment and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of a
cable communications system in the city; provided, however, that the exercise
of such right and privilege shall not interfere with the use of such streets,
alleys and public places by the city and such others as are permitted by the
city to use the same, and the City Council may demand the removal of the
foregoing as have been constructed by or under contract with a franchisee at
such time as the City Council determines that the same are interfering with the
use of said streets, alleys or public places.
   (D)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege to be held for
the benefit of the public.
   (E)   Prior approval of the City Council shall be required and obtained
where ownership or control of more than 25% of the right of control of any
franchisee is acquired, disposed of or transferred by a person or group of
persons acting in concert. Approval of the City Council to such a transfer of
interest shall not be unreasonably withheld. Transfer from a subsidiary to a
parent corporation, or vice versa, shall not be considered as a change of
control.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit the mortgage or
the pledge of the network or any part thereof or a leasing by a franchisee from
another person of said network or part thereof for financing purposes or
otherwise. However, any such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject to the
rights of the City Council under this subchapter, a franchise granted hereunder
and all other applicable laws.
   (G)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall not relieve the franchisee of
its obligation to obtain necessary pole or conduit use agreements as are
necessary.
   (H)   The award of any franchise hereunder shall not impart to the
franchisee any right of ownership of streets or city-owned property.
   (I)   Any franchise granted hereunder shall be binding upon the franchisee,
its successors, lessees or assignees.
   (J)   A franchisee, at its expense, shall comply with all applicable laws,
orders, ordinances and regulations of federal, state, city and county or
municipal authorities including those established to protect historic districts
and/or designated landmark sites.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.18 PARTIAL LISTING OF RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
   (A)   (1)   The city reserves such rights and powers which, under applicable
federal or state law or regulations, the city must reserve and maintain.
      (2)   Franchisee agrees to comply with any action or requirements of the
city in the exercise of such rights and powers which either have been or shall,
subsequent to the grant of said franchise, be enacted or established.
   (B)   The city may designate and transfer its obligations and duties under
the franchise to any elected official, officer, employee, department, agent,
board or Commission of the city and a franchisee shall recognize the authority
of any such transferee.
   (C)   The city may inspect all construction or installation work performed
pursuant to the franchise grant under this subchapter.
   (D)   Neither the granting of any franchise hereafter nor any provisions
hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental
right or power of the city.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.19 APPLICATION FOR A FRANCHISE.
   Applications for an original franchise grant hereunder shall be filed with
the City Clerk, and shall contain the following written information and
provisions.
   (A)   Applications shall be submitted with the bid bond as required by the
requirements of division (B) below, and shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable filing fee of $250 payable to the “City of Woodlawn Park, Kentucky”.
   (B)   The application shall include:
      (1)   A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in
rendering the service;
      (2)   A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services
offered, the facilities to be employed, the service area or areas, the
commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the
proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named; and
      (3)   A detailed schedule of rates to be charged for the services offered
to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service.
   (C)   All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on
file a reasonable length of time and any intentional misrepresentation in an
application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the
franchise.
   (D)   All applications shall be considered firm and final and shall be
signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall
be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof and to
applicant’s responses thereto.
   (E)   The City Council reserves the right to require such supplementary,
addition or other information that it deems reasonably necessary for its
determinations.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.20 ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Any franchise granted hereunder, together with the rights, privileges
and authority granted thereby, shall take effect and be in force from and after
the effective date of an ordinance awarding a franchise hereunder, provided
that on or before said date the franchisee shall:
      (1)   File with the city an unconditional acceptance of the franchise
grant and enter into and execute such contracts and documents as required by
the City Council, consistent with the terms and provisions of this subchapter
and such other terms and provisions as were negotiated by the franchisee and
the City Council consistent with the application of the franchisee;
      (2)   File certificate of insurance, as set forth in §
115.22;
      (3)   File such bond or bonds, as required in §
115.22;
      (4)   Reimburse the city for the costs of publication of this subchapter
and the ordinance awarding the franchise; and
      (5)   Advise the City Council in writing of the franchisee’s location and
its address for mail and official notifications from the City Council.
   (B)   In the event the franchisee fails to comply in full with division (A)
above, then it shall be conclusively considered that the franchisee has
abandoned its application and rights to such grant and award of the franchise,
and any such rights that the franchisee may have acquired under the ordinance
shall immediately terminate, and the franchisee shall have no right, privilege
or authority whatsoever under this subchapter.
   (C)   The franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for
or on account of any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any
provisions or requirements of this subchapter and/or the ordinance awarding the
franchise or any amendments thereto or rules or regulations thereunder.
   (D)   The franchisee, by acceptance of any franchise awarded hereunder,
acknowledges that it has relied upon its own investigation and understanding of
the power and authority of the City Council to grant such a franchise.
   (E)   The franchisee, by acceptance of any franchise awarded hereunder,
acknowledges that it has thoroughly examined and is familiar with the terms and
conditions of this subchapter, the ordinance awarding the franchise and such
other contracts and documents entered into by the franchisee relative to the
franchise.
   (F)   The franchisee by acceptance of any franchise awarded hereunder
acknowledges and agrees that the matters contained in the franchisee’s
application for franchise or supplements thereto shall be incorporated into the
ordinance awarding the franchise as though set out verbatim and shall
thereafter be considered an integral part of such ordinance in all
communications, correspondence, filings or applications with all appropriate
regulatory agencies, including the FCC.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.21 INDEMNITY.
   The franchisee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend
and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees
against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage
or penalty arising out of the operation of the CATV franchise, including all
out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney fees and all other costs of
litigation, including the reasonable value of any services rendered by the City
Attorney, or his or her assistants or any employee of the city, except that the
franchisee shall not be required to indemnify the city, its officers, boards,
commissions or employees for acts or claims arising from their own negligence
or intentional acts. The damages or penalties to be indemnified shall include,
but not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringement and all
other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the
CATV system authorized herein, whether or not such acts or omissions complained
of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.22 BONDS AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   All persons submitting an application for a franchise in accordance
herewith shall file with his or her application bonds solely for the protection
of the city with corporate surety or sureties as follows:
      (1)   A bid bond in the amount of $10,000 which shall indemnify the city
up to the full amount of said bond for any damages or losses arising out of the
failure of the franchisee to execute an agreement in the form proposed under
this subchapter;
      (2)   A construction bond in the amount of $25,000 to be effective from
the date of execution of the franchise agreement and the effective date of the
ordinance awarding the franchise hereunder, and thereafter until the cable
communications systems referred to therein is certified completed by the Mayor/
Chairperson. The bond required under this section shall indemnify the city in
its own right and as trustee for subscribers up to the full amount of said bond
from any damages or losses arising out of the failure of the franchisee to
faithfully perform and satisfactorily complete construction of the cable
communication system in accordance with this subchapter and any agreement or
ordinance in connection with, including, but not limited to, the cost of
removal of any construction;
      (3)   All persons submitting an application for a franchise in accordance
herewith shall file with their application a bond with a corporate surety in
the amount of $25,000 to be effective upon the execution of the franchise
agreement and the effective date of the ordinance awarding the franchise
hereunder, and conditioned that, in the event that the franchisee fails to
comply with any provision of this subchapter or agreement or ordinance awarding
a franchise in accordance herewith, then there shall be recovered jointly and
severally from the principals and surety any and all damages or costs suffered
or incurred by the city or any subscriber as a result thereof, including, but
not limited to, costs and reasonable attorney’s fees of any action or
proceeding, and including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification,
costs of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs which may be in
default, up to the full principal amount of such bond; this condition shall be
a continuing obligation during the entire term of any agreement or ordinance or
ordinances awarded to the franchisee in accordance herewith and thereafter
until the franchisee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to
the city which arise out of or pertain to same; and
      (4)   None of the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the
city pursuant thereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall
be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or limit the liability of
the franchisee under this subchapter or any agreement or ordinance awarding a
franchise in accordance herewith or for damages either to the full amount of
said bond or otherwise.
   (B)   Within 30 days after the granting of the franchise and at all times
during the term of the franchise, franchisee shall obtain and pay all premiums
for the following:
      (1)   A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy
indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, board,
commissions, agents or employees, from any and all claims by any person
whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned
by the operations of a franchisee under the franchise herein granted, or
alleged to have been so caused or incurred with a minimum liability of $250,000
for bodily injury or death of any one person and $500,000 for bodily injuries
or death to two or any more persons in any one occurrence; and
      (2)   Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving
harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from
and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned
by the operation of franchisee under the franchise herein granted, or alleged
to have been so lost or incurred with a minimum liability of $250,000 for
property damage to any one person and $500,000 for property damage to two or
more persons in any one occurrence.
   (C)   Such insurance as provided for in this section shall be kept in full
force and effect by the franchisee during the existence of the franchise with
insurance companies qualified to do business in the commonwealth. The policies
shall require 30 days written notice to both city and franchisee herein prior
to any cancellation thereof, and copies of said policies shall be filed with
the city.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.23 FRANCHISE CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   (1)   A franchisee herein shall pay to the city as consideration
during the life of the franchise the sum of not less than 3% of the annual
gross receipts of such franchise. Such payment shall be in addition to any
other payment owed to the city by the franchisee and shall not be construed as
payment in lieu of personal or real property taxes levied by state, city or
county authorities.
      (2)   A franchisee shall annually file with the city 45 days after the
expiration of each fiscal year a financial statement showing, in detail, the
gross annual receipts as defined herein of the franchisee during that fiscal
year.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the franchisee to pay to the city at the
time of filing said financial statement the sums of consideration hereinabove
prescribed.
   (B)   In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to
the end of the 15-year term, the franchisee shall immediately submit to the
City Council a financial statement prepared as before required, showing the
gross receipts of the franchisee for the elapsed time since the last period it
paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual receipts, and the
franchisee shall pay to the city, not later than 30 days following the
termination of the franchise, a like percentage of such gross receipts and any
ocher sums legally due and owing to the city.
   (C)   In the event that any statement and/or payment is not made on or
before the applicable date fixed in division (A) above, interest on such
payments shall apply from such date at the current prime interest rate.
   (D)   (1)   The city shall have the right to inspect a franchisee’s records
showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and
shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid
under the franchise.
      (2)   No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a
release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for
further or additional sums payable under the terms of this subchapter or for
any other performance or obligation of a franchisee hereunder.
   (E)   Payments of compensation made by a franchisee to the city pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter shall not be considered in the nature of a
tax, but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter
required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state or the city.
   (F)   Sales taxes or any other taxes, which are collected from subscribers
by a franchisee and are to be remitted to a governmental agency, shall be
deducted from the annual gross revenues.
   (G)   Should the FCC or other governmental agency cease to regulate the
amount of percentage sums payable hereunder, then, in that event, the City
Council and any franchisee shall have the right to immediately renegotiate the
sum and manner of calculation of franchise payments payable hereunder shall be
conditioned upon and subject to agreement on the same between the city and any
franchisee.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.24 FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
   (A)   Any ordinance awarding a franchise to operate a cable communications
system in accordance herewith shall apply to its operation throughout all of
the incorporated areas of the city as now or may in the future exist.
   (B)   The franchisee shall endeavor to offer cable communications service to
all residents of the city. To the extent that the franchisee intends not to
provide service to any specific area, street, building or other location, the
franchisee shall designate the same and clearly indicate in its application for
a franchise in accordance herewith the technical or economic reason for its
inability to provide service in the enumerated locations.
   (C)   The franchisee is not required under this subchapter or any contract
granted hereunder to extend its facilities to any area unless there exists in
that area a potential of at least 35 subscribers per mile of trunk cable
system. When the potential of 35 subscribers per mile does not exist, the
company may make a charge at actual cost, including labor and material for
cable extension, for service in this portion of the system.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.25 TIME SCHEDULE AFTER FRANCHISE IS GRANTED.
   The franchisee shall adhere to the following time schedules.
   (A)   Within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding the
franchise, the franchisee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all
necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its
business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment
agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and
authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave
transmission facilities.
   (B)   The company agrees to comply with all of the procedural requirements
of the FCC. The franchisee shall notify all necessary parties, including the
FCC, within 30 days following the effective dace of the ordinance awarding a
franchise hereunder of its intent to operate a cable communications system and
shall begin construction with time period and for in the franchise’s
application for a franchise hereunder. If, for any reason, the franchisee has
not notified all parties within the 30 days, then the franchise shall be
considered null and void.
   (C)   Within the time period as specified in the franchisee’s proposal, the
franchisee shall have achieved substantial completion of construction. However,
the date to substantially complete construction shall be extended by the number
of days of delay of the franchisee caused by strikes, lockouts, fire, unusual
delay in transportation, unavoidable casualty or other such delay authorized by
the City Council.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.26 INSTALLATION AND EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The franchisee shall extend cable to new developments and subdivisions
and to other areas, including, but not limited to, blocks or streets,
simultaneously with the installation of electric power and telephone utility
facilities, provided the same is contiguous to any part of the installed CATV
system. If it is not, then service shall be extended as soon as the same is
contiguous to any part of the installed CATV system.
   (B)   In all cases where new developments and subdivisions are to be
constructed and to be served in whole or in part by both underground power and
telephone utilities, the owner or developer of such areas shall provide the
franchisee the trench, backfill and all necessary substructures for cables in
order that the franchisee may install all necessary electronic cable
communications facilities. In no event, shall such undergrounding be at any
cost or expense to the city.
   (C)   Failure to install cable in accordance with the construction timetable
as provided in §
115.25, or to extend cable within 90 days of a subscriber’s request for service
to new developments, subdivisions or other areas in instances controlled by
divisions (A) and (B) above shall constitute a violation of this subchapter and
a material breach of any agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith
shall subject the franchisee to all the penalties and remedies prescribed in
this subchapter as well as all other remedies, both legal and equitable, which
are available to the city.
   (D)   Cable communications service shall be made available to all individual
dwellings; residences, including apartments, condominiums, cooperative or
associate buildings; institutions; organizations; businesses; and all other
entities within the designated franchise area as the same now or in the future
may exist.
   (E)   Installation and service fees for the first television set of any
subscriber shall be uniform for all entities listed in division (D) above.
   (H)   Installation or subscriber use of cable communications system service
which involves retransmission of the cable signal to multiple reception points
within a structure shall be negotiated separately by the franchisee and the
owner of the structure or the subscriber. Service to condominium buildings
shall be on such conditions as the governing body of the tenants in common may
provide and as are agreed upon by the franchisee. Neither the franchisee nor
the city shall be responsible or liable for any failure to provide cable
communications service to a lessee or condominium owner whose lessor or
governing body refuses the installation of such service. The provision of cable
communications services to any multiple dwelling structure shall not be
conditioned upon the purchase by the owner, lessor or governing body of such
structure of any service of the franchisee or any person designated by it.
   (F)   Residential installation, including multiple drops, shall be offered
as the feeder line passes the dwelling unit.
   (G)   All of the franchisee’s cable equipment shall be removed within a
reasonable time, such time not to exceed one month from a subscriber’s property
at the subscriber’s written request.
      (1)   Where such removal interferes with the provision of cable
communications services to another subscriber, it shall be the obligation of
the subscriber so affected to secure a legal agreement which will enable the
franchisee to provide the subscriber the cable communications service the
subscriber desires.
      (2)   Where attachment to or use of a non-subscriber property is
necessary for the provision of cable communications services to a subscriber,
it shall be the obligation of such subscriber to secure a legal agreement which
will enable the franchisee to provide the service the subscriber desires.
   (H)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as a representation,
promise or guarantee by the city that any permit or other authorization
required under any city law for the construction or installation of a cable
communications system shall be issued.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.27 SERVICE TO CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   The cable communications system shall be designed for operation 24
hours per day and shall endure service interruptions only for good cause and
for a reasonable time. Permissible interruptions of service shall be for the
shortest possible time.
   (B)   The franchisee shall maintain an office in the county which shall be
open to the general public during normal business hours.
   (C)   The franchisee shall have a publicly listed telephone number. The
franchisee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering device 24
hours per day, each day of the year to receive subscriber complaint.
   (D)   The franchisee shall maintain a maintenance and repair service capable
of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for repairs within 24 hours
after the receipt of the complaint or request. If the franchisee or any of its
shareholders owning at least 3% of its stock, or any subsidiary, parent or
affiliated corporation of the franchisee engages in the business or activity of
selling, leasing, repairing, dismantling or installing television or radio
receivers, or accessories for such receivers, cameras, audio or video tape
machines, video tapes, microphones, control boxes, modulators or other
equipment utilized by users or subscribers in the operation of any cable
communications system, the franchisee shall not condition cable communications
service or the continuation thereof or usage of cable communications facility
on a subscriber’s purchase of or failure to purchase any of such services or
equipment.
   (E)   In the event that its service to subscribers is interrupted for 48 or
more consecutive hours, except for acts of God, riots or a state of emergency
declared by the President of the United States, the Governor of the
commonwealth or the county judge/executive of the county, the franchisee shall
grant affected subscribers a pro rata credit or rebate for the full duration of
the interruption. An unreasonable interruption of subscriber services shall be
deemed a violation of this subchapter and a breach of any agreement awarding a
franchise in accordance herewith and subject the franchisee to all of the
penalties and remedies prescribed in the agreement as well as all other
remedies, both legal and equitable, which are available to the city.
   (F)   The franchisee shall not deny or delay service or use of cable
communications facility or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or users
on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin or marital
status.
   (G)   The franchisee shall maintain, in constant readiness, equipment
capable of providing standby powering for the headend, transportation and trunk
amplifiers for a minimum of four hours.
      (1)   Said equipment shall be constructed so as to revert automatically
to a standby mode when alternating current power returns.
      (2)   The franchisee shall comply with all utilities and other safety
regulations to prevent a standby generator from powering the “dead” utility
line so as to prevent injury to any person.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.28 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   The franchisee shall install a first quality cable system, using equipment
designed by a major supplier of CATV equipment.
   (A)   All necessary return - path, amplifiers and/or amplifier modules shall
provide maximum two-way service capability, and shall be installed at the time
of initial construction.
   (B)   The number of channels to be provided and their use shall be described
in the franchise proposal.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.29 PRIVACY.
   (A)   The franchisee shall strictly observe the privacy and property rights
of subscribers. The subscriber’s rights of privacy shall be protected, at all
times, by the franchisee.
   (B)   Individual subscriber preferences, viewing habits, beliefs,
philosophy, creeds, religions or political beliefs shall not be revealed to any
person, firm, agency, governmental unit, Police Department or investigating
agency unless upon the authority of a court of law or upon prior voluntary
valid written authorization of the subscriber, which shall not in any event be
required as a condition of receiving service.
      (1)   Without the authorization described herein, neither the franchisee
nor any other person shall, in any manner, activate, utilize or otherwise
operate any channel from a subscriber’s location.
      (2)   Every subscriber shall have the absolute right to deactivate the
return path from the subscriber’s receiver at the franchisee’s sole cost.
      (3)   The franchisee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the
use of its cable communications system for such tabulation, which would reveal
the commercial product preferences or opinions of subscribers, members of their
families or their invitees, licensees or employees.
      (4)   Violation of any provision of this section of this subchapter shall
be considered a material breach of this subchapter and any agreement or
ordinance awarding a franchise in accordance herewith and shall subject the
franchisee to all penalties and remedies prescribed in this subchapter as well
as all other legal or equitable remedies available to the city.
      (5)   Each compilation, publication, tabulation or other dissemination of
each piece of information made or permitted to be made in violation of this
section shall be considered a separate violation of this subchapter.
      (6)   A subscriber may, at any time, revoke any authorization previously
made, by delivering to the franchisee in writing a substantial indication of
his intent to so revoke. Any such revocation shall be effective on receipt by
the franchisee.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.30 INTERCONNECTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed so as to prohibit the
franchisee from interconnecting its network with other similar networks either
in the city or in other municipalities, counties or states or countries. Any
applicable revenues derived therefrom shall be equitably allocated in the
calculation of annual gross subscriber revenues.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.31 EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   In the event of an emergency or disaster, a franchisee shall, upon the
request of the county judge/executive, make available its facilities to the
city or to the county, state or federal government, at no cost for emergency
use during the period of such emergency or disaster, and shall provide such
personnel as necessary to properly operate the system under the circumstances.
   (B)   The franchisee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability of
an override alert system whereby the county judge/executive, in a time of
crisis, may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously.
   (C)   If, at any time, in case of fire or disaster in the city, it shall
become necessary, in the reasonable judgment of the Mayor/Chairperson of the
city, to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers or other
appurtenances to the network of the franchisee, such cutting or moving may be
done and any repairs rendered necessary thereby shall be made by the
franchisee, at its sole expense provided that such repairs are not necessitated
by a negligent act of the city, in which case, cost for repairs shall be borne
by the city.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.32 RATES.
   (A)   The City Council expressly reserves the right and retains its
jurisdiction to authorize, establish and approve all rates which the franchisee
charges subscribers, including rates for subscriber service, equipment,
maintenance and repair. By acceptance of a franchise, the franchisee agrees
that the City Council shall have such power, right and jurisdiction. All rates
and charges shall be non-discriminatory.
   (B)   No rate, fee or charge of any kind shall be charged or collected from
subscribers by the franchisee without the authorization and approval of the
City Council. Violation of this section shall be deemed to be a breach of any
agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith and shall subject the
franchisee to all remedies and penalties prescribed in this subchapter and to
all other remedies, legal and equitable, which are available to the city.
   (C)   The initial rates to be charged and collected from subscribers shall
be in conformity with the franchisee’s application hereunder, and established
in the agreement awarding a franchise in accordance herewith, and shall remain
in force for a minimum of 30 months from and after the date of execution of the
said agreement and the effective date of the ordinance awarding the franchise.
Provided, however, that should the City Council determine to amend any
franchise within the purview of §
115.42, the franchisee may request rate increases or decreases in accordance
with this section.
   (D)   The franchisee shall file with the City Clerk on December 31 each year
a full schedule of all subscriber and user rates and all other charges made in
connection with the operation of the cable communications system.
      (1)   Any and all special rates for institutions, motels, hotels, inns,
multiple-family dwelling units or any other type of subscriber shall be
included.
      (2)   All rates shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.
   (E)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the
reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for
the purpose of attracting subscribers users.
   (F)   The franchisee shall neither impose nor collect any additional charge
for the disconnection of any installation or outlet.
   (G)   In the event that a subscriber fails to pay a properly due and owed
fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the subscriber’s service outlet,
upon giving ten days’ written notice thereof.
   (H)   The franchisee shall establish and conform to the following policy
regarding refunds to subscribers and users.
      (1)   If the franchisee collects a deposit or advance charge on any
service or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the franchisee shall
provide said service or equipment within 30 days of the collection of the
deposit or charge or it shall refund said deposit or charge within five days
thereafter.
         (a)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to relieve the
franchisee of any responsibility to subscribers or users under any contractual
agreements into which it enters with them.
         (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the
franchisee’s liability for penalties which may be imposed under this subchapter
or for the violation or breach of any of its provisions.
         (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
franchisee’s liability for damages because of its failure to provide the
service for which the deposit or charge was made.
      (2)   (a)   In the event that a subscriber terminates service during the
first 12 months because of the failure of the franchisee to render the service
in accordance with the requirements set forth in this subchapter, or in any
agreement or ordinance in accordance herewith, the franchisee shall refund to
such subscriber an amount equal to the initial applicable installation or
reconnection charge paid by the subscriber.
         (b)   In the event that such subscriber has made an advance payment,
the amount so advanced shall be refunded to such subscriber by the franchisee.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed to relieve the franchisee of any
liability established under any other provision of this subchapter or any
agreement or ordinance in accordance herewith.
      (3)   In the event that a subscriber terminates service prior to the end
of a pre-paid period, the pro rata portion of any pre-paid subscriber fee,
which represents payment for services which are no longer to be rendered, shall
be refunded promptly, but in no case more than 30 days after receipt of the
request for termination.
   (I)   The franchisee shall not charge a converter security deposit greater
than said converter’s actual cost to the franchisee. Any converter security
deposit collected by the franchisee shall be returned to the subscriber 36
months after the installation of such converter or within 60 days upon
termination of service by the subscriber and return of such converter
undamaged, with allowance for reasonable wear and tear, and payment of any
outstanding balance due and payable.
   (J)   A franchisee may, from time to time, subject to the limitation
contained in division (C) above, request of the City Council rate increases or
decreases. A franchisee shall be allowed to increase its rates and charges if
it is able to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that it is
unable to realize a fair return on its investment, without a rate or charge
increase. The City Council establish the procedure for hearings and review of
any such request. The City Council may allow rate or charge reduction, at any
time, if it shall determine that the existing rates and charges unreasonably
restrict the growth of cable television in the city and that the proposed rates
and charges will continue to allow the franchisee a reasonable profit. Any such
request shall be made no less than 60 days tn advance of the effective date of
the change or changes requested.
   (K)   A franchisee may, at any time, request of the City Council
establishment, authorization and approval of rates and charges for new or
additional services which the franchisee desires to offer its subscribers. Any
such request shall be made no less than 60 days in advance of the offering of
such new or additional services.
   (L)   In the event the franchisee for the city also has a CATV franchise for
the unincorporated area of the county, the rates for like services in the city
shall not exceed the rates charged for identical services in the unincorporated
area of the county. In the event that the fiscal court of the county approves a
rate increase or reduction for the same CATV franchisee that has the city
franchise, the franchisee shall, within ten days thereafter, file with the City
Clerk a complete schedule of the county approved CATV rates. The City Clerk
shall forthwith advise all members of the City Council and the Mayor/
Chairperson of the approved the county CATV rate schedule. Unless the
franchisee, a member of the City Council or the Mayor/Chairperson requests a
CATV rate hearing for city rates within 60 days after the filing of the
approved the county CATV rate schedule with the City Clerk, the approved the
county CATV race schedule shall automatically be the approved and authorized
CATV rate schedule for the city, effective 61 days after the approved the
county CATV rate schedule is filed with the City Clerk by the franchisee.
   (M)   No charge shall be made to the city for its use of government access
channels and, under no circumstances, shall the city be obligated to pay to a
franchisee any fee for service rendered to the city under the terms of the
franchise.
   (N)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the setting of special
races for certain classes of citizens for certain types of subscriber service,
when, by the determination of the City Council and, at its sole discretion,
such special rates are justified by the potential of such service to assist
which the health, care and/or safety of such citizens.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.33 POLICE POWERS.
   Nothing in this subchapter, or in any agreement or ordinance in accordance
herewith, shall be construed as an abrogation by the city of any of its police
powers.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.34 TRANSFER AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   The franchisee shall not transfer, assign, sell, lease or dispose of
its interest in any franchise or ordinance or agreement awarding a franchise in
accordance herewith or in its cable communications system without the prior
written authorization of the City Council. A merger or consolidation shall be
deemed a transfer or assignment.
   (B)   During the term of any franchise, the franchisee shall not sell,
transfer, assign, lease, dispose of, exchange or release of more than 25% of
the ownership of its cable communications system to a person (hereinafter
“proposed transferee”), without the prior written authorization of City
Council. The City Council may require such information, as it reasonably deems
necessary, from the franchisee in connection with a proposal to sell, transfer,
assign, lease, dispose of, exchange or release of more than 25% of the
ownership of its cable communications system.
   (C)   Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in the form and
containing the conditions approved by the City Attorney, that it will assume
and be bound by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of this subchapter
and any agreement or ordinance in accordance herewith and all applicable
federal, state and local laws and further that it shall be primarily liable and
obligated under said documents without, however, relieving the franchisee from
its obligations to the city under said document.
   (D)   No transfer under divisions (A) or (B) above shall be made within 13
months of the termination date of the term of franchise agreement.
   (E)   Nothing in any approval by the City Council of any transfer or
assignment of any ownership interest pursuant to divisions (A) and (B) above
shall be construed to waive or release any rights of the city in and to the
streets, public ways and public places of the city or as a release of any of
the city’s police powers.
   (F)   The occurrence of any event which constitutes either grounds for entry
of an order for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code, or placement of
the franchisee into receivership, or the issuance of any order to the
franchisee or any of its stockholders by a government agency or court of
competent jurisdiction to divest any interest related to the cable
communications system hereunder, or the entry of any judgment against the
franchisee which, in the opinion of the City Council, impairs the franchisee’s
credit shall be deemed an unauthorized transfer and assignment under the
provisions of this section and shall:
      (1)   [Reserved] agreement or ordinance granting a franchise in
accordance herewith; and
      (2)   Subject the franchisee to all penalties and remedies prescribed in
the agreement and to all other remedies, legal and equitable which are
available to the city.
   (G)   The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the
option of the city, terminate any agreement and franchise and accelerate all of
the obligations and rights thereunder, including inter alia, the right of the
city to purchase the cable communications system at book value or to award a
franchise to another person. The franchisee shall notify the City Clerk of any
occurrence which constitutes an unauthorized transfer under the provisions of
division (F) above and of the entry of any judgment against it within 24 hours
of such occurrence.
   (H)   From and after any of the occurrences enumerated in division (F)
above, the franchisee shall not make, execute or enter into any deed, deed of
trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales contract or any loan, lease,
pledge, sale, pole agreement or any other agreement or hypothecation concerning
any of the facilities or property, real or personal, of the cable
communications system without the written approval of City Council.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.35 ABANDONMENT.
   In the event that the use of any part of the system is discontinued for any
reason by any franchisee for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event
such system or property has been installed in any street or public place
without complying with requirements of this subchapter, or the rights granted
hereunder have been terminated, cancelled or have expired, the franchisee shall
promptly remove from the streets and public places all such property and poles
of such system, other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in
place. In the event of such removal, the franchisee shall promptly restore the
street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition
satisfactory to the City Council. Any property of a franchisee to be abandoned
in place shall be abandoned in such manner as City Council may prescribe. Upon
a permanent abandonment of the property of a franchisee in place, the
franchisee shall submit to the City Council an instrument to be approved by the
City Council, transferring to the city ownership of such property.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.36 CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause
minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public
ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the right and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other
public places. The cable communications system shall be constructed and
operated in compliance with all adopted local and national construction and
safety codes.
   (B)   The installation of the cable communications system shall be in
accordance with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations
of the commonwealth and the city affecting electrical installations and
buildings, now or hereafter in effect.
   (C)   Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not
simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for the
franchisee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted, in writing,
by the City Engineer or the Mayor/Chairperson, under such conditions as he or
she shall prescribe for the public welfare, the franchisee shall not erect or
authorize or permit others to erect any poles or other facilities within the
streets of the city for conduct of its cable communications system, but shall
use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power
and telephone or other utility companies under such terms and agreements as the
franchisee shall negotiate with these companies. The franchisee shall use its
best efforts to ensure that the terms and agreements between the franchisee and
any utility company are concluded in a reasonable time with no unnecessary
delay.
   (D)   Should the franchisee be required to place any lines or other
equipment on any boulevard, parkway or other property under control of the
Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Board, the manner of placement and location
thereof shall be subject to the control of said Board.
   (E)   The franchisee may trim trees which infringe upon easements, rights-
of-way or streets of the city to prevent the trees from coming in contact with
the cable communications system.
   (F)   The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove any property of the franchisee located on
streets, public places, rights-of-way and easements of the city, when required
by the City Council because of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street
grade; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines
and tracks; or any other type of structures or improvements by the city or the
commonwealth. If the franchisee fails to do so, the city or the commonwealth
may cause the necessary work to be completed and the franchisee shall pay the
cost thereof within ten days of receipt of an itemized account of such cost.
   (G)   Whenever the city or the commonwealth shall require the relocation or
reinstallation of any property of the franchisee in any of the streets or
public places of the city, it shall be the obligation of the franchisee, upon
notice of such requirement, to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall
said property as may be reasonably necessary at the sole cost of the
franchisee.
   (H)   Whenever, in any place within the city, all or any part of the
electric or telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the
obligation of the franchisee to locate or to cause its property to be located
underground within such places. If the electric or telephone utilities shall be
located underground, in any place within the city after the franchisee shall
have previously installed its property, nevertheless, the franchisee shall, at
the same time or immediately thereafter, remove and relocate its property also
underground in such places. If the franchisee shall, in any case, be unable,
for operational reasons only, to locate or relocate any part of its property
underground, then in that event the City Engineer or the Mayor/Chairperson,
upon being satisfied as to the facts thereof and subject to the concurrence of
the City Council, may permit such property to remain above the ground even
though other facilities may be placed underground in the area. However, any
such permission shall be upon such conditions as the City Council may require
for the public welfare. Any facilities of the franchisee placed underground at
the property owner’s request, in an area where electric and telephone
facilities are aerial, shall be installed with the additional expense paid by
the property owner.
   (I)   In the case of disturbance of any street caused by the franchisee, the
franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the
City Engineer or the Mayor/Chairperson, replace and restore such street in such
a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done.
   (J)   The franchisee shall, upon request, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of buildings or other things. The expense of such
temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the
person, requesting the same and the franchisee shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given not less than 72
hours’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.37 ARRANGEMENT BY FRANCHISE WITH OTHERS.
   There is hereby granted to the franchisee authority to lease, rent or in any
other manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment
and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and utilities within
the city, including, but not limited to, the South Central Bell Telephone
Company and Louisville Gas and Electric Company, and in each instance the
franchisee shall make its own contractual arrangements with such entity in
order to obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables and other facilities
and shall report their arrangements to the City Engineer or the Mayor/
Chairperson.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.38 RENEWAL, TERMINATION AND CANCELLATION.
   (A)   The procedure for renewal or termination of any franchise or agreement
or ordinance awarding the franchise in accordance herewith shall require public
hearings prior to action by the City Council. Hearings in connection with a
renewal of a franchise shall take place not less than 90 days prior to the
termination of the franchise. The City Council shall, after hearing, take such
action as it deems appropriate, which may include any of the following.
      (1)   The City Council may renew the franchise and agreement and
ordinance awarding a franchise in accordance herewith upon such conditions as
it may direct.
      (2)   The City Council may authorize the franchisee to transfer the cable
communications system to another acceptable franchisee or cable operator.
      (3)   The City Council may solicit proposals for and execute a new
agreement awarding a franchise in accordance with this subchapter and any
amendments hereto.
      (4)   (a)   The City Council may determine not to authorize the award of
any further franchise and, thereupon, may direct the franchisee to dismantle
its cable communication system.
         (b)   If the franchisee determines not to renew the agreement awarding
a franchise in accordance herewith, the City Council shall proceed to follow
one of the courses under divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) above.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council may terminate any agreement awarding a
franchise in accordance herewith in the event of the violation of any provision
hereof or of any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant hereto or of any
applicable federal, state or local law, or the breach or other failure, refusal
or neglect by the franchisee to perform its obligations under the terms and
conditions of this subchapter or of any ordinance or agreement awarding a
franchise in accordance herewith, except when such violation, breach, failure,
refusal or neglect is caused by any of the following:
         (a)   Act of God;
         (b)   Riot;
         (c)   An emergency declared by the President of the United States, the
Governor of the commonwealth, the county judge/executive of the county or the
Mayor/Chairperson; or
         (d)   A condition beyond the control of the franchisee.
      (2)   In the event that the City Council determines that the franchisee
has violated any provision of this subchapter, any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant hereto, any applicable federal, state or local law, or any
term of an agreement or ordinance awarding a franchise, except as noted in
divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d) above, the City Council
shall make a written demand on the franchisee that it comply with the law or
said agreement or ordinance. If the violation, breach, failure, refusal or
neglect is not remedied to the satisfaction of the City Council within 30 days
following such demand, the City Council shall determine whether or not, in its
sole discretion, seek violation, breach, failure, refusal or neglect by the
franchisee was excusable or inexcusable as provided in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)
(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d) above.
         (a)   If the City Council determines such violation, breach, failure,
refusal or neglect by the franchisee was excusable as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d) above, the City Council shall direct
the franchisee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in
such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the City Council may direct.
         (b)   1.   If the City Council determines such violation, breach,
failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee was inexcusable as provided in
divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d) above, then the City
Council shall declare this subchapter, the franchise or the agreement or
ordinance awarding a franchise in accordance herewith breached, terminated and
of no further force and effect. This action shall be taken by ordinance.
            2.   Termination shall in no way limit the rights of the city or
the franchisee to any remedies legal or equitable, available to the city or
franchisee.
      (3)   If the City Council declares the said agreement breached pursuant
to divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d) above, the City
Council may pursue any remedies available to it pursuant to this subchapter or
to the said franchise agreement or ordinance or any other remedy, legal or
equitable, available to the City Council. In addition, the City Council may
take action listed in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c) or (B)(1)(d)
above.
   (C)   In the event that the franchisee dismantles or terminates the cable
communications system or is required by any provision of this subchapter to
dismantle or terminate the cable communications system, the franchisee shall,
at the City Council’s direction, restore any property public or private, to the
condition in which it existed prior to the erection or construction of the
system, including any improvements made to such property subsequent to the
construction of the system. Restoration of city property, including, but not
limited to, streets, shall be in accordance with the directions and
specifications of the City Council and all applicable laws. The franchisee, at
the option and direction of the City Council, shall restore the same at its
expense.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.39 REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.
   Any franchise issued hereunder may, after hearing, be revoked, altered or
suspended by the City Council as it deems necessary on any of the following
grounds:
   (A)   For willful false or misleading statement in, or material omissions
from, any application;
   (B)   For failure to file and maintain the bonds required under this
subchapter;
   (C)   For repeated failure, as determined by the City Council, to maintain
signal quality;
   (D)   For any sale, lease, assignment or other transfer of its permit
without consent of the City Council;
   (E)   For an inability to provide CATV service to subscribers at the rates
authorized by the City Council;
   (F)   For failure to properly provide service to subscribers or to the city;
and
   (G)   (1)   For violation of the terms of its franchise or the agreement or
ordinance awarding the same or of this subchapter as stated herein. In addition
to all other rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the City Council, the
City Council reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct remedy
the right to revoke the franchise and all rights and privileges of the
franchisee thereunder in any of the following events or for any of the
following reasons:
         (a)   The franchisee shall, by act or omission, fail to comply with
any term or condition of this subchapter and shall within 30 days following
written demand by the City Council to effect such compliance fail or refuse to
do so;
         (b)   Any provision of this subchapter shall be finally adjudged by a
court of law invalid or unenforceable and the City Council further finds that
such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the
continuance of the franchise herein granted;
         (c)   The franchisee becomes insolvent; unable, unwilling or fails to
pay its debts as such debts become due; or a custodian, receiver, trustee or
agent appointed or authorized to do so, is appointed or takes charge or less
than substantially all or substantially all of the property of a franchisee for
the purpose of enforcing any lien, whether judicial, execution or otherwise; is
the subject debtor of an order for relief entered by a bankruptcy court; or all
or part of a franchisee’s facilities be sold under an instrument to secure a
debt and are not redeemed by franchisee within 30 days from said sale; or
         (d)   The franchisee attempts to or practices any fraud or deceit in
its conduct or relations under the franchise.
      (2)   No such revocation shall be effective unless or until the City
Council shall have adopted an ordinance setting forth the cause and reasons for
the revocation and the effective date thereof, which ordinance shall not be
adopted without 30 days prior notice thereof to the franchisee and a full
opportunity offered to the franchisee to be heard upon the proposed adoption of
said ordinance. The franchisee shall not be declared in default or be subject
to any sanction under any provision of this contract in any case in which the
performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.40 FORECLOSURE-RECEIVERSHIP.
   (A)   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial
part of the cable communications system, or upon the termination of any lease
covering all or a substantial part of the system, the franchisee shall notify
the City Council of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a
notification that a change in control of the franchisee has taken place and the
provisions of this subchapter governing the consent of the City Council to such
change in control of the franchisee shall apply.
   (B)   The City Council shall have the right to cancel this franchise 120
days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct
the business of the franchisee, whether in receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days,
or unless:
      (1)   Within 120 days after his or her election of appointment such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all of the provisions of
this subchapter and the agreement and ordinance awarding a franchise hereunder,
and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have executed
an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction over the same,
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every provision of this subchapter and the agreement and ordinance awarding a
franchise hereunder.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.41 BOOKS AND RECORDS OF THE FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The franchisee shall maintain an office in the county for so long as
it continues to operate the cable communications system or any portion thereof
and hereby designates such offices as the place where all notices, directions,
orders and requests may be served or delivered under this subchapter. The City
Council shall be notified of the location of such office or any change thereof.
   (B)   The franchisee shall keep complete and accurate books of account and
records of its business and operations in connection with any franchise granted
under this subchapter.
   (C)   The City Council, and its representatives, shall have access to all
books of account and records fo the franchisee for the purpose of ascertaining
the correctness of any and all reports and may examine its officers and
employees in respect thereto.
   (D)   Any false entry in the books of account or records submitted to the
City Council and its representatives to a material fact, knowingly made by the
franchisee, shall constitute a breach of a material provision of this
subchapter and any franchise agreement or ordinance hereunder, for which the
remedies provided in this subchapter may be invoked.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.42 NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   It shall be the policy of the City Council to liberally amend any franchise
of its own volition or upon application of a franchisee, after public hearing,
when necessary to require or enable a franchisee to take advantage of any
developments in the field of transmission of television and radio signals which
would afford the franchisee an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or
economically serve its customers so that at all times the cable communications
system shall be no less advanced than any other system of comparable size,
excepting only systems which are experimental, pilot or demonstration.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
§ 115.43 TIME OF ESSENCE.
   Whenever this subchapter, or any ordinance or agreement awarding a franchise
hereunder, shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf
of a franchisee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a
franchisee to perform within the time set forth shall constitute a material
breach of the terms of this subchapter and shall entitle the City Council to
invoke all penalties and remedies prescribed in this subchapter as well as all
other legal or equitable remedies available to the city.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.44 FRANCHISE NOT TO CONTEST VALIDITY OF FRANCHISE OR ORDINANCE.
   By acceptance of any franchise hereunder, a franchisee covenants and agrees
that it will not, at any time or in any manner or proceeding, set up any term
or condition of this subchapter or of any ordinance or agreement awarding a
franchise hereunder as unreasonable, arbitrary, voidable or void, or that the
City Council had not the power or authority to make such term or condition, but
shall be required to accept the validity of same in their entirety.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.45 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry
on the business of distributing to any persons in the incorporated areas of the
city, any television, radio or non-broadcast signals by means of a cable
communications system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained from
the City Council, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain
within any public street in the incorporated areas of the city, equipment or
facilities for distributing any television, radio or non-broadcast signals
through a cable communications system, unless a franchise authorizing such use
of such street or property or area has first been obtained from the City
Council, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable communications
system within the incorporated areas of the city, for the purpose of taking or
receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sound or other
non-broadcast signals.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable communications
system within the incorporated areas of the city, for the purpose of enabling
himself or herself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal,
picture, programs, sound or other signals without payment to the owner of said
system.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wire or equipment used
in any cable communications system.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§
115.29 or
115.45 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $50 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for a term of not to exceed
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that a corporation shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $5,000.
      (2)   Each day that a person violates or fails to comply with the terms
of §§
115.29 or
115.45 shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter.
(Ord. 4, series 1979, passed 9-17-1979)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: WEAPONS
Section
   
130.01   Discharge of firearms, air rifles, air pistols and pellet guns
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, AIR RIFLES, AIR PISTOLS AND PELLET GUNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer in
fulfillment of his or her official duties to discharge any firearms, air
rifles, air pistols and pellet guns within the city limits, unless such person
is acting in self defense or in defense of others.
(Ord. 13, passed 2-16-1957; Ord. 3 - series 2001, passed 8-20-2001) Penalty,
see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to the following schedule
of civil fines for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations:
            1.   First offense: $25;
            2.   Second offense: $50; and
            3.   All others: $100.
         (b)   Contested violations:
            1.   First offense: $75;
            2.   Second offense: $150; and
            3.   All others: $300.
      (2)   Any continuing violation of this chapter shall be considered a
separate offense for each day that such violation continues, and a separate
penalty may be imposed therefor.
(Ord. 13, passed 2-16-1957; Ord. 3 - series 2001, passed 8-20-2001)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   ZONING REGULATIONS
      
152.   FENCES
      
153.   SIGNS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Adoption of state codes; enforcement agents
   
150.02   Application
   
150.03   Appeals
Rights-of-Way and Encroachments
   
150.15   Form for obtaining encroachment permit
   
150.16   Vendor application for right-of-way encroachment
   
150.17   Resident application for right-of-way encroachment for driveways
   
150.18   Permit required
   
150.19   Need or hardship permission
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF STATE CODES; ENFORCEMENT AGENTS.
   (A)   The Kentucky Building Code, as contained in Title 815, Chapter 7 of
the Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Residential Code, as
contained in Title 815, Chapter 7 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations;
the Kentucky Plumbing Code, as contained in Title 815, Chapter 20 of the
Kentucky Administrative Regulations; the Kentucky Standards of Safety, as
contained in Title 815, Chapter 10 of the Kentucky Administrative Regulations,
together with any amendments, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
forth in this code of ordinances. Copies of the above codes and any amendments
thereto shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk where they
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
   (B)   The city’s Code Enforcement Board shall be designated as the local
enforcement agent for the Kentucky Building Code and Residential Code.
   (C)   The city’s Code Enforcement Board and all other designated officers,
agents and employees of the city are hereby charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of the Standards of Safety.
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.02 APPLICATION.
   The application of the Kentucky Building Code and Kentucky Residential Code
shall be extended to all single-family dwellings in the city which are to be
constructed or remodeled.
§ 150.03 APPEALS.
   Appeals from decisions made by the Building Inspector under this subchapter
may be taken to the State Board of Housing, Buildings and Construction unless
and/or until a local board of housing appeals, as set forth in KRS Chapter
198B, is established to hear the appeals.
Statutory reference:
   Appeals procedure, see KRS 198B.070
RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 150.15 FORM FOR OBTAINING ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   The form for obtaining issuance of encroachment permits for performance of
any work within the rights-of-way of the city shall be set forth by forms
created by the city and shall be utilized by all applicants requesting
encroachment.
(Ord. 3, series 2021-2022, passed 1-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.16 VENDOR APPLICATION FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT.
   The form entitled “Vendor Application for Right-of-Way Encroachment” shall
be used by all persons, firms or corporations intending to perform any and all
work in the rights-of-way within the city, with the exception of driveways.
(Ord. 3, series 2021-2022, passed 1-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.17 RESIDENT APPLICATION FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT FOR DRIVEWAYS.
   The form entitled “Resident Application for Right-of-Way Encroachment for
Driveways” shall be used by all persons, firms or corporations solely for the
purpose of constructing or renovating driveways within the right-of-way.
(Ord. 3, series 2021-2022, passed 1-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.18 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall proceed with any work within said
rights-of-way without first completing and filing the proper form with the City
Clerk and thereafter obtaining an encroachment permit upon compliance with the
terms of this section and the encroachment forms.
(Ord. 3, series 2021-2022, passed 1-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.19 NEED OR HARDSHIP PERMISSION.
   Applicants may apply for a hearing before the City Council for temporary or
special variances in case of need or hardship. Need or hardship permission to
vary will be granted at the sole discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. 3, series 2021-2022, passed 1-17-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of the state codes adopted in §
150.01 shall be subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   Violators of the State Plumbing Code shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100, imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or both for each offense. Each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(KRS 318.990)
      (2)   Violators of the State Standards of Safety shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment
for not more than 60 days or both for each offense.
      (3)   Violators of the Uniform State Building Code or the Uniform State
Residential Code shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$10 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
150.15 through
150.19 shall have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a maximum
civil penalty of $250 for each violation thereof, subject to the following
schedule of civil penalties for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations:
            1.   First offense: $50;
            2.   Second offense: $100; and
            3.   All others: $200.
         (b)   Contested violations:
            1.   First offense: $100;
            2.   Second offense: $200; and
            3.   All others: $250.
      (2)   In the event any person who has violated §§
150.15 through
150.19 fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after issuance of a
citation for violation of §§
150.15 through
150.19, or within 30 days after any and all appealable appeals therefrom have
been exhausted, the city may recover the amount of the civil penalty and court
costs in a civil action in any court of appropriate jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3, series 2021-2022, passed 1-17-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Violations of State Building or Residential Code; penalty, see KRS 227.990
(1)
CHAPTER 151: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
   
151.01   Plans for buildings, additions, garages or fences; permits
   
151.02   Submission of plans
   
151.03   Application and fees
   
151.04   Removal of extraneous material
   
151.05   Heating
   
151.06   Zoning regulations generally
   
151.07   Regulations pertaining to the area of lots and yard requirements
   
151.08   Regulations pertaining to structures and their usage
   
151.09   Regulations pertaining to drainage on all lots
   
151.10   Regulations pertaining to location of improvements on lots
   
151.11   Subdivisions and streets
   
151.12   Regulations pertaining to health and sanitation
   
151.13   Regulations pertaining to enforcement and violations of these
regulations
   
151.14   Provisions for amendments
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PLANS FOR BUILDINGS, ADDITIONS, GARAGES OR FENCES; PERMITS.
   Detailed plans and specifications for any and all future construction or
reconstruction of any building, addition thereto, garages or fences must be
submitted to the City Clerk for approval by the Zoning and Planning Commission
and the City Engineer. An application for a building permit must be submitted
along with a set of blueprints and any other necessary specifications. Upon
approval, a building permit shall be issued by the City Clerk with reference to
the requested construction upon payment of a fee as designated herein.
(Ord. 6, passed 5-24-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   (A)   No stucco, concrete block or cinder block house shall be permitted and
no garage shall be permitted unless the outer wall of the garage (or two walls
on garages constructed on corner lots) facing the street is constructed of
brick or stone veneer, or wood, or other composite with cladding consisting of
wood, vinyl or aluminum siding. The remaining side walls may be constructed of
concrete block, cinder block or stucco construction provided said walls are
painted on the exterior thereof.
   (B)    No outbuilding shall be erected, except one or more garages and/or
one storage building on each lot; said garages shall provide space for no more
than a total of three vehicles and said storage shed shall comply with the
following regulations.
      (1)   The exterior building dimensions shall not exceed 11 feet in width,
11 feet in depth or eight feet in height.
      (2)   No portion of the storage building can be located on an existing
easement.
      (3)   The building cannot be located closer than two feet to the property
line.
      (4)   The total area occupied by an accessory building, including garage
and storage building, cannot exceed 30% of the rear yard area. On lots with a
detached garage, the sum of the garage area plus the storage building area must
not exceed 30% of the total rear yard area.
      (5)   All storage sheds shall be located behind the rear building line of
each house and no storage shed on a corner lot shall be located any nearer the
street than the house which is located on said corner lot.
      (6)   All storage sheds shall be affixed to the real estate upon which
they rest and shall conform to the general type of architecture and consist of
the same general types of materials typically used in the construction of
houses within the city.
      (7)   Any person desiring to locate or construct a storage shed shall
submit a request to the City Council, or its designated representative,
accompanied by a $10 fee payable to the city. Said request shall include a
description of the shed, including a description of the materials of which it
consists, its dimensions and a drawing of the proposed location of the shed in
relation to the boundary lines of the property and the rear building line of
the house. Within 30 days after receipt of the request, and if it is determined
that the request is in conformity with the provisions of §§
151.01 through
151.05, the person so authorized shall issue a permit authorizing the
construction and/or placement of the storage shed.
(Ord. 6, passed 5-24-1955; Ord. 3-1972, passed 11-20-1972; Ord. 3-1975, passed
9-22-1975; Ord. 4, series 2013-2014, passed 5-19-2014; Ord. 4 - series 2018-
2019, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 2, series 2025-2026, passed 9-15-2025) Penalty,
see §
151.99
§ 151.03 APPLICATION AND FEES.
   Before a building permit shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall pay
to the City Clerk the sum of $25. Said sum, however, shall be applicable only
for the construction of new residences. There shall be no fee for the issuance
of building permits pertaining to remodeling of homes, or for fences or
garages, either new or reconstruction, but permits for all shall be obtained
prior to commencement of work. Said fees shall be used for the purpose of
paying the City Engineer to examine the specifications and blueprints submitted
and to follow the progress of the work and to make reports thereon.
(Ord. 6, passed 5-24-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 REMOVAL OF EXTRANEOUS MATERIAL.
   In addition to the foregoing, before a building permit is issued for the
construction of a new residence, the applicant therefor shall deposit $50 with
the City Clerk for the purpose of ensuring that all waste, debris and any and
all other extraneous building materials are removed from the building site
within a reasonable time after the project has been completed; or to remove the
same if for any reason the project is unduly delayed or abandoned prior to
completion. In the event extraneous material is removed satisfactorily after
the project has been completed, and other conditions such as grading and
drainage have been complied with, the deposit of $50 shall be refunded to the
individual or firm making the deposit. Failure to comply with these provisions
will constitute grounds for forfeiture of this deposit, in addition to fines as
provided hereinbelow.
(Ord. 6, passed 5-24-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 HEATING.
   Houses built within the city boundaries shall be heated by either gas- or
oil-fired furnaces.
(Ord. 6, passed 5-24-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 ZONING REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   All areas within the incorporated limits of the city shall be zoned
“A” one-family residence district.
   (B)   Any and all existing structures not presently being used as residences
are hereby classified as being in a “non-conforming use”. All of such latter
uses are clearly depicted and set forth in red on the attached plot of the said
city, reflecting the zoning uses of the land.
   (C)   The following zoning rules and regulations shall be in full force and
effect.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955)
§ 151.07 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE AREA OF LOTS AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Size of lot. No building or structure shall be erected on a lot unless
such lot contains at least 9,000 square feet and has a minimum width at the
required front yard line of at least 60 feet.
   (B)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   A front yard shall be provided having a depth as measured from
the front line of a building or structure to the center line of the street as
follows:
            1.   Ninety feet if the property abuts on a federal or state
maintained street, road or highway; but in no case shall a front yard be less
than 50 feet from the street right-of-way line or the street widening line to
the front line of the building;
            2.   Eighty feet if the property abuts on a county maintained
street, road or highway; but in no case shall a front yard be less than 30 feet
from the street right-of-way or the street widening line to the front line of
the building; and
            3.   Seventy feet if property does not abut on any federal, state
or county maintained street, road or highway; but in no case shall the front
yard be less than 30 feet from the street right-of-way line or the street
widening line to the front line of the building.
         (b)   Provided, however, an open porch may extend not more than ten
feet into such required front yard; provided, however, if 25% or more of the
frontage on one side of the street between two intersecting streets is improved
with buildings which have observed an average front yard line with variation in
depth of not more than six feet, no building or structure shall project beyond
the average front yard line so established; but this regulation shall not be
interpreted as to require a front yard of more than 120 feet in depth, as
measured from the center line of the street to the front line of the building
or structure.
         (c)   Interior lots having a frontage on more than one street shall
provide a front yard on each street as required above.
         (d)   Corner lots shall provide a front yard on both intersecting
streets as provided above.
         (e)   No accessory building or structure or parking space shall be
located in or project beyond the required front yard on either street.
      (2)   Side yard. Thirty percent of the width of a lot shall be provided
for side yards; however, no portion of any building shall be located closer to
the side property line than a distance of 10% of the width of the lot.
      (3)   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO STRUCTURES AND THEIR USAGE.
   (A)   No stucco, concrete block or cinder block house or garage shall be
permitted.
   (B)    No outbuildings shall be erected except one or more garages on each
lot, and such garages shall provide space for no more than a total of three
vehicles.
   (C)   No prefabricated house or garage shall be permitted.
   (D)   No trailer, basement, tent, shack, garage or other outbuilding shall
be used as a temporary or permanent residence.
   (E)   (1)   Inasmuch as the city is a highly developed residential area, all
houses erected must conform to the general style of architecture and value of
the improvements already in existence in the incorporated area of the city.
      (2)   The floor area of one-story or one and one-half-story houses shall
have a minimum of 1,100 square feet excluding garages and porches.
      (3)   The floor area of two-story houses shall have a minimum of 800
square feet per floor and the second floor ceiling height shall not be less
than seven and one-half feet at walls.
   (F)   All improvements must be of brick or stone veneer, or a combination
thereof.
   (G)   Detailed plans and specifications for all future construction shall be
submitted to the City Clerk for approval by the Zoning and Planning Commission
before construction is begun. Upon approval of said plans, a building permit
shall be issued by the City Clerk covering the construction requested, provided
that a fee as designated by the Board of Trustees shall be first paid.
   (H)   No building hereafter erected, or structurally altered, shall exceed
two stories, or 30 feet.
   (I)   The general remodeling, improving or changing of the exterior of a
house or garage shall require, before work is started, the submission of
detailed plans and specifications to the City Clerk for approval by the Zoning
and Planning Commission. Building permit must be obtained before construction
is begun.
   (J)   Not more than two roomers or lodgers, other than members of the
family, shall be provided with shelter or meals.
   (K)   Home occupations shall not be carried on by anyone except a member of
the family residing on the premises. In connection with such occupation, there
shall be:
      (1)   No stock in trade;
      (2)   No commodity sales upon the premises;
      (3)   No mechanical equipment except such as would be permissible for
purely domestic, household or professional purposes;
      (4)   No advertising, artificial lighting or any display which would
indicate from the exterior that the building is being used in whole or in part
for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; and
      (5)   No employment other than a member of the family residing on the
premises.
   (L)   A maximum of two temporary signs, not exceeding four square feet each,
pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises on which such
signs are located shall be permitted, provided such signs are located so as not
to unduly obstruct vision.
   (M)   No more than one nameplate, unilluminated, not exceeding one square
foot in area and not containing lettering other than the name of the owner or
occupants or name and/or address of the premises shall be permitted.
   (N)   Accessory buildings or structures shall not be used as stables.
Horses, cattle, chickens or other objectionable creatures shall not be kept on
the premises.
   (O)   Parking lots or trailer camps shall not be permitted.
   (P)   All lots shall be used for resident purposes only. No apartment or
duplex residence may be built on any lot. In general, no use shall be made of
property within the city limits which is not in harmony with the residential
nature of all the property.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955; Ord. 2, series 2025-2026, passed 9-15-2025) Penalty, see
§
151.99
§ 151.09 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO DRAINAGE ON ALL LOTS.
   (A)   Existing drainage or storm sewers as governed by the established
topography shall not be altered without permission of the Zoning and Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Without express permission of the Zoning and Planning Commission, all
lots shall be drained towards the front property line and to empty into the
drainage ditch or storm sewer established parallel to the road.
   (C)   All matters or disputes concerning drainage and disposal of surface
water shall be referred to the Zoning and Planning Commission for hearing and
rulings.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LOCATION OF IMPROVEMENTS ON LOTS.
   (A)   The main building shall be constructed on the established building
line.
   (B)   A minimum of 30% of the width of a lot shall be provided for side
yards; however, no portion of any building shall be located closer to the side
property line than a distance of 10% of the width of the lot. A detached rear
garage, however, in the discretion of the Commission, may be as close as two
feet from the property line.
   (C)   Where a private garage is constructed as a part of the main building,
all yard requirements for the main building shall be observed.
   (D)   Buildings other than the main building shall not occupy more than 30%
of the rear yard.
   (E)   Fences may be erected around the rear yard only and shall not be of
objectionable height or type of construction. However, if existing easements
are fenced in, it is with the understanding that that portion of the fence
shall be removed by the owner if and when it should become necessary and so
directed by the Zoning and Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.11 SUBDIVISIONS AND STREETS.
   Detailed plans concerning any and all subdivisions and streets within the
city must be submitted for consideration and approval of the Zoning and
Planning Commission. Particular details concerning the type construction and
width of streets must be submitted, as well as details concerning drainage and
any and all other facts affecting the health and general welfare of the city.
In the event that a street is constructed or reconstructed by anyone other than
the city, appropriate arrangements must be made for the purpose of posting with
the city a performance bond to ensure the appropriate and proper construction
or reconstruction of said street or streets, and this Commission shall approve
said bond before a building permit or certification of the subdivision plot as
a whole is had. In the interest of the general welfare and health, this
Commission reserves the right to have the approval on any subdivision and
street plans of any and all interested governmental agencies prior to making
its certification thereon.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.12 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO HEALTH AND SANITATION.
   A satisfactory certificate from the Louisville and the County Board of
Health shall be furnished to the Zoning and Planning Commission before a
building permit is issued for residence construction, except where a
subdivision has received approval from the Board of Health, the individual
builder will not be required to obtain a certificate.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.13 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS OF THESE
REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Marshal to investigate any and all
violations of these rules and regulations and to enforce them generally.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.14 PROVISIONS FOR AMENDMENTS.
   Requests for amendments to the above restrictions and regulations shall be
presented to the City Zoning and Planning Commission for consideration. The
Commission will then submit recommendations to the City Council for approval or
disapproval.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
151.01 through
151.05 shall have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to a maximum
fine of $250 for each violation thereof, subject to the following schedule of
civil fines for each offense:
      (1)   Uncontested violations:
         (a)   First offense: $100;
         (b)   Second offense: $150; and
         (c)   All others: $200.
      (2)   Contested violations:
         (a)   First offense: $150;
         (b)   Second offense: $200; and
         (c)   All others: $250.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §§
151.06 through
151.14 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in a
court of proper jurisdiction, shall be fined not less than $10 and not more
than $100, or imprisoned for not more than 20 days, or both. Each and every day
during which such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 5-2-1955; Ord. 6, passed 5-24-1955; Ord. 4 - series 2018-2019,
passed 8-20-2018)
CHAPTER 152: FENCES
Section
   
152.01   Boundary fence provisions
   
152.02   Regulations for construction and installation of all fences
   
152.03   Permits
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 BOUNDARY FENCE PROVISIONS.
   Except as provided in divisions (A), (B) and (C) below, boundary fences may
be erected only behind the rear building line of each house and/or lot and
shall not exceed 72 inches in height above the established elevation of said
lot.
   (A)   On all lots directly adjoining the railroad tracks and/or Watterson
Expressway, a privacy fence or wall not exceeding 96 inches in height may be
constructed along so much of said property as directly adjoins said railroad
tracks and/or Watterson Expressway.
   (B)   Privacy fences may be constructed to a height of 72 inches.
   (C)   The City Council may grant variances for the construction of privacy
area screens to a height of 84 inches behind the rear of building line of each
home in such instance as City Council deems it appropriate or necessary for the
added or necessary privacy of the individual homeowner or resident.
   (D)   No fence shall be built on a corner lot any nearer the street than the
house which is located on said corner lot.
(Ord. 1 - series 1996, passed 2-19-1996; Ord. 3, series 2003, passed 8-18-2003;
Ord. 3, series 2005, passed 10-17-2005) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.02 REGULATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF ALL FENCES.
   The following provisions and regulations shall control the construction and
installation of all fences and/or privacy area fences.
   (A)   Any person desiring to construct a fence, boundary or privacy area
screen shall submit their request to the person responsible for issuing fence
permits. Said request shall include a list of the building materials to be
used, a description of the type of fence or screen to be constructed, its
height and length and a drawing of the area to be fenced in or screened. It
shall include the location of the house on the lot and the street and any other
important features of the property. A rough drawing, not necessarily to scale,
will suffice. Within 30 days after receipt of said request, and if it is
determined that said request is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the Councilmember so authorized shall issue a construction permit to
the applicant upon payment of a $10 fee.
   (B)   All fences and privacy area screens erected must conform to the
general type of architecture and value of the improvements already in existence
within the city. All fences, fence posts, supports and braces must be
constructed of wood, vinyl or metal. All fence posts, supports and braces shall
be on the inside of the fence. Under no circumstance will a chain link fence in
excess of 60 inches in height be approved for construction and installation.
   (C)   If any fence or privacy area screen is constructed within an existing
easement, it is with the understanding that said fence or privacy screen will
be immediately removed by the owner of the fence at his or her expense, if and
when directed by the city or the owner of the easement, as the case may be.
   (D)   No non-conforming fence existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter must be repaired or rebuilt if the cost of repairs or rebuilding said
fence exceeds 50% of the cost of constructing a new fence in conformity with
the chapter.
   (E)   Should a variance to this chapter be requested, the request shall be
submitted to the City Council at its regular meeting for consideration. A
decision will be made no later than the following regular City Council meeting
as to whether to grant said variance.
   (F)   Fence permits are valid for 60 days from date of issue and may be
renewed for an additional 60 days.
(Ord. 1 - series 1996, passed 2-19-1996; Ord. 3, series 2005, passed 10-17-
2005) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.03 PERMITS.
   Records of permits shall be kept by the City Clerk. The City Clerk will also
keep on file all requests for fence permits granted or denied. A report of
fence permits issued will be made monthly to the City Council. The report will
list address, name of person receiving permit and a brief description of the
request.
(Ord. 1 - series 1996, passed 2-19-1996)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
have committed a civil offense and shall be subject to the following schedule
of civil fines for each offense:
         (a)   Uncontested violations:
            1.   First offense: $25;
            2.   Second offense: $50; and
            3.   All others: $100.
         (b)   Contested violations:
            1.   First offense: $75;
            2.   Second offense: $150; and
            3.   All others: $300.
      (2)   Any continuing violation of this chapter shall be considered a
separate offense for each day that such violation continues, and a separate
penalty may be imposed therefor.
(Ord. 1 - series 1996, passed 2-19-1996; Ord. 11 - series 1997, passed 11-17-
1997)
CHAPTER 153: SIGNS
Section
   
153.01   Signs in the rights-of-way prohibited
   
153.02   “For rent” or “for sale” signs
   
153.03   Signs remaining on property after sale or lease
   
153.04   Construction, remodeling and other signs
   
153.05   Liability
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 SIGNS IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to display, or allow to be displayed, or allowed to
remain on display, any sign, as defined in the Louisville Metro Ordinances and
Regulations thereunder, on public rights-of-way at any location within the
city, except those signs specifically exempted under said laws and regulations
(such as governmental signs). Provided, however, an “open house” sign and/or a
“yard sale” sign designating the address of the event may be displayed on
public rights-of-way at any location within the city only during the hours of
the said event, not to exceed 24 hours. No balloons or directional arrow signs
drawing attention to any such events shall be displayed on public rights-of-way
at any location within the city.
(Ord. 3, series 2012-2013, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 3, series 2014-2015, passed
5-18-2015) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.02 “FOR RENT” OR “FOR SALE” SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful to display, or allow to be displayed, or allowed to
remain on display, any “for rent” or “for sale” sign on any real estate other
than the real estate being offered for sale or lease, or in any public right-
of-way.
(Ord. 3, series 2012-2013, passed 5-20-2013) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.03 SIGNS REMAINING ON PROPERTY AFTER SALE OR LEASE.
   It shall be unlawful for any “for sale” or “for rent” sign to be displayed,
or allowed to be displayed, or to remain on any lot more than 24 hours after
the sale of such lot as evidenced by the recording of a deed, or after a lease
or rental of said lot as evidenced by the signing of a lease on the subject lot
by both lessor and lessee, or as evidenced by the taking of possession by the
lessee or tenant.
(Ord. 3, series 2012-2013, passed 5-20-2013) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.04 CONSTRUCTION, REMODELING AND OTHER SIGNS.
   No construction, remodeling or any other sign advertising improvements to
real estate shall be placed on any lot prior to the commencement of any
construction, remodeling or other improvement work, nor shall any such sign
remain on any lot after the construction, remodeling or other improvement work
is substantially completed.
(Ord. 3, series 2012-2013, passed 5-20-2013) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.05 LIABILITY.
   It shall be presumed that any sign placed in violation of this chapter was
so placed by the owner of the lot being offered for sale or lease as well as
the real estate agent whose name appears on the sign and the real estate
company whose name appears on the sign, and any one or all of whom may be cited
separately, and each shall be liable separately for the fines and penalties
contained herein. It shall further be presumed that any other sign placed on
the public right-of-way was so placed by the person, firm or corporation whose
product or services are promoted by such sign.
(Ord. 3, series 2012-2013, passed 5-20-2013) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100. Each day a
violation continues shall be a separate offense and a separate penalty may be
imposed therefor.
   (B)   (1)   A violation of this chapter shall be a civil offense. The
maximum civil fine required by KRS 65.8808(2)(b) that may be imposed for each
separate offense and violation of this chapter is hereby established as $100.
      (2)   The specific civil fine required by KRS 68.8808(2)(c) that shall be
imposed for each separate offense and violation of this chapter if the person
who has committed the violation and offense does not contest the citation is
hereby established as $25.
      (3)   Any law enforcement officer may, in lieu of immediately issuing a
civil citation, give notice that the violation of this chapter shall be
remedied within a specific period of time.
(Ord. 3, series 2012-2013, passed 5-20-2013)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND FRANCHISES
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS AND DEANNEXATIONS
      
III.   FUNDS
TABLE I: CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND FRANCHISES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./  Date
Res.   Passed Description
No.
              Joint and cooperative program for self-insurance, insurance and the investment
1 -           of public funds among various cities, urban-county governments and other
series - -    public agencies within the state; authorizing the execution of the “Interlocal
1988          Cooperation Agreement to Establish the Kentucky Municipal Risk Management
              Association”; authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds under the terms and
              conditions set forth in the interlocal agreement
              Franchise for the erection of poles and for stringing and maintaining wires
              and for laying and maintaining gas pipes and the necessary conduits and
5      4-4-   manholes in, along and across the public ways, roads, streets, alleys and
       1955   other public places in the city; for furnishing and selling electricity by
              means of said wires; for furnishing and selling gas from said pipes; and also
              providing for the sale of said franchise
              Franchise for erecting, laying and maintaining electric and gas facilities in,
-      4-21-  along, under and across the public ways and places in the city for furnishing
       1975   and selling electricity and gas by means of said facilities and providing for
              the sale of said franchise
2 -    2-18-  Granting of a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a community antenna
series 1980   television system within the city
1980
              Approving participation in the State Municipal Risk Management Association
              (KMRMA) General Insurance Trust (a pooled self-insurance and insurance
2 -           purchase program); approving the purchase by the city through the KMRMA
series 2-15-  General Insurance Trust of such liability and property damage insurance
1988   1988   coverages as shall be determined advisable; and authorizing the Mayor to
              execute for and on behalf of the city in connection with its participation in
              the KMRMA general insurance trust a binding trust participation agreement
              between the city and the KMRMA
Res. - 12-21- Granting consent and approval to restructuring relating to the grantee of the
       1992   cable television franchise
6      1-16-  Renewing the community antenna television system (CATV) non-exclusive
       1995   franchise of TCI-TKR of Jefferson County, Inc.
3,     6-22-  Granting a communications franchise and authorizing execution of a uniform
series 2016   franchise agreement
2016
5,            Participation in the program for capital projects which are authorized by LMCO
series 10-16- 97.100. The city agrees to construct projects funded in whole or in part by
2017   2017   the program in accordance with standards established in compliance with LMCO
              97.100
              Adopting and approving the execution of a municipal aid co-op program contract
Res. - 10-21- between the incorporated city and the Commonwealth of Kentucky, Transportation
       2024   Cabinet, Department of Rural and Municipal Aid and accepting all streets
              referred to therein as being streets which are a part of the incorporated city
             
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS AND DEANNEXATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.  Date Passed Description
8              12-5-1955   Annexation of a certain tract of land commonly known
                           as the Stivers Road area
9              1-9-1956    Annexation of a certain tract of land commonly known
                           as the Stivers Road area
10             9-24-1956   Annexation of a certain tract of land commonly known
                           as the east portion of Marydale Subdivision
                           Annexation of a certain tract of land approximately
11             12-6-1956   20 feet in depth between the south right-of- way of
                           Westport Road and the present northwest boundary
                           line of the city
                           Annexation of a certain tract of land extending
                           eastwardly from the easterly city limits along the
15             8-8-1957    northern right-of-way of the Louisville-Nashville-
                           Railroad to the westwardly right-of-way line of the
                           proposed innerbelt highway
                           Annexation of a certain tract of land extending
                           eastwardly from the easterly city limits along the
16             8-9-1957    northern right-of-way of the Louisville-Nashville-
                           Railroad to the westwardly right-of-way line of the
                           proposed innerbelt highway
                           Annexation of a certain tract of land commonly known
21             6-5-1958    as the Westport Road from Stivers School eastwardly
                           to the present limits of the city and adjacent to
                           the city limits on the north
                           Annexation of a certain tract of land commonly known
22             7-5-1958    as the Westport Road from Stivers School eastwardly
                           to the city limits and adjacent to the city limits
                           on the north
2-1976         7-19-1976   Deannexation of a tract of land lying to the north
                           of Westport Road
                           Annexation of all of that part of St. Matthews
1, series 1983 8-15-1983   Village Subdivision presently being a part of the
                           City of St. Matthews
5, series 1983 12- -1983   Annexing the described property presently being a
                           part of the City of St. Matthews
                          
 
TABLE III: FUNDS
 
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
4, series 2021-2022 6-20-2022   Approving the use of American Rescue Plan Act
                                Funds for road maintenance
3, series 2022-2023 8-15-2022   Approving the use of American Rescue Plan Act
                                Funds for road maintenance
                               
 
TABLES OF LEGISLATION
References to Kentucky Revised Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO KENTUCKY REVISED STATUTES
KRS Cites Code Section
KRS Cites                Code Section
6.050                    32.43
6.955 to 6.975           33.04
Chapter 13A              93.02
Chapter 13B              93.06
15.409                   34.26
16.220                   72.31
18A.225                  113.02
41.240(4)                33.05
42.450 to 42.495         33.04
43.050                   33.04
Chapter 45A              34.26
Chapter 56               34.26
Chapter 61               32.16
61.810                   38.26
61.823(2) to (4)         91.20
61.870 to 61.882         31.31
61.870 to 61.884         34.27,
                         38.30
61.870(1)                34.01
61.870(2)                34.01
61.870(3)                34.01
61.870(4)                34.01
61.870(5)                34.01
61.870(6)                34.01
61.870(7)                34.01
61.870(8)                34.01
61.870(9)                34.01
61.870(10)               34.01
61.872 to 61.884         38.10
61.872(1) - (3)          34.15
61.872(4)                34.16
61.872(5)                34.17
61.872(6)                34.18
61.874(1)                34.22
61.874(2)                34.22
61.874(3)                34.23
61.874(4)                34.23
61.874(5)                34.24
61.874(6)                34.25
61.878                   34.01
61.878(1)                34.26
61.878(2)                34.26
61.878(3)                34.26
61.878(4)                34.26
61.878(5)                34.26
61.880(1)                34.19,
                         34.26
61.884                   34.21
62.060                   31.04
65.003                   38.03
65.067                   31.04
65.120                   Ch. 72
65.8801 to 65.8839       36.16,
                         36.25
                         92.99,
65.8808(2)(b)            111.99,
                         114.99,
                         153.99
65.8808(2)(c)            114.99
65.8815(5)               92.99,
                         36.19
65.8825 through 65.8839  36.25
65.8839                  36.16,
                         36.25
65.8840(1)(b)            92.01
65.8840(1)(e)            92.01
65.8840(1)(h)            92.01
65.8840(1)(j)            92.01
65.8840(3) - (14)        92.04
66.660                   91.06
                         92.99,
68.8808(2)(c)            111.99,
                         153.99
82.020                   30.06
82.082                   38.03
83.020(2)                30.06
Chapter 83A              31.15
83A.010 to 83A.120       30.01
83A.010(5)               10.02
83A.010(6)               10.02
83A.010(8)               10.02
83A.030(1)               30.02
83A.040(1)               31.16
83A.040(2)(a)            31.16
83A.040(2)(c)            31.16
83A.040(2)(d)            31.16
83A.040(3)               31.16
83A.040(4)               32.01
83A.040(5)               32.02
83A.040(6)               31.16,
                         32.02
83A.040(7)               31.16,
                         32.02
83A.040(8)               31.16,
                         32.02
83A.040(9)               31.03
83A.045                  31.15
83A.050                  31.15,
                         32.01
83A.060(1)               32.30
83A.060(2)               32.31
83A.060(3)               32.32
83A.060(4)               32.33
83A.060(5)               32.35
83A.060(6)               32.17
83A.060(7)               32.33
83A.060(8)               32.36
83A.060(8)(a)            32.37
83A.060(8)(b)            32.37
83A.060(9)               32.38
83A.060(10)              32.39
83A.060(11)              32.40
83A.060(12)              32.41
83A.060(13)              32.41
83A.060(14)              32.42
83A.060(15)              32.43
83A.065                  10.99
83A.070                  31.02
83A.070(1)               31.02
83A.070(2)               31.02
83A.070(3)               31.02
83A.075                  31.02
83A.080                  38.04
83A.080(1)               31.30
83A.080(2)               31.30
83A.080(3)               31.03,
                         31.30
83A.080(4)               31.15
83A.080(5)               31.15
83A.085                  31.31
83A.130 to 83A.150       31.16
83A.130(1)               30.01
83A.130(2)               30.02
83A.130(3)               31.16
83A.130(4)               31.16
83A.130(5)               32.15
83A.130(6)               32.34
83A.130(7)               31.16
83A.130(8)               31.16
83A.130(9)               31.16
83A.130(10)              31.16
83A.130(11)              32.03,
                         32.16
83A.130(12)              32.03
83A.130(13)              32.03
83A.175                  32.02
91A.010                  33.01
91A.010(4)               10.02
91A.010(8)               10.02
91A.020                  33.02
91A.030                  33.03
91A.040                  33.04
91A.050                  33.04
91A.060                  33.05
91A.080                  113.06,
                         113.99
91A.080(12)              113.01
91A.200                  33.21
91A.210                  33.20
91A.220                  33.21
91A.230                  33.22
91A.240                  33.23
91A.250                  33.24
91A.260                  33.25
91A.270                  33.26
91A.280                  33.27
91A.290                  33.28
100.500 through 100.530  36.03
100.500 to 100.600       36.04
Chapter 107              33.21
Chapters 116 through 121 31.15
118.305(7)               32.02
131.010(6)               113.03
132.285                  35.01
134.800                  35.04
134.810                  35.04
139.200                  93.03
Chapter 154              34.26
174.100                  91.20
174.100(1)               91.21
174.100(2)               91.22
174.100(3)               91.23
174.100(4)               91.24
174.100(5)               91.25
178.290                  91.06
186.020                  72.31
186.560                  71.30
186A.145                 72.31
186A.190                 72.31
189.020                  71.32
189.285                  73.02
189.287                  73.01
189.290                  71.30
189.330(8)               71.02
189.338                  70.25
189.450(5)               72.03
189.450(6)               72.03
189.580                  71.15
189.635(9)(b)1.a. to e.  34.01
189.725                  72.08
189.930                  71.31
189.990(1)               72.99
189.993(8)               71.99
190.010(6)               92.04
190.010(8)               92.04
190.010(11)              92.04
196.099                  34.01
Chapter 198B             150.03
198B.070                 150.03
224.1-410                92.04
226.010                  112.01
226.020                  112.02
226.030                  112.07
226.040                  112.03
226.050                  112.04
226.060                  112.08
226.070                  112.03
226.080                  112.05
226.090                  112.06
226.100                  112.08
226.990(1)               112.99
226.990(3)               112.99
227.330(6)               93.03
227.550                  92.04
227.700                  93.01
227.700 to 227.750       93.01,
                         93.06
227.702                  93.01,
                         93.02
227.704                  93.01
227.706                  93.01
227.708                  93.01
227.710                  93.02
227.715                  93.02,
                         93.03
227.720                  93.04
227.730                  93.05
227.750                  93.06
227.990(1)               150.99
227.990(4)               93.99
257.010                  90.01
257.100                  90.07
281.010                  92.04
281.605(12)              72.31
281.920 to 281.936       72.31
281.926                  72.31
281.928                  72.31
281.928(1)               72.31
281.932                  72.31
Chapter 304              113.99
304.17B                  113.02
318.990                  150.99
Chapter 342              113.02
359.230                  72.31
376.275(1)               72.31
376.275(2)               72.31
376.275(3)               72.32
376.275(4)               72.32
411.500 through 411.570  Ch. 92
                         32.38,
Chapter 424              33.04,
                         33.24,
                         33.25
424.220                  33.04
436.600                  90.05,
                         90.99
446.010(1)               10.02
446.010(2)               10.02
446.010(9)               10.02
446.010(10)              10.02
446.010(12)              10.02
446.010(13)              10.02
446.010(14)              10.02
446.010(15)              10.02
446.010(17)              10.02
446.010(18)              10.02
446.010(23)              10.02
446.010(25)              10.02
446.010(26)              10.02
446.010(27)              10.02
446.010(28)              10.02
446.010(30)              10.02
446.010(31)              10.02
446.010(33)              10.02
446.010(37)              10.02
446.010(39)              10.02
446.010(43)              10.02
446.010(46)              10.02
446.010(47)              10.02
446.010(49)              10.02
446.010(55)              10.02
446.020(1)               10.03
446.020(2)               10.03
446.030                  10.04
446.050                  10.05
446.060                  10.06
446.080(1)               10.03
446.080(3)               10.03
446.080(4)               10.03
446.090                  10.07
446.100                  10.08
446.110                  10.09
446.140                  10.01
520.010                  34.01
525.125                  90.03,
                         90.04
                         90.03,
525.130                  90.04,
                         90.99
525.135                  90.04,
                         90.99
534.040(2)(c)            10.99
                         
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed  Code Section
-        12-21-1992     TSO Table I
-        10-21-2024     TSO Table I
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.             Date Passed Code Section
1 - series 1988      - -         TSO Table I
4                    3-17-1955   36.01 -
                                 36.04
5                    4-4-1955    TSO Table I
                                 151.06 -
-                    5-2-1955    151.14,
                                 151.99
                                 151.01 -
6                    5-24-1955   151.05,
                                 151.99
8                    12-5-1955   TSO Table II
9                    1-9-1956    TSO Table II
10                   9-24-1956   TSO Table II
11                   12-6-1956   TSO Table II
13                   2-16-1957   130.01,
                                 130.99
                                 111.07 -
14                   4 - -1957   111.09,
                                 111.99
15                   8-8-1957    TSO Table II
16                   8-9-1957    TSO Table II
18                   2-6-1958    50.06,
                                 50.99
21                   6-5-1958    TSO Table II
22                   7-5-1958    TSO Table II
                                 92.07 -
23                   8-7-1958    92.13,
                                 92.99
29                   5-8-1962    111.06,
                                 111.99
38                   9-19-1966   37.01 -
                                 37.07
41                   2- -1968    90.08,
                                 90.99
                                 37.20 -
42                   3-15-1968   37.22,
                                 37.99
44                   12-16-1968  50.01 -
                                 50.03
45                   3-17-1969   Ch. 74, Sch. I
3-1972               11-20-1972  151.02
1-1975               1-20-1975   37.08
-                    4-21-1975   TSO Table I
2-1975               9-22-1975   37.09
3-1975               9-22-1975   151.02
2-1976               7-19-1976   TSO Table II
4-1977               11-21-1977  Ch. 74, Sch. I
                                 115.15 -
4, series 1979       9-17-1979   115.45,
                                 115.99
5 - series 1980      - -1980     30.03 -
                                 30.06
2 - series 1980      2-18-1980   TSO Table I
1, series 1983       8-15-1983   TSO Table II
5, series 1983       12- -1983   TSO Table II
1, series 1985       3-18-1985   37.01 -
                                 37.07
2 - series 1988      2-15-1988   TSO Table I
                                 72.13 -
I - series 1990      6-18-1990   72.15,
                                 72.99
                                 50.04,
1 - series 1990/1991 10-15-1990  50.05,
                                 50.99
                                 114.20 -
2 - series 1990/1991 10-15-1990  114.22,
                                 114.99
                                 110.01,
3, series 1992       6-15-1992   110.10,
                                 110.11
4, series 1992       12-26-1992  31.15
                                 71.33,
4 series 1993-1994   8-16-1993   71.34,
                                 71.99
                                 95.01 -
5, series 1993-1994  10-12-1993  95.03,
                                 95.99
6, series 1993-1994  1-17-1994   115.01
                                 95.30 -
7, series 1993-1994  2-21-1994   95.34,
                                 95.99
1x series 1994-1995  8-15-1994   72.16,
                                 72.99
                                 38.01 -
3                    8-15-1994   38.30,
                                 38.99
4 series 1994-1995   12-19-1994  38.17
6                    1-16-1995   TSO Table I
                                 152.01 -
1 - series 1996      2-19-1996   152.03,
                                 152.99
4, series 1997-1998  6-16-1997   36.15
5, series 1997-1998  8-18-1997   36.15 -
                                 36.25
9 - series 1997      11-17-1997  95.99
11 - series 1997     11-17-1997  152.99
-                    8-20-2001   38.45 -
                                 38.48
3 - series 2001      8-20-2001   130.01,
                                 130.99
4 - series 2001      8-20-2001   111.06,
                                 111.99
5 - series 2001      8-20-2001   110.99
3, series 2003       8-18-2003   152.01
4, series 2003       12-15-2003  72.16
3, series 2004       11-15-2004  36.15 -
                                 36.24
3, series 2005-2006  8-15-2005   110.10
3, series 2005       10-17-2005  152.01,
                                 152.02
1 - series 2008      3-19-2008   114.99
2011-1               11-21-2011  32.18
                                 111.01 -
3, series 2011-2012  4-16-2012   111.05,
                                 111.99
3, series 2012-2013  5-20-2013   153.01 -
                                 153.05
3, series 2013-2014  3-17-2014   95.15 -
                                 95.18
4, series 2013-2014  5-19-2014   151.02
5, series 2013/2014  5-19-2014   32.16
3, series 2014-2015  5-18-2015   153.01
3, series 2016       6-22-2016   TSO Table I
4, series 2016- 2017 12-19-2016  36.18
                                 92.25 -
3, series 2017-2018  7-17-2017   92.27,
                                 92.99
4, series 2017       7-17-2017   36.18,
                                 36.19
5, series 2017       10-16-2017  TSO Table I
                                 114.01 -
3, series 2018-2019  6-18-2018   114.05,
                                 114.99
4 - series 2018-2019 8-20-2018   151.02,
                                 151.99
5, series 2018-2019  5-20-2019   110.10
                                 150.15 -
3, series 2021-2022  1-17-2022   150.19,
                                 150.99
                                 35.06,
                                 35.07,
                                 35.08,
2 series 2022-2023   6-20-2022   35.09,
                                 35.10,
                                 35.11,
                                 35.12
4, series 2021-2022  6-20-2022   TSO Table III
3, series 2022-2023  8-15-2022   TSO Table III
3, series 2023       7-17-2023   Adopting Ordinance
4, series 2023-2024  9-18-2023   114.03,
                                 114.05
                                 113.01 -
5, series 2023-2024  3-4-2024    113.06,
                                 113.99
2, series 2024-2025  6-17-2024   35.06 -
                                 35.12
1, series 2024-2025  3-17-2025   38.20
1, series 2025-2026  8-18-2025   114.20,
                                 114.21
2, series 2025-2026  9-15-2025   151.02,
                                 151.08
3, series 2025-2026  9-15-2025   72.15,
                                 72.99
4, series 2025-2026  12-15-2025  Ch. 74, Sch. I
                                
 
 
