CITY CODE
of
ATHOL, IDAHO
2006
Code current through:
Ord. 445, passed May 21, 2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Athol, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 443, passed - -2023. Ordinances of the City adopted
after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that
they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in
order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
This code of the City of Athol, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 445, passed May 21, 2024. Ordinances of the City adopted
after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that
they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in
order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 430
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ATHOL, KOOTENAI COUNTY, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF
THE STATE OF IDAHO, AMENDING THE ATHOL CITY CODE BY AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER
6, SECTION 3 TO CHANGE TO TIME OF CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS, AMENDING TITLE 2,
CHAPTER 1, SUBSECTIONS A, B, AND C, TO REVISE REQUIREMENTS FOR SELLING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 3 TO EXTEND THE
LICENSE PERIOD FOR TEMPORARY BUSINESSES AND ADD REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE
BUSINESSES; AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 4 TO CLARIFY EXEMPTIONS TO
BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 5 TO ADD A
REFERENCE TO MOBILE BUSINESS LICENSES; AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 6
TO ADD A REFERENCE TO MOBILE BUSINESS LICENSES; AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4,
SECTION 7 TO ADD REFERENCES TO MOBILE BUSINESS LICENSES; AMENDING TITLE 2,
CHAPTER 4, SECTION 8 TO CLARIFY REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESS LICENSE HOLDERS;
AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 10 TO CREATE PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO
COMPLY WITH BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 3, CHAPTER 1, SECTION
7 TO CLARIFY PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO ABATE A NUISANCE; AMENDING TITLE 3,
CHAPTER 2, SECTION 4 TO CLARIFY REQUIREMENTS FOR SEPTIC PUMPING; AMENDING TITLE
3, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 5 TO CLARIFY REPORTING TO THE HEALTH DISTRICT AND
NOTIFICATIONS FOR SEPTIC PUMPING; AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 1 TO ADD
A DEFINITION FOR AT LARGE ANIMALS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS; AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER
3, CHAPTER 2 TO ADD REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CARE OF ANIMALS; AMENDING TITLE 4,
CHAPTER 3 TO ADD A NEW SECTION 3 TO ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR IMPOUNDMENT;
AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 8 TO REQUIRE WATER LINES TO BE EXTENDED
THROUGH PROPERTIES TO THE PROPERTY LINE; AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 9
TO DELETE THE SECTION IN ITS ENTIRETY; AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2A, SECTION 7
TO CLARIFY REQUIREMENTS FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES AND YEARLY TESTING
REQUIREMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 5, SECTION 2 TO UPDATE PROHIBITIONS ON
LITTER IN CITY PARKS; AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 6, TO ADD A NEW SECTION 4
CONTAINING STANDARDS FOR ACCESS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY TO PUBLIC STREETS;
AMENDING TITLE 6, TO ADD A NEW CHAPTER 7 ADDRESSING PARADES AND PUBLIC
ASSEMBLY; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 4 TO REVISE AND DELETE
DEFINITIONS OF CERTAIN TERMS; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 6 TO
CLARIFY THE USE OF THE TERM “LOT COVERAGE”; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A,
SECTION 8 TO DELETE THE REFERENCE TO CITY COUNCIL; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER
8B, SECTION 2 TO REVISE PERMITTED USES IN THE COMMERCIAL ZONE AND DELETE THE
REFERENCE TO CITY COUNCIL; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 3 TO REVISE
PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND REVISE STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR STORAGE; AMENDING
TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 4 TO ADD KENNELS AS A SPECIAL USE IN THE
COMMERCIAL ZONE; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 6 TO CLARIFY THE USE OF
THE TERM “LOT COVERAGE”; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 8 TO DELETE THE
REFERENCE TO CITY COUNCIL; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8C, SECTION 3 TO ELIMINATE
RESIDENTIAL USE AS AN ACCESSORY USE AND CLARIFY REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR
STORAGE IN THE LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ZONE; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8C, SECTION 6
TO DELETE THE OPTION TO HAVE CITY COUNCIL DETERMINE VIEW TRIANGLE REQUIREMENTS;
AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 4 TO CHANGE PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR
CERTAIN USES; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 5 TO CLARIFY REQUIREMENTS
FOR DRIVEWAY AND PARKING LOT DESIGN; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 6 TO
CLARIFY DRIVEWAY STANDARDS; AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 10 TO DELETE
THE SECTION IN ITS ENTIRETY; PROVIDING SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF
CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
IT IS ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the City of Athol, Kootenai
County, Idaho as follows:
 
SECTION 1:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 1, CHAPTER 6, SECTION 3, SUBSECTION A.
 
1-6-3: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
 
A. Regular Meetings:
1. There shall be held two (2) regular monthly meetings of the Mayor and City
Council on the first and third Tuesday of each month. The meeting on the first
Tuesday shall be held at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and the meeting on the third
Tuesday shall be held at seven six o'clock (7:00 6:00) P.M., in the chambers of
the Athol Community Center located at 30355 Third Street in the City.
2. If the regular meeting day of any month is a holiday, the meeting shall be
held on the following day at the regular hour.
 
SECTION 2:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 1, SUBSECTION A.
 
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
Repeal and replace the entirety of Subsection A with the following:
 
2-1A-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
This article is passed pursuant to and under authority of provisions of Idaho
Code title 23, chapters 1 through 9. The term “liquor” means all kinds of
liquor sold by and in a state liquor store of the state of Idaho.
 
2-1A-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS; FEE:
A. License To Retail Liquor: From and after the effective date hereof, it shall
be unlawful for any person individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation to sell liquor by the drink at retail within the limits of the city
until after having first procured a license as hereinafter provided.
B. Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing, signed
and sworn to by the applicant, upon application forms furnished by the city
clerk and presented to the city council for their approval, rejection, or
further consideration. The applicant for a license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the Idaho
state police, as prescribed by Idaho Code title 23, chapters 1 through 9, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is
issued. The possession of a license regularly issued by the state of Idaho
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a
license hereunder. No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor upon
premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 9, as amended from time to time.
C. Annual License Fee: The fee for a license for the sale of liquor shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be in conformance with
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as amended from time to time. The license fee
will be imposed and collected per annum for the license year, which license
year shall be from March 1 to March 1 of the following year; provided, however,
that if the license is issued after March 1 of any year, any person obtaining a
license shall pay a license fee for a full year.
D. One License Per Year: No person shall be granted more than one license for
any one establishment in one year.
E. Posting Of License: It shall be the duty of any such person, individual,
firm, copartnership, corporation, or association to keep posted in a
conspicuous place in his or its place of business the license under which said
place of business is conducted.
 
2-1A-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon approval by
the mayor and council of such application and the payment of the license fee as
herein provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to sell
liquor by the drink at retail within the city for such calendar year or the
remainder thereof.
 
2-1A-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
A. Application; Affidavit: Application for a license transfer shall be made in
writing filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant
before a person authorized to administer oaths showing the applicant to be
qualified by the ordinances of the city and county of Kootenai and the laws of
the state of Idaho to receive a license. Applicant shall also have the
necessary State and County approvals governing a transfer of license, in
conformance with Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9.
B. Council Approval: Said application and affidavit of said applicant
transferee shall be approved by the mayor and city council.
C. Endorsement: After council approval and payment of transfer fees, the
current license shall be endorsed on the reverse side thereof by the existing
licensee over to the proposed transferee for the remainder of the period for
which said license has been issued, and shall be signed by the city clerk.
D. Fee: A transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and
consistent with the limitations provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9,
shall be paid for the transfer of liquor licenses.
 
2-1A-6: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A.   Application for renewal of a license to sell liquor shall be on the same
form as the application for the initial license.
B.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in the
application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal of
the license may be issued by the city clerk after approval by the mayor and
council.
 
2-1A-7: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE:
A. Additional Days For Sales: From the effective date hereof, in accordance
with the provisions of Idaho Code section 23-927(2), liquor may be sold in the
city on Sundays, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving Day.
B. Hours Of Sale Extended: From the effective date hereof, in accordance with
the provisions of Idaho Code section 23-927(2), the hours when liquor may be
sold in the city are hereby extended to two o'clock (2:00) A.M., prevailing
local time.
 
2-1A-8: SALE TO MINORS:
The liquor referred to in this article shall not be sold to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years.
 
2-1A-9: REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE:
A violation of any of the provisions of the state liquor laws shall be deemed a
violation of this article. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the license issued hereunder.
 
2-1A-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A violation of the terms of this article, in addition to being grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license issued hereunder, shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall subject to penalty as provided
in subsection 1-4-1A of this code.
 
SECTION 3:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 1, SUBSECTION B.
 
ARTICLE B. BEER
Repeal and replace the entirety of Subsection B. with the following:
 
2-1B-1: DEFINITION:
This article is passed pursuant to and under authority of provisions of Idaho
Code title 23, chapters 1 through 10. The term “beer” means any beverage
obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley,
malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
 
2-1B-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS; FEE:
A. License Required: No person, individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation shall sell such beer within the city without first obtaining a
license therefor as herein provided. Provided, however, that if such beer
contains less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by weight, such
license need not be obtained.
B. Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing, signed
and sworn to by the applicant, upon application forms furnished by the city
clerk and presented to the city council for their approval, rejection, or
further consideration. The applicant for a license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the Idaho
state police, as prescribed by Idaho Code title 23, chapters 1 through 10, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is
issued. The possession of a license regularly issued by the state of Idaho
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant’s qualifications to receive a
license hereunder. No license shall be issued for the sale of beer upon
premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 10, as amended from time to time.
C. License Fees: The fee for a license for the sale of beer for any such
person, individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be in conformance with
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, as amended from time to time.
D. One License Per Year: All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and city
council for a period of one year from March 1 to the following March 1;
provided, that any person obtaining a license after March 1 of any year shall
pay a license fee for a full year.
 
E. Posting Of License: It shall be the duty of any such person, individual,
firm, copartnership, corporation, or association to keep posted in a
conspicuous place in his or its place of business the license under which said
place of business is conducted.
 
2-1B-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon approval by
the mayor and council of such application and the payment of the license fee as
herein provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to sell
beer within the city for such calendar year or the remainder thereof.
 
2-1B-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
A. Application; Affidavit: Applications for license transfers shall be made in
writing filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant
before a person authorized to administer oaths showing the applicant to be
qualified by the ordinances of the city, county of Kootenai and laws of the
state of Idaho to receive a license. Applicant shall also have the necessary
State and County approvals governing a transfer of license, in conformance with
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10.
B. Council Approval: Said application and applicant transferee shall be
approved by the city council.
C. Endorsement: After council approval and payment of transfer fees, the
current license shall be endorsed on the reverse side thereof by the existing
licensee to the proposed transferee for the remainder of the period for which
said license has been issued, and shall be signed by the city clerk.
D. Fee: A transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and
consistent with the limitations provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10,
shall be paid for the transfer of a license to sell beer.
 
2-1B-5: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A.   Application for renewal of a license to sell beer shall be on the same
form as the application for the initial license.
 
B.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in the
application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal of
the license may be issued by the city clerk after approval by the mayor and
council.
 
2-1B-6: SALE TO MINORS:
The beer referred to in this article shall not be sold to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years.
 
2-1B-7: REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE:
A violation of any of the provisions of the state liquor laws shall be deemed a
violation of this article. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the license issued hereunder.
 
2-1B-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be a guilty of
committing a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in subsection 1-4-1A of this code.
 
SECTION 4:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 1, SUBSECTION C.
 
ARTICLE C. WINE
Repeal and replace the entirety of Subsection C. with the following:
 
2-1C-1: DEFINITION:
This article is passed pursuant to and under authority of provisions of Idaho
Code title 23, chapters 1 through 13. The term “wine” includes table wine and
dessert wine, unless the context requires otherwise.
The term “wine by the drink license” means a license to sell table wine or
dessert wine by the individual glass or opened bottle at retail, for
consumption on the premises only.
 
2-1C-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail
within the city without first obtaining a license therefor, as herein provided
and pursuant to Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13.
B. Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing, signed
and sworn to by the applicant, upon application forms furnished by the city
clerk and presented to the city council for their approval, rejection, or
further consideration. The applicant for a license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the Idaho
state police, as prescribed by Idaho Code title 23, chapters 1 through 13, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is
issued. The possession of a license regularly issued by the state of Idaho
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant’s qualifications to receive a
license hereunder. No license shall be issued for the sale of beer upon
premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 13, as amended from time to time.
C. License Fees: The fee for a license for each person, individual, firm,
copartnership, association or corporation selling wine for consumption off the
licensed premises and for each wine by the individual glass or open bottle at
retail for consumption on the premises only shall be established by resolution
of the city council and shall be in conformance with Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 13, as amended from time to time.
D. One License Per Year: All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and city
council for a period of one year from March 1 to the following March 1;
provided, that any person obtaining a license after March 1 of any year shall
pay a license fee for a full year.
E. Posting Of License: It shall be the duty of any such person, individual,
firm, copartnership, corporation, or association to keep posted in a
conspicuous place in his or its place of business the license under which said
place of business is conducted.
 
2-1C-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon approval by
the mayor and council of such application and the payment of the license fee as
herein provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for such
calendar year or the remainder thereof.
 
2-1C-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
A. Application; Affidavit: Applications for license transfers shall be made in
writing filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant
showing the applicant to be qualified by the ordinances of the city and county
of Kootenai and the laws of the state of Idaho to receive a license. Applicant
shall also have the necessary State and County approvals governing a transfer
of license, in conformance with Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13.
B. Council Approval: Said application and affidavit of said application
transferee shall be approved by the city council.
C. Endorsement: After council approval and payment of transfer fees, the
current license shall be endorsed on the reverse side thereof by the existing
licensee to the proposed transferee for the remainder of the period for which
said license has been issued, and shall be signed by the city clerk.
D. Fee: Transfer fee for a wine license shall be in an amount set by resolution
of the city council, and consistent with the limitations provided in Idaho Code
title 23, chapter 13.
 
2-1C-5: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A.   Application for renewal of a license to shall be on the same form as the
application for the initial license.
B.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in the
application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal of
the license may be issued by the city clerk after approval by the mayor and
council.
 
2-1C-6: REGULATIONS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE:
A. Retailers holding valid licenses for the retail sale of liquor by the drink,
pursuant to Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, may sell wine for consumption on or
off the licensed premises.
B. Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor
by the drink, or the sale of wine by the drink, shall not permit consumption of
wine on the licensed premises and may sell the wine only in its original
unbroken container.
C. Wine by the drink, sold by licensed retailers holding a valid liquor by the
drink license, may be sold only during hours that liquor by the drink can be
sold pursuant to the laws of this state.
D. Wine sold by licensed retailers, for consumption off the premises, may be
sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the laws of this
state.
E. Retailers holding a valid wine by the drink license may sell wine for
consumption on the premises only.
F. Retailers licensed to sell wine by the drink, but not licensed to sell
liquor by the drink, may sell wine by the drink only during the hours that beer
may be sold pursuant to the laws of the state.
 
2-1C-7: SALE TO MINORS:
The wine referred to in this article shall not be sold to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years.
 
2-1C-8: REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE:
A violation of any of the provisions of the state liquor laws shall be deemed a
violation of this article. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the license issued hereunder.
 
2-1C-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of committing a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in subsection 1-4-1A of this code.
 
SECTION 5:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 3
 
2-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
 
A. No person shall engage in any business within the City of Athol for which
licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a license
application to the City Clerk and receiving a general business license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This license shall be in
addition to any other license or permit required by other sections of this
Code. Such license shall be valid so long as the ownership, management, nature
of the business or location of the business remains unchanged.
 
B. No person shall engage in any temporary business within the City of Athol
for which licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a
temporary license application to the City Clerk or a designee and receiving a
general business license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Such license shall be valid for no more than seven (7) days six (6) months.
Only one temporary license may be granted per year. Persons having a general
business license are exempt from obtaining a temporary business license when
engaging in business at a special event. 
 
C. No person shall engage in any mobile business within the City of Athol for
which licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a license
application to the City Clerk and receiving a mobile business license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This license shall be in
addition to any other license or permit required by other sections of this
Code. Such license shall be renewed annually.
 
SECTION 6: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 4, SUBSECTION B
 
2-4-4: EXEMPTIONS:
 
B. In addition, both the fee and license provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to:
1. Persons who make occasional sales (i.e. yard sales) of their own household
property not more than twice four times each calendar year. Each event shall
not last more than 3 consecutive days. Holding more than four events per
calendar year at any single location is prohibited;
2. Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual labor not included as
temporary employees of a regularly conducted business;
3. Lessors of any residential property having one or two family units. 
4. Vendors at a city-sponsored or city-managed event.
 
SECTION 7: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 5
 
2-4-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:

A general, mobile, or temporary license application shall be provided by the
City Clerk or a designee and the application shall contain information
including, but not limited to, the name, residence address and residence phone
number of the owner and manager of the business, the street and mailing address
of the place of business, the business phone number, and the nature of the
business to be conducted at such address or special event, and any other
information deemed necessary by the City for the health and safety of emergency
service personnel or utility service providers. Every application shall be
personally signed by the owner or his agent. The application shall be submitted
no less than ten (10) business days prior to the date on which business will be
commenced.
 
SECTION 8: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 6
 
2-4-6: LICENSE FEE:
A license fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council shall be paid
at the time the application is submitted to the City Clerk or a designee and/or
prior to the issuance of a general, mobile or temporary business license. 
 
SECTION 9: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 7
 
2-4-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:

Every business required under this chapter to obtain a general, mobile or
temporary business license shall display such license in a prominent location
upon the business premises or the event location in the case of a mobile or
temporary business. No business shall loan, sell, give or assign to any other
person or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or
remove, or to have in his possession any license which has been issued to said
business. 
 
SECTION 10: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 8, SUBSECTION A.
 
2-4-8: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, NATURE OF BUSINESS OR LOCATION OF
BUSINESS:
 
A. Whenever the ownership, nature of the business or location of any business
within the City is changed, a new license application reflecting the change
shall be presented to the City Clerk or a designee within ten (10) days of said
change. The date of the issuance of the new license shall be the new
anniversary date for license renewal.
 
SECTION 11: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 7
 
2-4-10: FAILURE TO COMPLY:

Any general business license may be denied, suspended or revoked for failure of
the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter, failure to comply
with any reasonable condition placed on the permit, or failure to comply with
other requirements of this Code.  The city may charge a double application fee
for applications that are submitted after-the-fact.
 
SECTION 12:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 3, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 7
 
3-1-7: FAILURE TO ABATE; PENALTIES:
 
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in section 3-1-6 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon
being found liable therefor shall be subject to an infraction penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00) each day. Each day that a violation of this chapter exists may
be charged as a separate infraction or misdemeanor violation, as appropriate.
Any nuisance which violates this chapter and which constitutes an immediate
hazard to the public health or which continues to exist after a finding of
guilt or liability in two (2) or more prior infraction proceedings shall
constitute a misdemeanor. charged with a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in subsection 1-4-1A of this
code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition, any person who creates a nuisance, causes a
nuisance, commits an act which constitutes a nuisance or maintains a nuisance
shall bear the cost of preventing, removing or abating such nuisance, including
attorney fees, if any.
 
SECTION 13: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 3, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 4
 
3-2-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
 
A. Disposal in accordance with the sewage management plan:
6. At the time of septic tank pumping, property owners shall assure that all
tank manholes are extended with risers to be within 6 inches of the surface
grade with risers. All new septic systems shall be constructed with tank risers
to be within 6 inches of the surface. If order odor may be a concern, care
should be taken to use air tight lid construction. Property owners with
existing systems will be required to install a manhole riser to within six
inches (6") of the surface at the time of pumping. The installers of new
residential septic systems shall install a manhole riser to within six inches
(6") of the surface.
 
SECTION 14: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 3, CHAPTER 2 SECTION 5
 
3-2-5: ADMINISTRATION:
 
C. Data Management: The City will maintain a data management system, including
a map, to track all existing and unused DEs per parcel.
1. The City will provide this information to the Health District in its annual
report.
2. All new permits as requested by the property owner will be first given by
the City and subsequently forwarded by written notice to the Health District
stating the installation and DE allotment.
3. An quarterly annual report shall be provided to the City Council detailing
the current standings of issued and unissued DEs as well as status on the
septic pumping for the year.
 
D. Timeline For Implementation Of The Plan: Each property owner will be
notified by U.S. Mail by the City when it has been 5 years since the last
septic tank pumping, according to the City’s records. The City properties are
divided into five (5) sections, with each section receiving notice by mail of
the requirement to pump their septic system as required by the Sewage
Management Plan. The following shall be a timeline for implementation of the
disposal of sewage:
1. By April 1 of each year Every Spring, the City Clerk will identify, by map
or list, and send notice to, the groups of property owners that need to have
their septic system pumped for the current year.
2. The property owner will have a minimum of four (4) five (5) months from the
date of the notice to have their septic system pumped, and shall provide
documentation as evidence of such to the City Clerk no later than
September October 1.
3. If the property owner fails to comply, the City Clerk will consult the City
Attorney and a letter will be drafted and sent to the property owner requesting
compliance within thirty (30) days. A list of the property owners that fail to
comply will be presented to the City Council at the next available meeting.
4. If the property owner continually fails to comply, the water to their
property may be shut off.
5. The City shall maintain an annual report on the status of compliance with
the Sewage Management Plan, and present the report to City Council and the
Health District. 
 
SECTION 15: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 1
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
AT LARGE ANIMAL: An animal that is off the premises of its owner, or if on the
premises of its owner or of another, with permission, is not on a leash or
otherwise suitably contained within a fenced enclosure such that it is under
the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal.
 
EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk,
fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, nonpoisonous snakes more than three
feet (3') in length, members of the feline species other than domestic cat
(Felis domesticus), members of the canine species other than domestic dog
(Canis familiaris) or any other animal that by virtue of strength or inherent
temperament or disposition would require a standard of care and control greater
than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or
domestic farm animals.
 
 
SECTION 16: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 2
 
4-3-2: ANIMAL REGULATIONS:
 
A.   Purpose: It shall be the purpose of this section to provide standards and
procedures for the care and ownership of certain domestic animals within the
incorporated areas of the City. This section does not address all aspects of
animal ownership, rather it establishes some minimum standards for animal care,
control and treatment for public safety and animal welfare; the responsibility
for actions and behavior of domestic animals remains with the owner. For
purposes of this chapter, all species of animals shall be classified as either
a large animal or a small animal in keeping with the definitions of Section 4-
3-1. Any codes not covered in the City code shall be required to follow the
codes of Kootenai County with respect to procedures for animal care and
impoundment.
 
B. Requirements For Keeping:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the City on a
parcel of less than one acre in size to maintain any horse, cow, bull, or any
other large animals as defined herein. The number of animals shall be limited
as outlined in subsection C of this section.
2. On parcels over one acre, the following requirements shall be in force:
a. All excreta from the animal shall be removed daily from any building or
shelter where the animal is kept, or from any yard or enclosure where the
animal is permitted. This excreta shall be buried in the ground or placed in a
covered container. Subsequent and final disposal thereof, if made in the City,
shall be done by burying the same in the ground.
b. No large animals shall be kept or permitted in any building, shelter, yard
enclosure or pasture, unless the parcel is a minimum size of one acre and is at
least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any residence, street or highway in
the City, except the residence of the owner.
       3. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to
refuse or fail to provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious
food, water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and
treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal to intolerably hot,
stormy, cold or inclement weather without adequate shelter.
4. No owner or custodian of any animal shall abandon such animal on any street,
road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of
another responsible person. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to
fail to keep such animal under restraint or permit such animal to run at large
upon the streets and public ways of the city or upon private property without
consent of the owner or present occupant. It shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section when an animal is found by an animal safety officer
or police officer while it is away from its owner (or responsible person).
   5. If a person feeds or harbors any animal, they shall be considered an
owner or custodian for purposes of this chapter.
   6. Every owner and custodian of animals shall be responsible for any damage
done by their animals to another person’s property.
 
C.   Keeping of Exotic or Wild Animals: It shall be unlawful for anyone to own,
harbor, or permit at large any wild or exotic animal without the express
written authorization of the Athol City Council. Such authorization may be
given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the council that the
animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. The City
Council may conduct a public hearing to obtain the opinions of adjoining
residents and property owners when considering such requests. The City Council
may charge an applicant for such authorization an appropriate fee to recover
the authorization processing costs incurred by the City.
 
SECTION 17: ADDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 3
 
4-3-3: IMPOUNDMENT:
 
A. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal safety
officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to an
animal shelter or hospital any of the following animals:
1. Any dog without a valid license tag;
2. Any animal at large, including cats;
3. Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the
public;
4. Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of
the Panhandle health district, a Post Falls animal safety officer or any
standing quarantine or confinement order of any public officer;
5. Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care;
6. Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected;
7. Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
8. Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or dangerous
where the city council or animal safety officer determines that there is a
threat to public health and safety; including illegal exotic and wild animals;
9. Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or
destroyed;
10. Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations
where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or has been evicted from his
regular place of residence;
11. Any animal that has been declared vicious and the owner or harborer fails
to adhere the established guidelines set forth in 4-3-2 of this title.
 
B. An animal safety officer or police officer may also, or in lieu of
impoundment of a cat or dog running at large, issue to the owner a notice of
violation which calls for payment of an animal control fee or, in the
alternative, may issue a uniform citation charging the owner with a criminal
violation of this chapter. The animal safety officer or police officer may
issue a uniform citation or refer the matter to the city prosecutor in order to
initiate misdemeanor criminal proceedings for the underlying violation of this
chapter. Such citation or complaint shall be punishable as a criminal
misdemeanor as otherwise provided by this code.
 
SECTION 18: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 8
 
6-2-8: EXTENSION OF WATER LINES; COSTS:

Each property owner requesting water where there has been no prior service to
the land, premises, or building, shall be required to pay for all costs
associated with the extension of the water line, this may include costs of
boring and road patches.  Where city water mains are extended at the request of
a private property owner to provide water service, the water main shall be
extended through the property to the property line, to facilitate future
expansion as required by the City.
 
SECTION 19: AMEND TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 9 TO DELETE THE SECTION IN ITS
ENTIRETY
 
6-2-9: WATER MAIN IMPROVEMENT COSTS; REIMBURSEMENT: 
 
A. Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing and future
public water mains of the City, situated within the boundaries of the City, and
located in the right-of-way of a street or alley, or within a utility easement.
(Ord. 258, 8-3-2004; amd. Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
 
B. Parties Entitled To Refunds In Specific Circumstances: If, on or after the
date of August 3, 2004, a public water main has been installed and/or upgraded
in size, including lateral lines with or without meters for subsequent property
connections, by private contract, or otherwise by certain owners of property,
at no expense to the City, or if the cost and expenses of such water main
installation or upgrade and related infrastructure have been shared with the
City and certain owners of property, with or without additional aid of some
government agency, or if the costs of such water main installation or upgrade
and related infrastructure have been borne solely by the City, then the
provisions of this subsection shall apply to those parties having borne the
initial expense and to those parties who subsequently seek connection to the
subject water main improvements at a later time.
1. Refund Criteria For Certain Parties:
a. For a period of five (5) years from the date of the installation and/or
upgrade of the public water main and related infrastructure, the private
parties having borne the initial cost and expenses shall be entitled to
proportionate refunds to be paid by future connections to the improvements;
provided, that: (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
(1) Owners shall file with the City a written application, together with the
necessary supporting affidavits, within thirty (30) days after the completion
of the water main installation and/or upgrade and related infrastructure,
setting forth the properties for which they are contributing, and also the
total cost to them, and other necessary information. The thirty (30) day time
frame may be extended by the City Council upon written request for such
extension.
(2) The total amount of such fees refunded to a specific owner or owners, or
their assignors, shall not exceed the total amount contributed by the original
owners toward that portion of the cost of the public water main installation
and/or upgrade and related infrastructure serving property not owned by them.
(3) The total amount of the refund shall be both estimated and verified by the
City.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) who installed the
improvements to keep the City informed of current address information. In the
absence of the materials required in subsection B1a of this section, and in the
event that a current address is not provided and the City is unable to locate
the owner of record after a reasonable effort to do so, future fees and charges
collected shall be forfeited and shall revert to the General Operating Fund of
the City. (Ord. 258, 8-3-2004; amd. Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
2. Reimbursement Criteria When Initial Costs And Expenses Paid By City: When
the City has borne the initial costs for installation and/or upgrade of the
public water main and related infrastructure, the City shall be entitled to
proportionate reimbursement to be paid by future connections to improvements in
the same manner as set forth in subsection B1a of this section, except that
there shall be no five (5) year time limitation on the City for requiring such
proportionate reimbursement by the future connections to the improvements at
issue. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
3. Payment Criteria; Parties Seeking Connection To Water Main Infrastructure
Constructed By Others:
a. Generally: If other owners who have not, either themselves or their
assignors, contributed toward the cost of such public water main installation
and/or upgrade, desire to connect to it, the City shall collect a proportionate
share of costs associated therewith and shall authorize the refunding of such
fees which are collected pursuant to the provisions of subsections B1 and B2 of
this section.
b. Exception: When, on a previously undeveloped parcel of land that was of
record in the Kootenai County Recorder's Office on the date the public water
main installation and/or upgrade was constructed, the current owner of record
of such parcel seeks to construct one new single-family dwelling, either for
personal occupancy or for sale or lease to another party, the current owner of
record, his/her successors or assigns, shall be exempt from the proportionate
repayment or reimbursement provisions of this section only to the extent that
they apply to the one new single-family dwelling to be constructed and to one
detached residential garage building accessory thereto. All future division of
the subject property, or construction of additional new buildings on the
subject property, whether for residential or nonresidential occupancy, shall
not be exempt from the proportionate repayment or reimbursement provisions of
this section.
 
C. Withholding Of Final Approval: The City Council shall withhold final
approval of any connection to the water infrastructure in question until such
time as the requirements of this section are fully satisfied and the City has
asserted to the same. 
 
SECTION 20: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2A, SECTION 7
 
6-2A-7: TYPES OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES REQUIRED: 

The type of prevention device required depends on the degree of hazard that
exists:
 
A. An air gap separation or reduced principle backflow prevention assembly
shall be installed where the water supply may be contaminated by sewage,
industrial waste of a toxic nature or other contaminant, which could cause a
health or system hazard.
 
B. In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous to
health, an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly, or a double check valve assembly shall be installed.
 
C. Lawn sprinkler systems, which are supplied by city water only, shall be
required to have a double check valve backflow prevention assembly, or a
pressure vacuum breaker assembly depending on the design of the sprinkler
system and potential risk to the potable water supply. For backflow prevention
assemblies larger than one inch (1"), design shall be submitted, and approval
shall be made by the water operator. All backflow prevention assemblies shall
be of a type approved by the Idaho department of health and welfare, division
of environmental quality.
 
D.   Any new backflow prevention device installed on any part of the City’s
water system shall meet the International Plumbing Code standards, as adopted
by the State of Idaho. This requirement shall also apply to any backflow
prevention device that is replaced due to a failed test performed by a
certified backflow assembly tester.
 
E.   All assemblies and underground lawn irrigation and sprinkler systems must
be tested within ten (10) days of spring start-up, and no later than June 30th
of each year. All other assemblies must be tested by September 30th. Proof of
required yearly testing must be supplied to the City Clerk and Public Works
Director/Water Operator by the testing deadline respective to each assembly
system.
 
SECTION 21: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 6, CHAPTER 5, SECTION 2
 
6-5-2: GLASS AND LITTER METAL CONTAINERS:

It is unlawful for any person to cause to be deposited on the premises of any
public park or playfield any glass container or litter of any type, pop top
style metal container or the opening tag off of the containers, except in
designated trash receptacles. "Pop top" style metal container shall be defined
to include, but not be limited to, any metal container which has an opening
secured by a removable metal tag. 
 
SECTION 22: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 6, CHAPTER 6, TO ADD A NEW SECTION 4, ACCESS
FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY TO PUBLIC STREETS
 
6-6-4:   ACCESS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY TO PUBLIC STREETS
 
A. Permit Required:
1. All vehicular approaches (private, common, commercial or public driveways)
shall obtain an approach permit, prior to construction of the approach.
2. A single approach for a residential parcel is exempt from the requirement
for a separate approach permit, when shown on the site plan and submitted as
part of the building location permit for the primary structure. All the
requirements of the approach standards herein shall continue to apply.
 
B. Permit Application: No approach permit under this chapter shall be issued
unless a written application for the issuance of an approach permit is
submitted to the City. The application shall be reviewed by the City. For new
commercial approaches that are anticipated to experience significant traffic
volume, as determined by the City, traffic studies and mitigation measures may
be required prior to or in conjunction with permit approval. Prior to permit
issuance, the applicant shall mark the driveway location for a site inspection
by the City. The City Clerk shall issue the permit only after all application
items have been completed or satisfactorily addressed, all reviews have been
completed and all fees have been paid.
 
C. Approach Standards:
1. The number of approaches serving an individual lot or parcel may be
restricted to a single two-way approach, and in some cases, common driveways
serving two or more lots may be required.
2. The width of a single private residential driveway approach shall be a
minimum of 14 feet and a maximum of 24 feet, and shall meet the requirements of
the fire protection district.
3. Common residential driveways or approaches that access two or more lots or
parcels, and commercial accesses shall have a minimum width of 20 feet, and a
maximum width of 28 feet. Where additional lanes are required to accommodate
turning traffic, an approach may be up to 40 feet in width when justified by an
appropriate traffic study.
 
D. Permit Fees: Fees for an approach permit and inspections related to such
permits shall as set forth in the duly adopted fee resolution for the City.
 
SECTION 23: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 6, ADDING A NEW CHAPTER 7
 
PARADES, PUBLIC EVENTS AND ASSEMBLY
 
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings set out in this section:
APPLICANT: Any person applying for a “permit” as defined herein. The true
applicant for any such permit shall be the sponsoring entity whether such
sponsoring entity is an individual person, a corporation, a partnership or
other legal entity of any type.
CITY CLERK: The clerk of the city or the clerk's authorized designee.
EVENT: A gathering or meeting of 50 or more people with or without vendors,
including weddings, birthdays, reunions, and class reunions.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Timberlake Fire Protection District.
PARADE: Any dash, demonstration, march, marathon, meeting, motorcade, parade,
procession, public assembly, race, rally, or like activity consisting of
persons, animals, or vehicles or a combination thereof within the city with an
intent of attracting public attention or achieving some other expressive
purpose which might interfere with or has the potential to interfere with the
normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets.
PERMIT: The permit as required by this chapter for a "parade", "public
assembly" or “event” as defined herein. An approved application will serve as
the permit.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind granted a permit for an activity regulated by this
chapter.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, rally or gathering of 50 or more
persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with
or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or occupies any street or other public property managed by
the city of Athol, including parks.
SHERIFF: The Kootenai County sheriff or the sheriff's authorized designee.
SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purpose
of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for primary
purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder, parkway, right
of way, or median strip thereof.
6-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, participate in, or conduct any "parade", "public
assembly" or “event” as defined by this chapter unless a permit has been issued
by the city clerk for the date and location involved.
6-7-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
    A.   Funeral processions;
    B.   Government agencies acting within the scope of their function;
    C.   Regular park usage by family, charitable, fraternal or other groups in
the ordinary traditional use of the park, when the anticipated number of
participants is less than fifty (50) where no vendors are present;
    D.   Community block watch events that are organized and working with
Kootenai County Sheriff’s Office or city government;
    E.   Students going to and from classes or participating in educational
activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities;
    F.   Other activities sponsored by the city of Athol in its municipal
capacity.
6-7-4: APPLICATION AND PROPER NOTICE:
A person seeking a parade/event permit shall obtain an application form and
file a completed application with the city clerk on forms provided.
An application for a permit shall be filed with the city clerk as soon as the
applicant knows sufficient information to complete an application and at least
thirty (30) days and not more than one year before a parade or public assembly
is proposed to commence. The time frame set forth herein may be waived in the
discretion of the city clerk for good cause and upon a finding that such waiver
would not compromise the ability of the city to prepare for the activity for
which the permit is requested.
Good cause may be shown when the parade or event is related to an unanticipated
or recently announced or occurring event and the application for permit or
public assembly can be processed in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter in sufficient time to allow the parade or event to proceed as scheduled
without causing fiscal or operational hardship to the city's operations.
This section is subject to amendment or replacement at any time, and any
application for a parade or event permit shall be issued pursuant to the
ordinance in effect at the time of application, but conduct during the parade
or assembly shall be governed by standards of behavior legally required at the
time the event occurs.
6-7-5: CONTENTS OF PERMIT APPLICATION:
Each permit application shall state at least the following, and the applicant
shall adhere to and be bound by any commitments made in an application
submittal:
    A.   The full name, street address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
facsimile number, if any, of the person or organization sponsoring the parade
or event;
    B.   The name, street address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
facsimile number, if any, of the person in charge of the parade or event;
    C.   The date when the parade or event is to be conducted;
    D.   The name of the parade or event, if any;
    E.   The time the parade or event will begin to form, and the time the
parade or event will begin movement;
    F.   The place the parade or event will form;
    G.   The route of the parade or event selected from the preapproved routes
maintained by the city clerk;
    H.   The place the parade or event will disband;
    I.   The approximate number of participants, not including spectators, who
will participate in the parade or event and the maximum number who will be
allowed to participate;
    J.   The number of marchers, animals, floats, automobiles, or other
vehicles in the parade or event;
    K.   The prior parade or event history of the applicant within Athol, or
the state of Idaho history if no Athol history exists, including the number of
permits previously applied for;
    L.   A thoroughly documented plan for controlling disorderly or violent
conduct if such might reasonably be expected, a plan for maintaining traffic
flow to commercial and other establishments, a plan for sanitary and medical
facilities, and for cleanup;
    M.   Attach the required certificate of insurance, if applicable, as set
forth elsewhere within this chapter;
    N.   Identify any requested exception from any requirement established by
this chapter premised upon the unique circumstances associated with the parade/
event for which application has been made;
    O.   Any other information required by the city clerk or sheriff to enable
them to understand the impacts of the proposed parade or event.
6-7-6: APPLICATION FEE:
A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of the city
council to cover the expenses incident to processing the application for parade
or event permit shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of filing of the
application. This fee is not refundable unless the application is withdrawn on
the same date it is submitted.
6-7-7: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
    A.   Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to set forth
the standards of issuance for a parade or event permit. It is further the
purpose of these regulations to:
       1.   Assure that emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance
services are available for a parade or event taking place within the corporate
limits of the city of Athol; and
       2.   Assure that emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance
services are not unreasonably inhibited in their ability to travel on and to
cross public streets or property used by parades or events; and
       3.   Assure that private business activities in Athol are not
unreasonably impacted by parades or events; and
       4.   Assure that traffic on public streets is not unreasonably disturbed
or disrupted by parades or events; and
       5.   Assure that public safety can be maintained; and
       6.   Assure that public property can be protected from harm.
    B.   Permit Issuance: Only one parade or event permit will be granted for
the same calendar day unless absolute assurance can be provided that the
permitted events will not conflict and that public service obligations will not
exceed the fiscal and operational limits of city personnel. The city clerk
shall issue the permit on a first come, first served basis. Except for the city
and other public agencies, individual persons/organizations/corporations shall
be limited to one parade and/or one public assembly per month. Prior to
issuance of the permit for any group over 50 people where vendors will be
present for a public event, the applicant shall provide a certificate of
liability insurance in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00). Private events such as weddings, birthdays or family reunions
shall not be required to provide insurance.
    C.   Health District Requirement: No permit shall be granted unless the
applicant obtains the approval of Panhandle Health District indicating that the
applicants for the permit have complied with the health requirements of such
district for like or similar facilities. Such approval shall include the type
and adequacy of water supply to be provided, the type and adequacy of toilet,
waste collection and washing facilities to be provided, and if there is food or
drink served on the premises, the type and adequacy of food and drink
preparation, and food and drink service facilities to be provided.
    D.   Application Form; Approval: Affected city departments, if any, may
request such information from the applicant as necessary to demonstrate
compliance with applicable provisions of law. Information may be requested on
the permit application form, through written instructions communicated from the
city clerk, or through written or oral inquiries addressed to the applicant by
any designated city staff member. The time for considering the permit may be
extended by the time taken by the applicant in responding satisfactorily to any
inquiry, not to exceed five (5) business days.
    E.   Discrimination Prohibited: There shall be no discrimination in
granting, denying, or conditionally granting permits under this chapter based
upon statutorily protected or constitutionally guaranteed individual rights.
    F.   Permit Denial: The city clerk may deny a permit if the applicant or
the person on whose behalf the application is made has on prior occasions made
material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of a parade or event
previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on
behalf of the applicant; or if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the
application was made has on prior occasions damaged city property and not paid
in full for such damage.
    G.   Additional Reasons For Denial; Halting Of Event: A permit may be
denied where the city clerk, upon the advice of the City Council, sheriff, or
fire department determines that the parade would unreasonably disrupt traffic
or public services or where there is clear and convincing evidence that the
applicant, not opponents of the applicant, intends to engage in violence and
that the time, place, and manner of the event cannot be adjusted such that the
city will be able to control such potential violence without injury to
bystanders, participants, or police. A parade or event may be halted by the
sheriff or fire department if at any time participants fail to conform to the
permit or if an imminent risk of violence arises in the course of the parade or
event. No application for a permit shall issue if the applicant fails to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of law, including the
requirements of this chapter.
6-7-8: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION:
The city clerk shall act upon the application for a permit promptly after the
filing thereof accompanied by the applicant's submission of complete
information. The clerk shall make a reasonable effort to notify the applicant,
by facsimile, personal service, or certified mail, of any notice of denial or
conditional approval and the reason(s) for denial or conditions as soon as
practical upon the clerk's decision. Such decision shall be made with a
promptness adequate to allow an opportunity for appeal pursuant to provisions
of this chapter.
6-7-9: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
The city clerk may authorize the conduct of the parade or event requiring a
permit at a date, time, place or in a manner different from that named by the
applicant and may tender a conditional permit setting forth proposed modified
terms which differ from those set forth in the application. An applicant
desiring to accept a conditional permit shall, within five (5) days after
notice of the action of the city clerk, file a written notice of acceptance
with the city clerk. If the applicant fails to provide written notice of
acceptance of the conditional permit within the time prescribed, the parade or
event shall not be held.
6-7-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the clerk's denial of a permit or
imposition of conditions to the city council. The denied applicant must make
any appeal within forty eight (48) hours after receipt of the denial or
conditional approval from the city clerk by filing a written notice of appeal
with the city clerk setting out the reasons therefor in writing. The city
council will hear the appeal at a regular or special meeting, when available,
and reach a determination prior to the planned date and time of the parade/
public assembly, and in each instance no more than ten (10) business days after
the date the notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk unless a quorum of
the city council cannot be obtained.
6-7-11: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit conditions and with all
federal, state and local laws.
The following shall be attached to the parade or event application:
    A.   Approval of the Panhandle Health District indicating that the
applicant has met all of the health requirements of the district for like or
similar facilities.
    B.   If sponsor operated motor vehicles are involved, proof of
comprehensive automobile liability insurance from an insurance company
authorized to do business in Idaho. This coverage shall be in the amount
required by Idaho Code. The city clerk may require a higher limit when in the
opinion of the city clerk or sheriff the event demands a higher limit. Such
reasons for higher limits shall be set forth in writing.
    C.   A performance bond may be required to guarantee damage repair to any
structure within the public right of way or other public property, if in the
opinion of the city clerk the nature of the activity is likely to cause damage
to city property.
6-7-12: TIME, PLACE, AND MANNER RESTRICTIONS:
The following prohibitions and regulations shall apply to activities requiring
a permit:
    A.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of, a duly permitted activity requiring a permit to knowingly fail
to comply with any condition of the permit.
    B.   No permit shall be issued for a parade or event to commence before
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. All parades and/or public assemblies shall terminate
prior to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. No parade requiring a permit shall exceed
two (2) hours in length. City street setup and dispersal, including barricade
removal, shall not be included in the activity time limit.
    C.   All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at the time and
location designated in the parade permit and shall disperse from public
property after the conclusion of the parade in order that regular traffic
patterns might be restored.
    D.   Parade or assembly organizers shall assure to the satisfaction of the
sheriff: 1) do not intend to engage in violence or other unlawful conduct, and
2) do not intend to incite others to do so.
    E.   The permit may limit or condition the number of participants, the
length of the event, the time and location of the event, or the manner of the
event where necessary to prevent violence; to avoid serious inconvenience to
those needing access to commercial or public services; to avoid interference
with movement of police or fire vehicles or ambulances and where such
limitations or conditions provide ample opportunity for exercise of
constitutionally protected rights.
    F.   The permit may require that the applicant provide water supply and/or
toilet, waste collection and washing facilities for participants and attendees
of the parade or event. Permittee is required to work with the health district
if additional portable facilities are required.
6-7-13: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or who, having obtained a permit hereunder, fails to comply with the
conditions set forth in the approved permit is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
subsection 1-4-1A of this code.
6-7-14: EMERGENCY CANCELLATION; TERMINATION:
Notwithstanding issuance of a permit pursuant to provisions of this chapter,
the mayor is authorized to revoke a parade/event permit if the mayor
determines, based upon competent evidence, that the conduct of the parade or
event would bring about violence which would, with reasonable certainty, result
in injury to the public or to public safety personnel or which would result in
damage to private property. Any such cancellation shall be communicated to the
sponsor/applicant as soon as possible after such determination has been made.
 
SECTION 24:   AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 4, AMENDING THE
DEFINTIONS OF CERTAIN TERMS, AS FOLLOWS:
 
ATTACHED: Any building or structure that has a wall or roof in common with
another building or structure.
 
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A residence where sleeping, bathing and toilet
accommodations and one or more meals daily for one or more persons, are
provided for hire on a daily or weekly basis, and where the living spaces of
the residents are shared by the paying guests. Such facilities shall not have
more than 5 bedrooms available for paying guests.
 
BOARD: The Board of County Commissioners of Kootenai County, Idaho.
 
FOREST USE: Land growing forest trees, species which are, or could be, at
maturity, capable of furnishing raw material used in the manufacture of lumber
or other forest products.
 
HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building in which there are six (6) or more containing guest
rooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation, and
where no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. A
comparable facility containing five (5) or fewer guest rooms may shall be
construed to be a bed and breakfast inn boardinghouse or lodging house.
 
KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats, or any combination
thereof, are kept or boarded. An adult dog or cat shall be construed to mean an
animal of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six (6)
months. Other domesticated animals commonly construed to fall under the
generalized term of household pets shall also be subject to this definition
(i.e. e.g. ferrets, guinea pigs, and mice, etc.). The keeping of large or small
farm animals and exotic animals are not included in this definition's context
and the same shall only be allowed where agricultural pursuits are authorized,
regardless of their number.
 
MOTOR COACH: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and which conforms to the
definition of a "travel trailer" herein as it pertains to highway use and human
habitation of the same.
 
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of the
lot and abutting the front property line. Depth of required front yards shall
be measured at right angles to the property line. a straight line joining the
foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot line,
in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be
assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met
without such rounding. Front and rear yard lines shall be parallel. In the case
of through lots, the front yard shall apply to both street frontages. In the
case of corner lots, the front yard shall apply to both the fronting and
flanking street frontages.
 
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between side lot lines.
In the case of through lots, there will be no rear yard. Depth of required rear
yards shall be measured at right angles to the property line. a straight line
joining the rearmost points of the side lot lines. The forward rear yard line
of a required rear yard shall be parallel to the straight line so established.
 
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to
the rear lot line. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from
the rear lines of the front yards required. In the case of a corner lot, the
side yard will apply only to the interior side property line. Width of required
side yards shall be measured at right angles to the property line. a straight
line joining the ends of front and rear lot lines on the same side of the lot.
The inner side yard line of a required side yard shall be parallel to the
straight line so established.
 
SECTION 25: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 6
 
8-8A-6: YARDS, SITE LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING SEPARATION: 

The following yard (setback), site coverage, and building separation standards
shall be observed by all uses in the Residential (R) Zone:
 
A. Street Frontage Yard: The minimum setback from any fronting street shall be
twenty five feet (25') from the street frontage property line. The minimum
setback from the flanking (side) street frontage for a corner lot shall be
twenty feet (20') from the flanking street frontage property line.
1. No building or fencing, nor any sight obstruction which constitutes a hazard
to the traveling public, shall be permitted on any corner lot within the area
designated as the "clear view triangle", which can be determined by measuring
fifty feet (50') from the corner of the two (2) intersecting street frontage
property lines along the property line of each street frontage, then connecting
the two (2) points with a straight line forming the hypotenuse of the clear
view triangle.

Trees within the clear view triangle shall have their branches removed from
ground level to a minimum of seven feet (7') above ground level, and shrubs
within such clear view triangle shall be maintained at a maximum height of
three feet (3') above ground level. In cases where such clear view triangle
will not provide adequate sight distance, the Administrator shall determine the
required area needed to reduce hazards to the traveling public.
 
2. Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be located on
the fronting or flanking street property line outside the area encompassed by
the clear view triangle.
 
B. Rear Yard:
1. Rear yards shall have a minimum depth of ten feet (10') from the rear
property line.
2. Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be located on
the rear property line.
 
C. Side Yard:
1. Side yards shall have a minimum depth of five feet (5') from one side
property line and ten feet (10') from the other side property line. In the case
of a corner lot, the interior side property line setback shall be a minimum of
five feet (5') in depth.
2. Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be located on
the side property line.
 
D. Yard Exceptions: Eaves and cornices may project into a required yard
(setback) area up to eighteen inches (18"); uncovered steps may project into a
required yard (setback) area; provided, that compliance with State and local
fire regulations has been demonstrated.
 
E. Site Lot Coverage: The maximum site lot coverage for all buildings and
structures shall be fifty percent (50%).
 
F. Building Separation: A minimum separation distance of ten feet (10') shall
be maintained between structures. 
 
SECTION 26: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 8
 
8-8A-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING: 
 
A. Parking and loading standards for uses in the Residential (R) Zone shall
conform to the standards set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
 
B. Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined in
this title, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the
City Council, and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for
the most comparable use specified in this title, or other requirements based
upon the best available information concerning the proposed use. 
 
SECTION 27: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 2
 
8-8B-2: PERMITTED PRIMARY USES:

No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building, structure, or
use in the Commercial (C) Zone shall be erected, structurally altered,
enlarged, or established, except for the following permitted uses:
 
A. Commercial retail and service uses:
Any wholesale, retail and service business similar to and compatible with the
uses described in this section.
Automotive parts retail and repair services, including battery shops and tire
repair shops.
Bakeries.
Banks and other financial services.
Business and professional offices, including medical and dental offices.
Car washes.
Carpet, furniture, and upholstery cleaning and repair establishments.
Churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, and similar houses of worship.
Clothing and clothing accessory retail sales.
Contractors' offices, and shops, and storage, including electrical, masonry,
tile, plumbing, heating and    ventilating, plastering, carpentry, roofing,
glass, insulation, iron work, and similar services.
Convalescent homes; sanitariums, or retirement homes.
Daycare, nursery school, or preschool facilities and services.
Delicatessens and meat markets.
Dog kennels, pet boarding and breeding operations.
Drugstores and pharmacies.
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
Electrical appliance and motor repair shops.
Electronic instrument and other technology businesses.
Florist and plant shops.
Food stores and markets.
Fraternal or philanthropic lodges and institutions and other community meeting
facilities.
Furniture and other home accessory sales such as carpets, drapes, and paint.
General merchandise and other retail sales.
Hardware stores.
Hospitality businesses, including but not limited to hotels, motels, bed and
breakfast inns, lodging houses,    meeting and convention facilities.
Household appliance repair shops.
Jewelry manufacturing and sales.
Lock and key services.
Lumber yards and building material sales.
Manufacture, sales, and service of windows, window screens, rain gutters,
shades and awnings.
Medical and dental laboratories.
Medical offices and emergency care clinics.
Mortuaries and funeral homes.
Motor vehicle and farm equipment sales, leasing, rental, and services.
Nurseries and garden supplies.
Pawnshops.
Personal services, including barber and beauty shops.
Pet shops, including grooming services.
Photographic services, including portrait studios and photo developing stores.
Printing and publishing services.
Public or private office buildings.
Radio, television, and other electronics sales and services.
Restaurants and any other eating or drinking establishments, including but not
limited to cafeterias, catering    services, lounges and taverns.
Service stations.
Shoe repair and clothing alterations shops.
Small tool sharpening and repair.
Sports and athletic facilities whether indoor, outdoor or in combination.
Theaters.
Vehicle and machinery repair and storage.
Veterinary offices, including hospitalization and boarding services.
Vocational, trade or private instructional schools.
Welding and metal fabricating shops.

Other uses which the Administrator determines to be similar in nature,
function, and operation to permitted primary commercial uses in the zone.
 
B. Other uses:

Government and utility facilities, including, but not limited to:
Elementary and secondary schools, public or private.
Government buildings and uses operated by Federal, State, County, or Municipal
government entities, or operated by special purpose districts.
Libraries.
Museums.
Open space/conservation areas.
Parks and recreation uses, including, but not limited to, tennis courts,
swimming pools, play fields, and other similar uses as determined by the City
Council Administrator.
Publicly or privately operated public utility uses, structures, or transmission
facilities. 
 
SECTION 28: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 3
 
8-8B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
 
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Commercial (C) Zone:
1. Any accessory use allowed in the Residential (R) Zone under those
circumstances where residential uses are authorized in accordance with
section 8-8B-4 of this article.

An on site residence for security persons, caretakers, custodians, or officials
of a church or other house of worship employed or otherwise retained by the
primary use.
2. Signs in conformance with the provisions set forth in chapter 13 of this
title.
 
B. Storage Restrictions:
1. All storage of materials and machinery must be indoors or fully enclosed
within a 100% sight obscuring, nonpierced fence at least eight six feet (8'6’)
in height.
2. Storage of petroleum in quantities of less than twenty thousand (20,000)
gallons (total for any individual site) shall be belowground and shall meet
National Fire Protection Association and Health and Welfare Department
standards. 
 
SECTION 29: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 4
 
8-8B-4: SPECIAL (CONDITIONAL) USES:
 
The following uses may be permitted in the Commercial (C) Zone, subject to the
approval of a special (conditional) use permit in compliance with the
conditions and requirements set forth in chapter 7 of this title:
 
Any special (conditional) use listed in the Residential (R) Zone which is not a
permitted primary use in the Commercial (C) Zone.
 
Dance halls, skating rinks, arcades, or other commercial amusement places.
 
Hospitals and long term medical care facilities.
 
Kennels, pet boarding and animal breeding operations.
 
Manufacture and assemblage of components, provided that such activity: a) is
carried on in such a manner and with such precautions against fire and
explosion hazards as provided by the Fire Code, b) emits no obnoxious odor or
noise, c) exhausts no waste or dust into the air, and d) shall be conducted so
that direct and indirect illumination shall not exceed 0.2 foot-candle across
lot lines of the subject property.
 
Mini-storage facilities: On parcels of not less than 3.5 acres, provided
outside storage must be within a sight obscuring fence or other enclosure.
 
Off premises advertising signs.
 
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds.
 
Transfer, storage, and warehouse facilities which are not a permitted primary
use in the Commercial (C) Zone, provided outside storage must be within a sight
obscuring fence or other enclosure.
 
Uses permitted in the Residential (R) Zone, including multi-family housing,
manufactured and modular homes; provided, at a minimum, that such uses comply
with all provisions of article A of this chapter and chapter 10 of this title.
 
SECTION 30: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 6
 
8-8B-6: YARDS AND LOT COVERAGE:

The following yard (setback) and site lot coverage standards shall be observed
by all uses in the Commercial (C) Zone:
 
A. Compliance With Residential Zone Requirements: Any authorized residential
uses shall observe the yard area and site lot coverage standards of the
Residential (R) Zone.
 
B. Street Frontage Yard For Commercial Uses: There shall be no minimum setback
from any street, fronting or flanking, except at intersecting streets.
1. No building or fencing, nor any sight obstruction which constitutes a hazard
to the traveling public, as determined by the City Council, shall be permitted
on any corner lot within the area designated as the "clear view triangle",
which can be determined by measuring fifty feet (50') from the corner of the
two (2) intersecting street frontage property lines along the property line of
each street frontage, then connecting the two (2) points with a straight line
forming the hypotenuse of the clear view triangle.

Trees within the clear view triangle shall have their branches removed from
ground level to a minimum of seven feet (7') above ground level, and shrubs
within such clear view triangle shall be maintained at a maximum height of
three feet (3') above ground level.
 
2. Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on the
fronting or flanking street property line outside the area encompassed by the
clear view triangle.
 
C. Rear Yard For Commercial Uses:
1. There shall be no rear yard setback from the rear property line, except
where the rear property line abuts property in the Residential (R) Zone, in
which case commercial buildings and structures shall observe the rear yard
setback requirement of the Residential (R) Zone.
2. Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on the rear
property line.
 
D. Side Yard For Commercial Uses:
1. There shall be no side yard setback from the side property line, except
where the side property line abuts property in the Residential (R) Zone, in
which case commercial buildings and structures shall observe the side yard
setback requirement of the Residential (R) Zone.
2. Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on the side
property line.
 
E. Exceptions: Where commercial buildings and structures are subject to rear
and side yard setbacks of the abutting Residential (R) Zone, the exceptions
authorized in the Residential (R) Zone shall apply.
 
F. Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage for development on commercially zoned
property shall be eighty percent (80%), except for residential uses which shall
have a maximum coverage of fifty percent (50%).
 
SECTION 31: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8B, SECTION 8
 
8-8B-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING: 
 
A. Parking and loading standards for uses in the Commercial (C) Zone shall
conform to the standards set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
 
B. Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined in
this title, the parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the
City Council, and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for
the most comparable use specified in this title, or other requirements based
upon the best available information concerning the proposed use. 
 
SECTION 32: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8C, SECTION 3
 
8-8C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
 
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
the Light Industrial (LI) Zone:
1. An on site residence for security persons, caretakers, custodians, or
officials employed or otherwise retained by the primary use.
2. Signs in conformance with the provisions set forth in chapter 13 of this
title.
 
B. Storage Restrictions:
1. All storage must be indoors or fully enclosed within an 80% sight obscuring,
nonpierced fence at least eight six feet (8'6’) in height.
2. Storage of petroleum in quantities of less than twenty thousand (20,000)
gallons (total for any individual site) shall be belowground and shall meet
National Fire Protection Association and Health and Welfare Department
standards. 
 
SECTION 33: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8C, SECTION 6, SUBSECTION A.
 
8-8C-6: YARDS AND LOT COVERAGE:

The following yard (setback) and lot coverage standards shall be observed by
all uses in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone:
 
A. Street Frontage Yard For Industrial Uses: There shall be no minimum setback
from any street, fronting or flanking, except at intersecting streets.
1. No building or fencing, nor any sight obstruction which constitutes a hazard
to the traveling public as determined by the Administrator, shall be permitted
on any corner lot within the area designated as the "clear view triangle",
which can be determined by measuring fifty feet (50') from the corner of the
two (2) intersecting street frontage property lines along the property line of
each street frontage, then connecting the two (2) points with a straight line
forming the hypotenuse of the clear view triangle.

Trees within the clear view triangle shall have their branches removed from
ground level to a minimum of seven feet (7') above ground level, and shrubs
within such clear view triangle shall be maintained at a maximum height of
three feet (3') above ground level. In cases where such clear view triangle
will not provide adequate sight distance, the City Council shall determine the
required area needed to reduce hazards to the traveling public.
 
SECTION 34: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 4
 
8-12-4: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:

All off street parking shall conform to the following requirements. No on
street parking shall be considered in fulfilling the requirements for any use.
 
A. Residential uses:  
 
   Duplex dwelling units                                               2 spaces per dwelling unit  
   Manufactured home park                                              2 spaces per dwelling unit  
   Multi-family dwelling units                                         2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1/2 space per dwelling unit for guest
                                                                        parking  
   Single-family dwellings                                             2 spaces per dwelling unit  
B. Commercial, educational, institutional and industrial uses:  
 
   Banks and business or professional offices                          1 space for each 325 square feet of gross floor area  
   Churches, synagogues, temples, assembly halls, auditoriums,          1 space for each 4 fixed seats, or for each 150 square feet of assembly area
   theaters, private clubs and lodges, or similar places of assembly   where there are no fixed seats  
   Club/lodge                                                          1 space for each 6 fixed seats, or 1 for every 10 members, whichever is
                                                                        larger  
   Convalescent homes, sanitariums, and retirement homes               1 space for each 5 beds  
   Daycare centers                                                     1 space per 350 square feet  
   Fast food restaurants                                               1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area  
   Full service restaurants, taverns, and lounges                      1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area  
   Furniture, carpeting, or large appliance, retail                    1 space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area  
   Group homes                                                         1 space for each staff person, plus 1 space for each 6 residents, plus 1
                                                                        space for each vehicle operated by the facility  
   Hospitals                                                           1 space for each 2 beds  
   Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns, boarding and lodging houses  1 space per each habitable guest room  
    
                                                                        1 space for each 400 1500 square feet of gross floor area of industrial and
   Industrial/manufacturing uses/warehouse and wholesale               manufacturing; 1 space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area of
                                                                        warehouse and wholesale use, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of
                                                                        outdoor storage area
   Warehouse and wholesale                                              1 space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area 
   Libraries                                                           1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area  
   Medical and dental offices                                          1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area  
   Motor vehicles, boats, or large machinery, retail                   1 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for
                                                                        each 1,500 square feet of outdoor storage and display area  
   Nursery and garden supplies or construction materials, retail       1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each
                                                                        1,000 square feet of outdoor storage or display area  
   Other retail and service uses                                       1 space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area  
   Recreation vehicles and manufactured homes, retail                  1 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for
                                                                        each 3,000 square feet of outdoor storage and display area  
   Research and development uses                                       1 space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area  
   Schools:  
    Elementary, junior and senior high schools                         1 space per classroom, 1 per office plus 1 per each 4 seats in largest
                                                                        gathering room  
    Specialized schools and studios (dance, martial arts, gymnastics,   1 space for each 60 square feet of gross floor area  
    fitness, etc.)  
 
SECTION 35: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 5
 
8-12-5: LOCATION OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:

Off street parking and loading spaces shall be located as specified herein.
 
A. Accessibility; Location: All required off street parking and loading spaces
shall be accessible and shall be located on the same lot as the use or building
requiring such spaces, except that parking facilities for nonresidential uses
may be separated from the use or building it serves by an alley as long as the
ownership of the parking area is the same as the use or building it serves.
 
B. Prohibited In Yard Area: Except for residential driveways and parking areas,
Off off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be located within any
required yard area.
 
C. Backing Into Public Street: Except for single-family and duplex dwelling
units, parking shall be so designed that vehicles shall not back out into
public streets.
 
D. Blocking Stairways Or Walkways: Parking and loading spaces shall not
preclude direct and free access to stairways, walkways, any pedestrian
accesses, or fire safety equipment.
 
E. Residential Uses: For residential uses, an area at least large enough to
house the parking required by subsection 8-12-4A of this chapter shall be
provided on the driveway or other on site approved parking site serving the
residential use. Such on site parking area may be located within a required
setback area.
 
F. Nonresidential Parking Spaces, Design: All nonresidential parking spaces
and/or stalls and aisles shall be designed in accordance with figure 1,
"Minimum One-Way Parking Design", or figure 2, "Minimum Two-Way Parking
Design", included in section 8-12-10 of this chapter. Parking spaces designed
at any angle other than those shown in said figures are permitted, provided the
width of stalls and aisles is proportionately adjusted based upon the angle
proposed.
 
G. Handicap ADA Parking: Handicap pParking shall be installed and designated in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilies Act (ADA) all handicap
accessibility requirements of the State of Idaho.
 
H. Bicycle Racks, Storage Areas: Whenever twenty five (25) or more parking
spaces are required for a building or use, bicycle racks or bicycle storage
areas shall be provided at a ratio of one bicycle rack or bicycle storage area
for each twenty five (25) required parking spaces. 
 
SECTION 36: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 6
 
8-12-6: DRIVEWAY STANDARDS:

Each parking space and loading space area shall be accessible as to both
entrance and exit as provided for herein:
 
A. Curb Openings, Entryways: The curb openings or entryways to the lot and
driveways or approaches to parking spaces shall not exceed forty feet (40’) or
fifty two percent (52%) of the total length of the fronting or flanking street
property line or width of the street facing yard area (whichever is less),
except where a circular driveway is provided and the Administrator approves the
design and location of such circular driveway.
 
B. Driveway Or Approach: Each driveway or approach to a parking space area
shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 6-6-4. have a minimum
clear width of ten feet (10'); provided, however, that a driveway in
residential zones may be reduced to nine feet (9') where no pedestrian passage
is required. The width of the driveway or approach to a loading space shall be
as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. Two-way drive aisles in non-residential
parking areas shall be a minimum width of twenty-four feet (24’).
 
C. Vertical Clearance: The vertical clearance above the surface of the driveway
or approach to a parking space shall be not less than seven feet (7') fourteen
feet (14’). The vertical clearance for the driveway or approach to a loading
space shall be as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
 
D. Parking Space Slope: No driveway or approach to a parking space shall have a
slope in excess of eight percent (8%), except for residential uses which shall
not exceed twelve percent (12%). For loading spaces, the slope of the driveway
or approach shall be as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
 
E. Outer Radius Of Curve: The outer radius of a curve in any driveway or
approach shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). 
 
SECTION 37: AMEND TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 10 TO DELETE THE SECTION IN ITS
ENTIRETY
 
8-12-10: PARKING SPACE DIAGRAMS:

See following pages for figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1
Minimum One-Way Parking Design
Minimum Parking Space Dimensions = 8.5 feet by 18.0 feet
(Parking Diagrams omitted for clarity)
 
Figure 2
Minimum Two-Way Parking Design
Minimum Parking Space Dimensions = 8.5 feet by 18.0 feet
(Parking Diagrams omitted for clarity)
 
SECTION 38:   SEVERABILITY. The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable.
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force
and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance
before the declaration of partial invalidity.
SECTION 39:   REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. All provisions of the
ordinances of the City of Athol which conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 40: EFFECTIVE DATE . The Ordinance shall be effective upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
 
Approved by the Mayor on the 17th day of November, 2020.
 
                     CITY OF ATHOL
 
 
                     By: _______________________________
                        William “Bill” Hill, Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
__________________________________
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITY OF ATHOL, IDAHO
ANNUAL APPROPRIATION
ORDINANCE NO. 446
 
AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR
BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2024, APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF $ 1,373,972.00 TO DEFRAY
THE EXPENSES AND LIABILITIES OF THE CITY OF ATHOL FOR SAID FISCAL YEAR,
AUTHORIZING A LEVY OF A SUFFICIENT TAX UPON THE TAXABLE PROPERTY, DIRECTING THE
CITY CLERK TO FILE CERTIFIED COPIES OF THIS
ORDINANCE WITH THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND IDAHO SECRETARY OF STATE, AND
PROVIDING
AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Athol, Kootenai County,
Idaho:
SECTION 1. That the sum of $1,373,972.00 be, and the same is hereby
appropriated to defray the necessary expenses and liabilities of the City of
Athol, Kootenai County, Idaho for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2024.
SECTION 2. The objects and purposes for which such appropriation is made, and
the amount of each object and purpose is as follows:
   Estimated Expenditures:
GENERAL FUND        $825,967.00
WATER FUND                          $548,005.00
TOTAL APPROPRIATIONS        $ 1,373,972.00
Section 3. That a general tax levy of $ 198,524.00 on all taxable property
within the City of Athol be levied for the general purposes of said City, for
the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2024.
Section 4. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 5. The City Clerk of the City of Athol is hereby directed to file a
certified copy of this Ordinance with the County Commissioners of Kootenai
County, Idaho, and the Idaho Secretary of State, in accordance with Idaho Code
50-1003 and 63-804.
Section 6. This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force upon its
passage, approval and publication in one issue of the Coeur d’ Alene Press, the
official newspaper of the City of Coeur d’ Alene.
PASSED under suspension of rules by roll call vote of the City Council at a
convened meeting of the City of Athol Mayor and City Council held on the 3 rd
day of September 2024.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Athol, Idaho, this 3 rd day of September
2024.
 
 
______________________________
Mayor, Steven Ruch               ATTEST: ______________________________
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk-Treasurer
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITY OF ATHOL, IDAHO
ANNUAL APPROPRIATION
ORDINANCE NO. 447
 
AN ORDINANCE TO CORRECT A CLERICAL ERROR DISCOVERED IN ORDINANCE 446, AN
ORDINANCE ENTITLED THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR
BEGINNING
OCTOBER 1, 2024, APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF $ 1,372,448.00 TO DEFRAY THE EXPENSES
AND LIABILITIES OF THE CITY OF ATHOL FOR SAID FISCAL YEAR, AUTHORIZING A LEVY
OF A SUFFICIENT TAX UPON THE TAXABLE PROPERTY, DIRECTING THE CITY CLERK TO FILE
CERTIFIED COPIES OF THIS
ORDINANCE WITH THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND IDAHO SECRETARY OF STATE, AND
PROVIDING
AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Athol, Kootenai County,
Idaho:
SECTION 1. That the sum of $1,372,448.00 be, and the same is hereby
appropriated to defray the necessary expenses and liabilities of the City of
Athol, Kootenai County, Idaho for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2024.
SECTION 2. The objects and purposes for which such appropriation is made, and
the amount of each object and purpose is as follows:
   Estimated Expenditures:
GENERAL FUND        $824,443.00
WATER FUND                          $548,005.00
TOTAL APPROPRIATIONS        $ 1,372,448.00
Section 3. That a general tax levy of $ 198,524.00 on all taxable property
within the City of Athol be levied for the general purposes of said City, for
the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2024.
Section 4. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 5. The City Clerk of the City of Athol is hereby directed to file a
certified copy of this Ordinance with the County Commissioners of Kootenai
County, Idaho, and the Idaho Secretary of State, in accordance with Idaho Code
50-1003 and 63-804.
Section 6. This ordinance does not raise the budget and only corrects a
clerical error in ORD. 446.
Section 7. This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force upon its
passage, approval and publication in one issue of the Coeur d’ Alene Press, the
official newspaper of the City of Coeur d’ Alene.
PASSED under suspension of rules by roll call vote of the City Council at a
convened meeting of the City of Athol Mayor and City Council held on the 17 th
day of September 2024.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Athol, Idaho, this 17 th day of September
2024.
 
______________________________
Mayor, Steven Ruch               ATTEST: ______________________________
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk-Treasurer
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 448
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ATHOL, KOOTENAI COUNTY, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF
THE STATE OF IDAHO, AMENDING THE ATHOL CITY CODE BY AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER
8A, SECTION 8-8A-2 TO INCREASE THE MINIMUM SIZE FOR SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS TO
850 SQUARE FEET, AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 8-8A-5 TO INCREASE THE
LOT WIDTH REQUIREMENT FOR LOTS IN THE RESIDENTIAL ZONE AND REQUIRE LOT ACCESS
THROUGH THE REQUIRED LOT FRONTAGE; AMENDING TITLE 7, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 7-1-
2 TO ADD A NEW SUBSECTION H. REQUIRING A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION PRIOR TO
OCCUPYING A NEW BUILDING OR
INITIATING A NEW USE AS AUTHORIZED BY A BUILDING LOCATION / LAND USE PERMIT;
AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 8-12-2 TO ALLOW DELAY OF PARKING,
LOADING, AND LANDSCAPING PROVISIONS IN THE COMMERCIAL ZONE BY SPECIAL
EXCEPTION; PROVIDING SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR
REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
IT IS ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the City of Athol, Kootenai
County, Idaho as follows:
 
SECTION 1. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 8-8A-2
 
One single-family dwelling per lot or parcel.
A.   An attached garage, storage shed, and/or patio, shall be subject to the
same limitations as those which are defined as accessory uses.
B.   When the permitted dwelling is a manufactured or modular home, it shall
conform to the following: comply with all provisions of chapter 10
of this title.
C.   "Single family dwelling" shall include any group residence in which eight
(8) or fewer unrelated persons with disabilities or elderly persons reside and
who are supervised at the group residence in connection with their disability
or age related infirmity.
D.   A single-
family dwelling shall, at a minimum, contain 500 850 square feet of living space to
include a toilet, sink and bathing facilities, cooking and food preparation
facilities and one bedroom area.
SECTION 2 AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 8-8A-5 8-8A-5: SITE (LOT)
AREA AND FRONTAGE:
The following site size and street frontage standards shall apply to all permitted or conditional uses
in the Residential (R) Zone:
A.   The required minimum lot area shall be fourteen thousand five hundred
twenty (14,520) square feet which is equal to one-third (1/3) of an acre.
B.   Each lot or parcel shall have a minimum width of ninety feet 
(90’) at its narrowest point at the building line (front street setback) of
seventy five feet (75').
 
C.   Each dwelling site shall front upon a public street without any other building site intervening
between it and the street upon which it fronts and shall access directly from such frontage.
SECTION 3. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 7, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 7-1-2 7-1-2: BUILDING
LOCATION / LAND USE PERMITS / PLOT PLAN:
H. Certificate of Completion: Prior to occupying the building or commencing the
use that is  authorized by the building location or land use permit, the
property owner shall request a
Certificate of Completion from the City. Prior to issuing the Certificate of Completion, the City shall review 
the project to ensure that it is substantially complete and in substantial
conformance with the permit. In addition to completion of the structure,
substantial completion shall also include parking, landscaping, stormwater
provisions and other design standards of this Code.
Prior to issuance of the Certificate, the City shall also coordinate with other
permitting agencies (as applicable) to ensure their permitting requirements
have been met. Agencies
may include, but are not limited to, Panhandle Health District, Timberlake Fire District, State of Idaho Department of Professional Licensing, and Idaho Transportation Department.
 
SECTION 4: AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 12, SECTION 8-12-2
The provisions of this chapter shall apply and govern in all zones.
A.   No person shall cause use or occupancy of any premises unless the off
street parking and loading facilities maintained thereon, or in connection
therewith, conform to the requirements of this chapter.
B.   Any change to a building, or any change in use of a building or site, shall require compliance
with the provisions contained herein.
C.   All required parking shall be made permanently available and shall be
maintained for parking purposes only.
D.   No construction shall be authorized until plans showing provisions for the required off street
parking have been submitted and approved.
E.   All off street parking and loading spaces being maintained in connection
with any existing building, structure, or use on the effective date hereof, and
all parking and loading spaces
subsequently required by this title for any building, structure, or use, shall be maintained as long as
said building, structure, or use remains, unless an equivalent number of parking and loading spaces
is provided conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
F.   All applications for building location permits shall be accompanied by a
site plan, drawn to scale, that demonstrates compliance with this chapter. For
commercial, industrial and other non-
residential uses, such site plan shall be professionally prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape
architect or professional drafter.
G.   For parcels that are at least 1 acre in size and located within the
Commercial Zone, the City Council may, by special exception, allow the
occupancy of a building or the use of property to commence
prior to implementation of the requirements of this Chapter where:
1.   There is a public benefit to do so.
2.   The occupancy of the building or use of the property prior to the
completion of the
parking, loading, and landscaping improvements will not create a hazardous condition or be detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare of the public.
 
 
City.
3.   Plans meeting the requirements of this Chapter have been reviewed and approved by
the
 
4.   A suitable financial guarantee of 150% of the cost to complete the
improvements has been
 
provided to ensure timely completion.
5.   Improvements will be completed in the timeframe specified by the city council, but in no case shall that
be more than 2 years from the date of approval of the special exception.
 
SECTION 5: SEVERABILITY. The ordinance is hereby declared to be
severable. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose
(s) of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.
 
SECTION 6: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.  All provisions of the ordinances
of the City of Athol which conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
 
SECTION 7: EFFECTIVE DATE. The Ordinance shall be effective upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
 
 
Approved by the Mayor on the     day of    , 2025.
 
 
CITY OF ATHOL
 
 
By:        Steven Ruch, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITY OF ATHOL, IDAHO
ANNUAL APPROPRIATION
ORDINANCE NO. 449
 
AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR
BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2025, APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF $ 1,425,522.00 TO DEFRAY
THE EXPENSES AND LIABILITIES OF THE CITY OF ATHOL FOR SAID FISCAL YEAR,
AUTHORIZING A LEVY OF A SUFFICIENT TAX UPON THE TAXABLE PROPERTY, DIRECTING THE
CITY CLERK TO FILE CERTIFIED COPIES OF THIS
ORDINANCE WITH THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AND IDAHO SECRETARY OF STATE, AND
PROVIDING
AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Athol, Kootenai County,
Idaho:
SECTION 1. That the sum of $1,425,522.00 be, and the same is hereby
appropriated to defray the necessary expenses and liabilities of the City of
Athol, Kootenai County, Idaho for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2025.
SECTION 2. The objects and purposes for which such appropriation is made, and
the amount of each object and purpose is as follows:
   Estimated Expenditures:
GENERAL FUND        $901,422.00
WATER FUND                          $524,100.00
TOTAL APPROPRIATIONS        $ 1,425,522.00
Section 3. That a general tax levy of $ 214,815.00 on all taxable property
within the City of Athol be levied for the general purposes of said City, for
the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2025.
Section 4. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 5. The City Clerk of the City of Athol is hereby directed to file a
certified copy of this Ordinance with the County Commissioners of Kootenai
County, Idaho, and the Idaho Secretary of State, in accordance with Idaho Code
50-1003 and 63-804.
Section 6. This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force upon its
passage, approval and publication in one issue of the Coeur d’ Alene Press, the
official newspaper of the City of Coeur d’ Alene.
PASSED under suspension of rules by roll call vote of the City Council at a
convened meeting of the City of Athol Mayor and City Council held on the 19 th
day of August 2025.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Athol, Idaho, this 19 th day of August
2025.
 
 
______________________________
Mayor, Steven Ruch               ATTEST: ______________________________
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk-Treasurer
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 450
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ATHOL, KOOTENAI COUNTY, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF
THE STATE OF IDAHO, AMENDING THE ATHOL CITY CODE BY AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER
8A, SECTION 8-8A-6 TO INCREASE THE YARD REQUIREMENTS ON LOTS THAT ARE 90 FEET
WIDE OR GREATER; PROVIDING SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING
PROVISIONS; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
IT IS ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the City of Athol, Kootenai
County, Idaho as follows:
 
SECTION 1. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 8, CHAPTER 8A, SECTION 8-8A-6
 
8-8A-6: YARDS, LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING SEPARATION:
C.   Side Yard:
       1.   For lots or parcels less than 90 feet in width at the narrowest
point of the property, side yards shall have a minimum depth of five feet (5')
from one side property line and ten feet (10') from the other side property
line. In the case of a corner lot, the interior side property line setback
shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in depth.
       2.   For lots or parcels that are 90 feet in width or greater at the
narrowest point of the property, side yards shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10’) from one side property line and fifteen feet (15’) from the other side
property line. For accessory structures located to the rear of the primary
structure on the property, the side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’)
on both sides. In the case of a corner lot, the interior side property line
setback shall be a minimum of 10 feet (10') in depth for all structures.
3. Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be located on
the side property line.
 
SECTION 2:   SEVERABILITY. The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable.
Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force
and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance
before the declaration of partial invalidity.
 
SECTION 3: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. All provisions of the ordinances
of the City of Athol which conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
 
SECTION 4: EFFECTIVE DATE . The Ordinance shall be effective upon passage and
publication as provided by law.
 
 
Approved by the Mayor on the _____ day of _____________________, 2025.
 
 
                     CITY OF ATHOL
 
 
                     By: _______________________________
                        Steven Ruch, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
 
__________________________________
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 451
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ATHOL, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE OF
IDAHO, AMENDING CITY CODE SECTION 1-6-3(A)(1) REGARDING THE TIME AT WHICH
REGULAR MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL SHALL BE HELD; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY;
PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE
DATE.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Athol, Idaho as follows:
 
SECTION 1. That Section 1-6-3(A)(1) of the Athol City Code shall be modified as
follows: 
 
1-6-3: Council Meetings:
 
A.   Regular Meetings:
 
1.   There shall be two regular monthly meetings held of the Mayor and City
Council on the first and third Tuesday of each month. The meeting on the first
Tuesday shall be held at six o’clock (6:00) P.M. and the meeting on the third
Tuesday shall be held at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., in the chambers of the Athol
Community Center located at 30355 Third Street in the City.
 
2.   If the regular meeting day of any month is a holiday, the meeting shall be
held on the following day at the regular hour.
 
SECTION 2. Severability. 
 
The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this
ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read
to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance before the declaration of partial
invalidity.
 
SECTION 3. Repeal of Conflicting Provisions.
 
All provisions of the current Athol City Code or ordinances of the City of
Athol which conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed
to the extent of such conflict.
 
SECTION 4. Effective Date.
 
This ordinance shall be effective upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
 
Enacted by the city council as an ordinance of the City of Athol on the 4th day
of November, 2025.
 
 
Approved by the Mayor on the 4 th day of November, 2025.
 
 
CITY OF ATHOL
 
 
By: _____________________________
Steven Ruch, Mayor
 
 
Councilman McDaniel voted      __yes___
Councilman Kramer voted      ___yes____
Councilman Porter voted      ____yes____
Councilman Devine voted      ____yes____
 
 
ATTEST:
 
__________________________
Lori Yarbrough, City Clerk                  ( S E A L )
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 267
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE CITY OF ATHOL, IDAHO, CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Athol, Idaho as
follows:
   Section 1: Pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code 50-903 from and after
the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code of the city of Athol,
Idaho, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc. containing the compilation of all
ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said
ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the city, shall be
accepted in all courts without question of the governing body of the city,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as a correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinance of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: Any person violating any of the provisions of the city code
hereby adopted shall be fined an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or imprisoned for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
   Section 6: All ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 7: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED this 6th day of February, 2007.
APPROVED this 6th day of February, 2007.
Mayor: Lanny Spurlock
ATTEST:
City Clerk: Charlotte J Hooper
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Rickel, Miller, Dane
No Nays
Absent: Hyke
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
ATHOL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Appeals
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Athol. This Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the ATHOL CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Code by title in any legal documents. (2006 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2006 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Code. (2006 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code books,
while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be
and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the Office of the
City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (2006 Code)
1-1-5: APPEALS:
   A.   General Provisions: The Council shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, recommendation or
determination made by the Administrator, department officials and employees in
the enforcement of this Code. Appeals to the Council concerning interpretation
or administration of this Code may be taken by any person aggrieved. All
appeals involving interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to
the City Council and recourse from the decision of the Council shall be to the
courts as provided by law.
   B.   Procedures: Appeals shall be filed within a reasonable period of time,
not to exceed fourteen (14) days, by filing with the Council through the City
Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City may charge a
reasonable fee to be paid at the time of filing the appeal. The Council shall
fix a reasonable time, for the hearing of the appeal, give legal public notice
to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time
following the hearing. At the hearing, any affected party may appear in person,
by agent or attorney.
   C.   Appeal Stays Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Council finds, after the
notice of appeal is filed with it, that by reason of facts stated in the
appeal, a stay would, in their opinion cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the courts after having due cause
shown. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this city code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (2006 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2006 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (2006 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Athol".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2006 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Athol, county of Kootenai, state of Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Athol.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Athol.
COUNTY: The county of Kootenai, state of Idaho.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the city shall commence on October 1 of each
year 1 .
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable only
by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
period of incarceration may be imposed 2 .
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under state law
3 .
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability
partnership, trust, association, limited liability company, organization,
government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include highways or roads, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-1001.
2 2. IC §§ 18-111 and 18-113A; see section
  1-4-1 of this title.
3 1. IC §§ 18-111 and 18-113; see section
  1-4-1 of this title.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2006
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person
convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this city code deemed a
misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for any offense and may be incarcerated for a period of not more
than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed;
and in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the
court may assess.
   B.   Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this city code or by state law, it is punishable only
by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), and no incarceration
may be imposed.
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses. (2006 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this city code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
city code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any
action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be
unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues unless otherwise
specifically provided in this city code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this city code, and there
shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this city
code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more
than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense;
provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2006 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the
intention of the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CORPORATE AND OFFICIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Seal, Form And Custody
1-5-2: Official Newspaper
1-5-3: Reorganization As City
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL, FORM AND CUSTODY:
   A.   Form: A seal in circular form, with the words "City of Athol, Kootenai
County" on the outer circle, and the words "Incorporated August 10, 1909" on
the interior and center of said circle shall be, and the same is hereby made
the corporate seal of the city, to be used in all cases in which, by the laws
of Idaho and the custom of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by a
municipal corporation.
   B.   Custody: Said seal shall be and remain in the custody of the city
clerk, to be used by the clerk as prescribed in subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 2, 9-3-1909; amd. 2006 Code)
1-5-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The "Coeur d'Alene Press", a daily newspaper published and printed in the city
of Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, and a newspaper of general circulation in the city of
Athol, is hereby appointed, designated, and constituted the official newspaper
of the city, and such writings as are required of or by virtue of the municipal
government of the city to be given publication in a newspaper shall be
published in said "Coeur d'Alene Press". (Ord. 177, 11-4-1980)
1-5-3: REORGANIZATION AS CITY 1 :
   A.   Effect Of Former Ordinances: All bylaws, ordinances and resolutions
lawfully passed and in force in the city of Athol, Idaho, under its former
organization as the village of Athol, Idaho, shall remain in full force and
effect until altered or repealed by the mayor and city council.
   B.   Effect Of Legislative Act: The passage of house bill number 3, as
amended, by the 39th session of the legislature of the state of Idaho, which
took effect April 12, 1967, shall not impair or affect any act done, offense
committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or lability, penalty,
forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the effective date of such
legislative act but the same may be enjoyed, asseted, enforced, prosecuted or
inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such act had not been passed.
(Ord. 113, 9-3-1967)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 6 of this title.
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Council Membership; Election
1-6-2: President Of Council
1-6-3: Council Meetings
1-6-4: Compensation
1-6-5: Council Powers And Duties
1-6-6: Mayor Powers And Duties
1-6-7: Adoption Of Ordinances
1-6-8: Filling Vacancies
1-6-1: COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP; ELECTION:
   A.   Purpose: The City Council hereby finds that the citizens of the City
would be best served by providing for the election of Council persons by
designated Council seats pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-707.
   B.   Election; Terms: The City shall have a City Council composed of four
(4) members. During each general City election, two (2) of the four (4) members
of the City Council shall stand for reelection for a four (4) year term of
office.
   C.   Residency Requirement: Each candidate for the City Council shall meet
the residency requirements in the City as set out in Idaho Code.
   D.   Council Seats; Assignment, Candidates:
      1.   Assignment: Thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, the
City Clerk shall assign a number for each of the four (4) Council seats
currently filled by existing Council persons. The assignment of each numbered
Council seat shall be at random with the method of selection to be determined
by the City Clerk.
      2.   Candidates: Candidates for Council seats, as established by this
section, shall file for a designated Council seat in the manner prescribed by
Idaho Code.
   E.   Election Procedure: Beginning with the general Municipal election to be
held on Tuesday, November 8, 2005, those two (2) Council persons with terms
ending January 3, 2006, shall stand for election, after filing for candidacy as
required by this section, against other qualified candidates for the Council
seats created by this section. Thereafter, each Council person shall stand for
election, after filing for candidacy as required by this section against other
qualified candidates pursuant to and for the Council seats as created by this
section at the next general Municipal election immediately prior to the
termination of that Council person's term of office. (Ord. 259, 8-3-2004)
1-6-2: PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL:
   A.   Selection: At the first meeting of the City Council in January
following a general City election, the Council shall, from its members, elect
one Council person to be styled President of the Council.
   B.   Powers: The President of the Council shall have all powers of the Mayor
when serving in that office due to absence of the Mayor or vacancy in the
Office of Mayor. (Ord. 113, 9-3-1967)
1-6-3: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   There shall be held two (2) regular monthly meetings of the Mayor
and City Council on the first and third Tuesday of each month. The meeting on
the first Tuesday shall be held at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and the meeting on
the third Tuesday shall be held at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., in the chambers of
the Athol Community Center located at 30355 Third Street in the City.
      2.   If the regular meeting day of any month is a holiday, the meeting
shall be held on the following day at the regular hour.
   B.   Special Meetings: The Mayor or one-half (1/2) plus one of the
membership of the Council may call special meetings, the object of which must
be submitted to the members in writing and the call, object and the disposition
thereof shall be entered upon the journal by the Clerk.
   C.   Open Meetings: The City Council meetings shall be open to the public
pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-2341 et seq. (Ord. 113, 9-3-1967; amd. 2006
Code; Ord. 415, 9-19-2017; Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
1-6-4: COMPENSATION:
Commencing January 1, 2018, the salaries of the Mayor and the four (4) members
of the Council shall be as follows:
   A.   Mayor: The Mayor shall receive a monthly salary in the amount of three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
   B.   Council Members: Each of the four (4) members of the City Council shall
receive a monthly salary in the amount of one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00). (Ord. 413, 7-18-2017)
1-6-5: COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   General: The members of the City Council, the legislative and policy
making branch of the government of the City, shall devote so much of their time
to the duties of their office as an efficient and faithful discharge thereof
may require. They shall attend all meetings of the Council unless lawfully
excused therefrom by the Mayor or by a majority of the remaining members,
perform all duties required of them by law and as may be assigned committees to
which they may severally be appointed by the Mayor.
   B.   Safekeeping Of Funds; Deposits: The City Council shall make provision
for the care and safekeeping of all public funds of the City and for the
deposit of the same.
   C.   Record Keeping System; Retention Of Records: The City Council shall
make provisions for an adequate record system and, by ordinance, establish a
classification for retention of records in accordance with the provisions of
Idaho Code title 50.
   D.   Examination Of Accounts: At least once in each quarter of each year,
the Council shall examine, either in open session or by committee, the accounts
and doings of all officers or other persons having the care, management or
disposition of monies, property or business of the City. (Ord. 113, 9-3-1967)
1-6-6: MAYOR POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Election And Term: The Mayor shall be elected in a Municipal election
of the City every four (4) years. (2006 Code)
   B.   General:
      1.   The Mayor, the superintending and administrative officer of the
City, shall devote so much of his time to the duties of his office as an
efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require.
      2.   He shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have a
vote when the Council is equally divided, and may call special meetings of the
Council when necessary.
      3.   He shall appoint all officers and employees of the City, subject to
the approval of the Council, and have such other powers as provided by law.
      4.   He shall from time to time provide for the Council such information
and recommend such measures as he may deem beneficial to the City.
      5.   He shall examine the grounds of all complaints against any officer
of the City to determine existence of a violation or neglect of duty and report
to the Council the evidence thereof, if deemed sufficient for the removal of
said officer.
      6.   He shall require that every officer, on the expiration of his term
of office or resignation or removal, deliver to his successor all assets
belonging to such office.
      7.   He shall perform all other duties required and necessary for the
efficient operation of the business of the City, and all other duties imposed
by laws of the State of Idaho.
      8.   He shall serve as the Administrator of this Code, and shall have the
authority to delegate Code administration to an employee or contractor of the
City with appropriate skills and experience for the task. Decisions made by the
Mayor or his designee in administering this Code may be appealed as outlined in
section
1-1-5 of this title. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
   C.   Sign Documents: The Mayor is authorized and empowered to sign, for and
on behalf of the City, all contracts, documents and papers to which the City is
a party, and to require that the conditions in any instrument are faithfully
performed.
   D.   Borrow Money: The Mayor may borrow money on the credit of the City when
so authorized by the Council.
   E.   Enforcement Jurisdiction: The Mayor shall have jurisdiction over all
places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the City, for the
enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance or regulation and shall have
jurisdiction in all matters excepting taxation, within one (1) mile of the
corporate limits.
   F.   Veto Or Sign Ordinances: The Mayor shall have power to veto or sign any
ordinance passed by the City Council; provided, that any ordinance vetoed by
the Mayor may be passed over his veto by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one (1)
of the members of the full Council notwithstanding the veto, and should the
Mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance and return the same with his
objections, in writing, at the next regular meeting of the Council, the same
shall become a law without his signature.
   G.   Require Officers To Exhibit Accounts: The Mayor shall have the power,
when he deems it necessary, to require any officer of the City to exhibit his
accounts or other papers or to make reports to the Council in writing, touching
any subject or matter pertaining to his office.
   H.   Request Aid For Law Enforcement: The Mayor is hereby authorized to call
on every inhabitant in the City over twenty one (21) years of age to aid in
enforcing the laws. (Ord. 113, 9-3-1967; amd. 2006 Code)
1-6-7: ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES:
   A.   Procedure:
      1.   All ordinances of the City shall be typewritten or printed and
presented to the City Council by a member at any regular or special meeting.
Every such ordinance shall be read at the meetings of the Council on three (3)
different days. At each reading, it shall be open to discussion and amendment
or may be referred to a committee unless by majority vote other disposition is
made. All ordinances which have been amended shall, after the second reading,
be engrossed by the City Clerk as amended. On final passage, the yeas and nays
shall be called and recorded and a concurrence of a majority of the full
Council shall be required for passage.
      2.   Provided, however, that on the vote of one-half (1/2) plus one (1)
members of the Council, the Council may dispense with the portion of this
subsection requiring all ordinances to be read on three (3) different days; and
on the vote upon the motion to dispense with this rule, the yeas and nays shall
be called and recorded.
      3.   When any such ordinance is passed, it shall be signed by the Clerk,
and the date of its passage by the Council shall be added thereto, and it
shall, within three (3) days thereafter, be presented to the Mayor, or, in case
of his absence from the City, to the President of the Council for his approval.
If he approves the same, he shall attach his signature thereto.
   B.   Veto By Mayor; Reconsideration By Council:
      1.   Should the Mayor not approve the ordinance, the Mayor shall, before
the next regular meeting after such ordinance is presented to him for his
approval, return the ordinance to the Council with his objections in writing.
When any ordinance is so returned by the Mayor, it shall be reconsidered by the
Council at the first regular meeting thereafter. If, on such reconsideration,
one-half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the full Council shall vote in
the affirmative, the ordinance shall become a law notwithstanding the Mayor's
veto. The Clerk, in such cases, shall annex a certificate to the ordinance
stating the same was vetoed by the Mayor, and that, on its reconsideration, it
received the required majority of votes.
      2.   Should the Mayor refuse or neglect to sign such ordinance and return
the same with his objections in writing at the next regular meeting after the
same has been presented to him, it shall become law without his signature. The
Clerk shall annex to such ordinance a certificate to the effect that the Mayor
has failed to sign or veto the same, and it has therefor become a law without
his signature.
   C.   Clerk To Maintain Ordinances: It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to
safely keep the original ordinances as engrossed, and, after final passage, the
Clerk shall copy the same at length in a book to be known as the "Ordinance
Book of Athol", which book shall be provided by the Council for that purpose
and shall be kept as a permanent record of the City. (Ord. 113, 9-3-1967)
1-6-8: FILLING VACANCIES:
In the event an office of the City Council shall become vacant through death,
removal of residence, or for any other cause, the Mayor shall appoint, with the
approval of the Council, a resident of the City to fill the unexpired portion
of the term until the next general election, at which time the unexpired term
shall be filled by regular election. (Ord. 113, 9-3-1967)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
CHAPTER 8
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Purpose
1-8-2: Consideration
1-8-3: Area Of City Impact Boundary
1-8-4: Annexation, Area Of Impact
1-8-5: Applicable Comprehensive Plan Policies And Ordinances
1-8-6: Coordination Of Amendments And Zoning Applications
1-8-7: Renegotiation
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of establishing an area of city impact is to identify a logical
urban fringe area adjoining the city. The urban fringe area is realizing, or
will realize, development pressure that must be planned for in an orderly
manner. Idaho Code section 67-6526 requires that cities and counties negotiate
an area of city impact. (Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
1-8-2: CONSIDERATION:
The following factors were considered by the planning and zoning commission and
the city council in the establishment of an area impact:
   A.   Trade area;
   B.   Geographic factors; and
   C.   Areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed in the future.
(Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
1-8-3: AREA OF CITY IMPACT BOUNDARY 1 :
   A.   The Athol area of city impact is the area designated on the Athol area
of city impact boundary map: All land lying within Township 53N Range 3WB.M.
Section 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 21, 22 and the East 1/2 of the SE 1/4, and
North 1/2 of Section 17, attached to ordinance 233 and by this reference fully
incorporated herein by this reference, copies of which are available for
inspection and delivery at the city clerk's office.
   B.   In case a property under single ownership is divided by the boundary
line of the Athol area of city impact and the line divides such property so
that one or both of the parts has a depth of three hundred feet (300') or less,
such part may be included in the jurisdiction within which the remainder and
larger portion of the property is located. (Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 8, chapter 3 of this code.
1-8-4: ANNEXATION, AREA OF IMPACT:
   A.   Annexation by the city of Athol shall be limited to those lands lying
within the area of impact and being contiguous to the city limits.
   B.   Upon annexation, the provisions of this chapter, which is the agreement
between the city of Athol and Kootenai County, shall no longer apply to the
annexed area. (Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
1-8-5: APPLICABLE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN POLICIES AND ORDINANCES:
   A.   The Kootenai County comprehensive plan shall apply to the Athol area of
city impact.
   B.   All subdivision plats, for land situated within the area of impact,
shall be submitted to the city for approval, in addition to Kootenai County for
approval, as provided in Idaho Code section 50-1306.
   C.   Within the area of city impact, the following standards shall apply:
Kootenai County subdivision ordinance.
   D.   The Kootenai County zoning ordinance shall be the zoning ordinance
applicable to the land in the area of city impact which is outside the Athol
city limits and within the boundaries of the area of city impact.
   E.   The Kootenai County storm water ordinance 185 shall be applicable to
the land in the area of city impact which is outside the Athol city limits and
within the boundaries of the area of city impact. (Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
1-8-6: COORDINATION OF AMENDMENTS AND ZONING APPLICATIONS:
   A.   All applications for Kootenai County comprehensive plans and
implementing ordinances which apply within the Athol area of city impact shall
be sent by Kootenai County to the city of Athol for review.
   B.   All Kootenai County land use applications and public notices within the
Athol area of city impact shall be sent to the city council for review and
comment. The city shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice prior
to the public hearing to comment. (Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
1-8-7: RENEGOTIATION:
   A.   In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526(d), the Athol city
council or the board of Kootenai County commissioners may request, in writing,
renegotiation of any provisions of this chapter at any time. Within thirty (30)
days of receipt of such written request by either party, a meeting between the
two (2) jurisdictions shall occur.
   B.   While renegotiation is occurring, all provisions of this chapter shall
remain in effect until this chapter is amended or a substitute ordinance is
adopted by Athol and Kootenai County, in accordance with the notice and hearing
procedures provided in the said ordinances and Idaho Code section 67-6526, or
until a declaratory judgment from the district court is final. Provided,
however, that this chapter or stipulated portions thereof shall be of no
further force and effect if both jurisdictions so agree by mutually adopted
resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 233, 12-6-1994)
CHAPTER 9
DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Depositories Designated
1-9-2: Consistency With Idaho Code
1-9-3: Signatories
1-9-4: Authorization Of New Accounts
1-9-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
The City Treasurer, and any other designated official, shall keep any public
monies and any money which during the ordinary course of City business comes
under the control of the City Treasurer or other City official, in one (1) or
more of the following named depositories:
Spokane Teachers Credit Union (STCU)
State of Idaho Local Government Investment Pool (LGIP). (Ord. 404, 9-15-2015)
1-9-2: CONSISTENCY WITH IDAHO CODE:
The City Treasurer, and any other designated official, shall keep and deposit
monies belonging to or in the care of the City in the manner required by Idaho
Code section 50-1013, and chapter 1, title 57, Idaho Code, in the above named
depositories. (Ord. 404, 9-15-2015)
1-9-3: SIGNATORIES:
No payment, or withdrawal of City funds from the depositories designated
herein, or from any depositories hereafter designated, shall be made upon the
signatures of fewer than two (2) of the following officers: Mayor, President of
Council, or City Treasurer. (Ord. 404, 9-15-2015)
1-9-4: AUTHORIZATION OF NEW ACCOUNTS:
After the effective date of this chapter, no person shall set up a new checking
or savings/other account for the City at the designated depository, or any
other depository hereafter designated by the City Council, without a motion and
affirmative vote of the City Council authorizing such account, which
documenting shall be entered on City records and provided to the depository.
(Ord. 404, 9-15-2015)
CHAPTER 10
ANNEXATIONS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Application
1-10-2: Pre-Annexation Studies
1-10-3: Annexation Procedure
1-10-1: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to request annexation of lands within his or her ownership
may initiate the annexation consideration process by submitting a completed
annexation request form to the City Clerk accompanied by the filing fee
established by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of such completed
form, a report prepared by City staff will be submitted to the Mayor and the
City Council for deliberation concerning the desirability of considering
annexation of the requested lands. Upon receipt of such report, the City
Council, in consultation with City staff, shall decide whether it wishes to
further consider annexation of the requested lands or not. In the course of
such consideration, the City Council may determine what analysis and study it
would require to properly evaluate the consequences and effects of the proposed
annexation. The City Council may, if it wishes to further consider the matter,
establish the necessary prepaid annexation processing fee to be remitted by the
requester if he desires to proceed with the request. Such prepaid fees may
include a standard administrative fee (reasonably related to the administrative
costs of processing an annexation request, including staff and legal expense)
established by resolution of the City Council, in addition to any study based
fees established after City Council consideration of the specific annexation
request. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
1-10-2: PRE-ANNEXATION STUDIES:
The City Council may require the completion of relevant studies before allowing
an annexation proposal to go forward for initial public hearing. Any studies
required by the City Council as a prerequisite to consideration of an
annexation request shall be conducted by City staff or by a consultant chosen
and engaged by the City. The estimated costs of such studies shall be prepaid
by the annexation applicant before the studies are undertaken. Any consultant
engaged to perform specified tasks in the course of evaluating the consequences
of a possible annexation shall serve the City of Athol as its client, not the
parties requesting annexation. Any such studies shall be conducted in
accordance with direction from the City to determine the anticipated
consequences of the proposed annexation. Such studies shall become public
documents upon their completion and shall be made available to the applicant
and other interested parties prior to the conduct of any deliberations. (Ord.
410, 1-17-2017)
1-10-3: ANNEXATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Upon completion of the required preannexation studies and payment of
requisite fees, the City Clerk shall schedule any authorized annexation
proposal for a public hearing before the City Council as soon as such request
may be accommodated by the Council schedule. No such hearing shall be scheduled
until the required preannexation studies have been received unless the City
Council waives such requirement. The legal purpose of such public hearing shall
be to receive public comment and determine proper zoning or land use
regulations for the lands in question. The public hearing concerning zoning in
anticipation of annexation shall be conducted as a quasi-judicial public
hearing with published notice as required by Idaho Code 50-222 as it now exists
or as subsequently amended.
   B.   Upon completion of the public hearing concerning zoning, and after
considering such other relevant information as it chooses to rely upon, the
City Council may decide to enact an ordinance annexing the subject lands, or
any parts thereof, and establish the zoning designation therefor. All fees and
expenses required to be paid must have been received and an annexation
agreement must have been executed and performed to the extent required by the
City Council prior to passage of the annexation ordinance. (Ord. 410, 1-17-
2017)
CHAPTER 11
EMERGENCY POWERS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Legal Authority
1-11-2: Purpose And Intent
1-11-3: Scope
1-11-4: Definitions
1-11-5: Public Health Emergency Orders
1-11-6: Process For Enacting Public Health Emergency Orders
1-11-7: Exclusions
1-11-8: Suspension And Waiver Of Certain City Services, Ordinances, And
Policies And Procedures
1-11-9: Force Majeure
1-11-10: Penalty
1-11-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-304 and 50-606 authorize the City of Athol to pass
ordinances granting certain powers to the Mayor related to public health
emergencies. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
1-11-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City finds that the preservation of public health, safety, and welfare may
require immediate action by the City in response to emergencies. Therefore, the
City hereby authorizes the Mayor certain powers for immediate response to
foreseeable, imminent, or present public health emergencies. (Ord. 428, 3-24-
2020)
1-11-3: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth the procedures for activating the emergency powers of
the Mayor and the specific powers of the Mayor during a public health
emergency. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
1-11-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
derivations will have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The words "shall", "will", or "must" are always
mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not
defined herein will have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. Words in
any gender apply to the feminine, masculine, and nonbinary genders.
 
                               The separation of infected persons, or of
                               persons suspected to be infected, from other
ISOLATION:                     persons to such places, under such conditions,
                               and for such time as will prevent transmission
                               of the infectious agent.
                               The foreseeable, imminent, or present threat of
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY:       any pathogen, agent, vector, or environmental
                               condition, including hazardous materials, which
                               does or may cause illness or injury to humans.
PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDER: An advisory, social distancing, isolation, or
                               quarantine order enacted by the Mayor.
                               The restriction placed on the entrance to and
QUARANTINE:                    exit from the place or premises where an
                               infectious agent or hazardous material exists.
                               Actions taken to maintain distance from other
                               people, including avoiding or canceling
SOCIAL DISTANCING:             congregate settings and mass gatherings such as
                               by ordering the closure of bars, restaurants and
                               other places of public accommodation. (Ord. 428,
                               3-24-2020)
 
1-11-5: PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
The Mayor, as authorized by this chapter and Idaho Code sections 50-304 and 50-
606, may issue the following orders, as deemed appropriate by the Mayor
following consultation with or review of information issued by local, regional,
statewide, or nationwide public health authorities.
   A.   Advisory Order: Where a public health emergency is foreseeable or
imminent, the Mayor may enact an advisory order, which order may provide
information and recommended guidelines for preventing, detecting, and/or
mitigating the onset or spread of a public health hazard.
   B.   Social Distancing Order: Where a public health emergency is imminent,
the Mayor may enact a social distancing order, which order may establish any or
all of the following:
      1.   Appropriate restrictions regarding the operation or occurrence of
planned or foreseeable commercial, recreational, or expressive gatherings or
events.
      2.   Restrictions on travel through or visitation within the community.
      3.   Postponement or cancellation of public meetings and hearings.
      4.   A limit on the number of persons who may gather in one location and
may apply to indoor or outdoor venues.
      5.   Measures to be taken to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or mitigate
a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   A social distancing order must include an effective date and an
anticipated expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the
imposition of the initial order.
   C.   Isolation Order: Where a public health emergency is present and poses a
clear threat of harm to the public health, the Mayor may enact an isolation
order, which order may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or mitigate
a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the isolation order.
      7.   An isolation order must include an effective date and an anticipated
expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the imposition of
the initial order. An isolation order will be effective only when and for so
long as the public health emergency is present or for so long as the subject(s)
of the isolation order poses a threat to public health. Any person who is the
subject of an isolation order is entitled to appeal the isolation order or to
request a modification of any provision of such order by filing a written
appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal will be heard by City Council at their
next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the term of the isolation
order, the Sheriff or designee will review such appeal and issue a written
decision. The Sheriff decision will be final.
   D.   Quarantine Order: Where a health emergency is present and poses a clear
threat of harm to the public health, the Mayor may enact a quarantine order,
which order may establish any or all of the following:
      1.   A directive that infected and/or exposed individuals isolate
themselves from other persons.
      2.   Geographical or other areas of restricted or prohibited access.
      3.   Other measures necessary to avoid, address, or mitigate an imminent
public health hazard.
      4.   The scope and manner of delivery of services, materials, or supplies
to be provided by the City, if any.
      5.   Measures to be taken to prevent, avoid, detect, address, or mitigate
a foreseeable, imminent, or present public health hazard.
      6.   Conditions of the quarantine.
      7.   A quarantine order must include an effective date and an anticipated
expiration date, which may be extended in the same manner as the imposition of
the initial order. A quarantine order will be effective only when and for so
long as the public health emergency is present or for so long as the subject(s)
of the quarantine order poses a threat to public health. Any person who is the
subject of a quarantine order is entitled to appeal the quarantine order, or to
request a modification of any provision of such order by filing a written
appeal with the City Clerk. Such appeal will be heard by City Council at their
next meeting, or, if no meeting is scheduled during the term of the quarantine
order, the Sheriff or designee will review such appeal and issue a written
decision. The Sheriff decision will be final. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
1-11-6: PROCESS FOR ENACTING PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY ORDERS:
   A.   Issuance Of An Order: The Mayor will prepare a written order and
publish it pursuant to this section.
   B.   Notice To The City Council: Following the issuance of any order
authorized by this chapter, the Mayor will advise the City Council at a
properly noticed public meeting of the issuance of the order and the basis for
its issuance as soon as is reasonably practicable but no later than seven (7)
days after the date that the order is issued.
   C.   Council Veto: The City Council may reverse or alter the order issued by
the Mayor by a majority vote of the full City Council.
   D.   Publication Of Public Health Emergency Order: As soon as possible and
prudent under the circumstances, the Mayor will cause a Public Health Emergency
Order to be published as follows:
      1.   Posting the order in a prominent place at the Athol City Hall;
      2.   Posting the order on the City's website;
      3.   Posting the order to some community social media accounts;
      4.   Providing the order to local media outlets; and
      5.   Notifying other government agencies, including Lakeland School
District, Lakes Highway District, Panhandle Health District, and Kootenai
County Sheriffs office.
Except as may be specifically stated in the Public Health Emergency Order, such
order will be effective upon posting at the Athol City Hall. (Ord. 428, 3-24-
2020)
1-11-7: EXCLUSIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by a Public Health Emergency Order
duly enacted by the Mayor, the following activities are exempt from the scope
of such order:
   A.   Any expressive and associative activity that is protected by the United
States and Idaho Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly, and/or
religious activity.
   B.   Activities necessary to operate critical infrastructure and utilities.
   C.   Activities necessary to operate and use medical facilities and
services.
   D.   Activities necessary to buy, sell, or otherwise deliver food and
necessities. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
1-11-8: SUSPENSION AND WAIVER OF CERTAIN CITY SERVICES, ORDINANCES, AND
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
During a Public Health Emergency and upon issuance of a Public Health Emergency
Order, the Mayor may suspend certain non-critical City government services and
functions as deemed necessary and advisable given the specific public health
emergency and in consideration of the health of employees and the general
public. During such time, the Mayor may also suspend the regular meetings of
City boards and commissions, including but not limited to Planning and Zoning
and the Parks and Recreation Commission. To facilitate such suspension of
meetings, the ordinances providing for the regular meetings of these
commissions will be temporarily suspended. Those ordinances providing the time
line for processing applications will also be suspended. The Mayor is also
authorized to waive such internal rules, regulations, and procedures as deemed
necessary to protect the health and welfare of City employees. The Mayor may
authorize the City Administrator to act on his/her behalf and exercise the
authority granted to the Mayor under this section. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
1-11-9: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the context of this chapter, a public health emergency is a force majeure.
No person is entitled to recover from the City of Athol any costs incurred, or
profits lost, as may be alleged to be attributed to the enactment of a Public
Health Emergency Order. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
1-11-10: PENALTY:
It is unlawful to violate any provision or directive of a duly enacted social
distancing order, isolation order, or quarantine order while such order is in
effect. The violation of any provision or directive of a social distancing
order, isolation order, or quarantine order is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1. (Ord. 428, 3-24-2020)
TITLE 2
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
2-1-1: Consumption Or Open Containers In Publicly Owned Places
2-1-1: CONSUMPTION OR OPEN CONTAINERS IN PUBLICLY OWNED PLACES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beer, wine or
intoxicating liquor, or to have in his possession any opened or open container
or receptacle containing beer, wine or intoxicating liquor in or on any
publicly owned park, grounds or buildings within the City. Special exceptions
to this prohibition may be granted by express authority of the City Council
when the use or activity is of general community benefit or of particular
benefit to the City. Approval of any such exception shall be evidenced by a
permit or letter of authorization to that effect which shall be exhibited to
any employee of the City upon request.
   B.   Violation of subsection A of this section shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
2-1A-1: Legal Authority
2-1A-2: License Requirements And Restrictions; Fee
2-1A-3: Issuance Of License
2-1A-4: Transfer Of License; Fee
2-1A-5: Renewal Of License
2-1A-6: Days And Hours Of Sale
2-1A-7: Sale To Minors
2-1A-8: Revocation Of State License
2-1A-9: Violations; Penalties
2-1A-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
This article is passed pursuant to and under authority of provisions of Idaho
Code title 23, chapters 1 through 9. The term "liquor" means all kinds of
liquor sold by and in a state liquor store of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 430,
11-17-2020)
2-1A-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS; FEE:
   A.   License To Retail Liquor: From and after the effective date hereof, it
shall be unlawful for any person individual, firm, copartnership, association
or corporation to sell liquor by the drink at retail within the limits of the
city until after having first procured a license as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing,
signed and sworn to by the applicant, upon application forms furnished by the
city clerk and presented to the city council for their approval, rejection, or
further consideration. The applicant for a license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the Idaho
state police, as prescribed by Idaho Code title 23, chapters 1 through 9, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is
issued. The possession of a license regularly issued by the state of Idaho
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a
license hereunder. No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor upon
premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 9, as amended from time to time.
   C.   Annual License Fee: The fee for a license for the sale of liquor shall
be established by resolution of the city council and shall be in conformance
with Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, as amended from time to time. The license
fee will be imposed and collected per annum for the license year, which license
year shall be from March 1 to March 1 of the following year; provided, however,
that if the license is issued after March 1 of any year, any person obtaining a
license shall pay a license fee for a full year.
   D.   One License Per Year: No person shall be granted more than one license
for any one establishment in one year.
   E.   Posting Of License: It shall be the duty of any such person,
individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, or association to keep posted in
a conspicuous place in his or its place of business the license under which
said place of business is conducted. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon approval by
the mayor and council of such application and the payment of the license fee as
herein provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to sell
liquor by the drink at retail within the city for such calendar year or the
remainder thereof. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Application; Affidavit: Application for a license transfer shall be
made in writing filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an affidavit of the
applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths showing the applicant
to be qualified by the ordinances of the city and county of Kootenai and the
laws of the state of Idaho to receive a license. Applicant shall also have the
necessary State and County approvals governing a transfer of license, in
conformance with Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9.
   B.   Council Approval: Said application and affidavit of said applicant
transferee shall be approved by the mayor and city council.
   C.   Endorsement: After council approval and payment of transfer fees, the
current license shall be endorsed on the reverse side thereof by the existing
licensee over to the proposed transferee for the remainder of the period for
which said license has been issued, and shall be signed by the city clerk.
   D.   Fee: A transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council,
and consistent with the limitations provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9,
shall be paid for the transfer of liquor licenses. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-5: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application for renewal of a license to sell liquor shall be on the
same form as the application for the initial license.
   B.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in the
application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal of
the license may be issued by the city clerk after approval by the mayor and
council. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-6: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   Additional Days For Sales: From the effective date hereof, in
accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code section 23-927(2), liquor may be
sold in the city on Sundays, Memorial Day and Thanksgiving Day.
   B.   Hours Of Sale Extended: From the effective date hereof, in accordance
with the provisions of Idaho Code section 23-927(2), the hours when liquor may
be sold in the city are hereby extended to two o'clock (2:00) A.M., prevailing
local time. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-7: SALE TO MINORS:
The liquor referred to in this article shall not be sold to any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-8: REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE:
A violation of any of the provisions of the state liquor laws shall be deemed a
violation of this article. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the license issued hereunder. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1A-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A violation of the terms of this article, in addition to being grounds for
revocation or suspension of the license issued hereunder, shall be deemed a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall subject to penalty as provided
in subsection
1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
ARTICLE B. BEER
SECTION:
2-1B-1: Definition
2-1B-2: License Requirements And Restrictions; Fee
2-1B-3: Issuance Of License
2-1B-4: Transfer Of License; Fee
2-1B-5: Renewal Of License
2-1B-6: Sale To Minors
2-1B-7: Revocation Of State License
2-1B-8: Violations; Penalties
2-1B-1: DEFINITION:
This article is passed pursuant to and under authority of provisions of Idaho
Code title 23, chapters 1 through 10. The term "beer" means any beverage
obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley,
malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1B-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS; FEE:
   A.   License Required: No person, individual, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation shall sell such beer within the city without first
obtaining a license therefor as herein provided. Provided, however, that if
such beer contains less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
weight, such license need not be obtained.
   B.   Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing,
signed and sworn to by the applicant, upon application forms furnished by the
city clerk and presented to the city council for their approval, rejection, or
further consideration. The applicant for a license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the Idaho
state police, as prescribed by Idaho Code title 23, chapters 1 through 10, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is
issued. The possession of a license regularly issued by the state of Idaho
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a
license hereunder. No license shall be issued for the sale of beer upon
premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 10, as amended from time to time.
   C.   License Fees: The fee for a license for the sale of beer for any such
person, individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation shall be
established by resolution of the city council and shall be in conformance with
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, as amended from time to time.
   D.   One License Per Year: All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and
city council for a period of one year from March 1 to the following March 1;
provided, that any person obtaining a license after March 1 of any year shall
pay a license fee for a full year.
   E.   Posting Of License: It shall be the duty of any such person,
individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, or association to keep posted in
a conspicuous place in his or its place of business the license under which
said place of business is conducted. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1B-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon approval by
the mayor and council of such application and the payment of the license fee as
herein provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to sell
beer within the city for such calendar year or the remainder thereof. (Ord.
430, 11-17-2020)
2-1B-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Application; Affidavit: Applications for license transfers shall be
made in writing filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an affidavit of the
applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths showing the applicant
to be qualified by the ordinances of the city, county of Kootenai and laws of
the state of Idaho to receive a license. Applicant shall also have the
necessary state and county approvals governing a transfer of license, in
conformance with Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10.
   B.   Council Approval: Said application and applicant transferee shall be
approved by the city council.
   C.   Endorsement: After council approval and payment of transfer fees, the
current license shall be endorsed on the reverse side thereof by the existing
licensee to the proposed transferee for the remainder of the period for which
said license has been issued, and shall be signed by the city clerk.
   D.   Fee: A transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council,
and consistent with the limitations provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter
10, shall be paid for the transfer of a license to sell beer. (Ord. 430, 11-17-
2020)
2-1B-5: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application for renewal of a license to sell beer shall be on the same
form as the application for the initial license.
   B.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in the
application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal of
the license may be issued by the city clerk after approval by the mayor and
council. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1B-6: SALE TO MINORS:
The beer referred to in this article shall not be sold to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1B-7: REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE:
A violation of any of the provisions of the state liquor laws shall be deemed a
violation of this article. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the license issued hereunder. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1B-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be a guilty of
committing a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
ARTICLE C. WINE
SECTION:
2-1C-1: Definitions
2-1C-2: License Requirements; Fees
2-1C-3: Issuance Of License
2-1C-4: Transfer Of License; Fee
2-1C-5: Renewal Of License
2-1C-6: Regulations; Restrictions On Sale
2-1C-7: Sale To Minors
2-1C-8: Revocation Of State License
2-1C-9: Violations; Penalties
2-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
This article is passed pursuant to and under authority of provisions of Idaho
Code title 23, chapters 1 through 13.
 
WINE:                      Includes table wine and dessert wine, unless the
                           context requires otherwise.
                           A license to sell table wine or dessert wine by the
WINE BY THE DRINK LICENSE: individual glass or opened bottle at retail, for
                           consumption on the premises only. (Ord. 430, 11-17-
                           2020)
 
2-1C-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to sell wine at retail
within the city without first obtaining a license therefor, as herein provided
and pursuant to Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13.
   B.   Application For License: Application for license shall be in writing,
signed and sworn to by the applicant, upon application forms furnished by the
city clerk and presented to the city council for their approval, rejection, or
further consideration. The applicant for a license shall possess all of the
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the Idaho
state police, as prescribed by Idaho Code title 23, chapters 1 through 13, and
maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is
issued. The possession of a license regularly issued by the state of Idaho
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a
license hereunder. No license shall be issued for the sale of beer upon
premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 13, as amended from time to time.
   C.   License Fees: The fee for a license for each person, individual, firm,
copartnership, association or corporation selling wine for consumption off the
licensed premises and for each wine by the individual glass or open bottle at
retail for consumption on the premises only shall be established by resolution
of the city council and shall be in conformance with Idaho Code title 23,
chapter 13, as amended from time to time.
   D.   One License Per Year: All licenses shall be granted by the mayor and
city council for a period of one year from March 1 to the following March 1;
provided, that any person obtaining a license after March 1 of any year shall
pay a license fee for a full year.
   E.   Posting Of License: It shall be the duty of any such person,
individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, or association to keep posted in
a conspicuous place in his or its place of business the license under which
said place of business is conducted. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for license as herein provided and upon approval by
the mayor and council of such application and the payment of the license fee as
herein provided, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for such
calendar year or the remainder thereof. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Application; Affidavit: Applications for license transfers shall be
made in writing filed with the city clerk, accompanied by an affidavit of the
applicant showing the applicant to be qualified by the ordinances of the city
and county of Kootenai and the laws of the state of Idaho to receive a license.
Applicant shall also have the necessary state and county approvals governing a
transfer of license, in conformance with Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13.
   B.   Council Approval: Said application and affidavit of said application
transferee shall be approved by the city council.
   C.   Endorsement: After council approval and payment of transfer fees, the
current license shall be endorsed on the reverse side thereof by the existing
licensee to the proposed transferee for the remainder of the period for which
said license has been issued, and shall be signed by the city clerk.
   D.   Fee: Transfer fee for a wine license shall be in an amount set by
resolution of the city council, and consistent with the limitations provided in
Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-5: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Application for renewal of a license to shall be on the same form as
the application for the initial license.
   B.   If all of the information provided by the licensee is the same in the
application for renewal as was provided in the initial application, renewal of
the license may be issued by the city clerk after approval by the mayor and
council. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-6: REGULATIONS; RESTRICTIONS ON SALE:
   A.   Retailers holding valid licenses for the retail sale of liquor by the
drink, pursuant to Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, may sell wine for
consumption on or off the licensed premises.
   B.   Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of
liquor by the drink, or the sale of wine by the drink, shall not permit
consumption of wine on the licensed premises and may sell the wine only in its
original unbroken container.
   C.   Wine by the drink, sold by licensed retailers holding a valid liquor by
the drink license, may be sold only during hours that liquor by the drink can
be sold pursuant to the laws of this state.
   D.   Wine sold by licensed retailers, for consumption off the premises, may
be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the laws of
this state.
   E.   Retailers holding a valid wine by the drink license may sell wine for
consumption on the premises only.
   F.   Retailers licensed to sell wine by the drink, but not licensed to sell
liquor by the drink, may sell wine by the drink only during the hours that beer
may be sold pursuant to the laws of the state. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-7: SALE TO MINORS:
The wine referred to in this article shall not be sold to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-8: REVOCATION OF STATE LICENSE:
A violation of any of the provisions of the state liquor laws shall be deemed a
violation of this article. A revocation or suspension of the state license by
the director of the Idaho state police shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
the license issued hereunder. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-1C-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of committing a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in subsection
1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
CHAPTER 2
ADULT BUSINESSES
SECTION:
2-2-1: Definitions
2-2-2: Persons Subject To License
2-2-3: License Required; Fees
2-2-4: Application For License
2-2-5: Investigation, Background Check By City
2-2-6: Issuance Or Denial Of License
2-2-7: License Nontransferable
2-2-8: Location Restrictions
2-2-9: Lighting Of Premises
2-2-10: Revocation Of License; Hearing
2-2-11: Violation A Misdemeanor
2-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:
ADULT ARCADE BUSINESS: An adult store, adult theater or business which operates
adult arcade machines on its premises.
ADULT ARCADE MACHINES: Machines which are used by an individual to view films
or segments of films which material is distinguished or characterized by
emphasis on material defined as obscene by Idaho Code sections 18-1514 and 18-
4101.
ADULT BUSINESS: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion
of its stock or trade, books, magazines, films or materials which are defined
as obscene matter by Idaho Code sections 18-1514 and 18-4101.
ADULT THEATER: An establishment, either enclosed or open air, used for
presenting to an audience through film or live performances material
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on material defined as obscene or
obscene live conduct in Idaho Code sections 18-1514 and 18-4101.
OWNER/OPERATOR: Individual, company or corporation that owns or otherwise has
an interest or operates businesses that are subject to this chapter. (Ord. 250,
12-3-2002)
2-2-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Wherever in this chapter a license is required for the maintenance, operation
or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to
the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner he holds
himself out as being engaged in the business or occupation, or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business in the City. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
2-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any adult
store, adult theater, or adult arcade machine without first obtaining an
appropriately classified license to do so as set forth in section
2-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
   B.   License Fees:
      1.   The annual license fee, as set forth in the most current fee
resolution, shall be paid to the City at the time the license application is
submitted. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
      2.   The request for renewal of licenses shall be made on forms supplied
by the City Clerk and such requests shall be submitted by November 15 for
approval for renewal by the City Council for the next calendar year. Each
renewal application shall be accompanied by the annual fee set forth in
subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
2-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license to operate one of the establishments described in
section
2-2-1 of this chapter shall be made to the city clerk, in such form and manner
as prescribed by the city council, accompanied by the annual fee prescribed in
subsection
2-2-3B1 of this chapter; but the application shall contain at least the
following:
   A.   The name and residence address of the application.
   B.   If application is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of
each of the officers, directors and managers of said corporation, and of each
stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation
and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the
proposed establishment. "Owner/operator" shall mean individual company or
corporation that owns or otherwise has an interest or operates businesses that
are subject to this chapter.
   C.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each of
the partners, including the limited partners and the address of the partnership
itself, if different from the address proposed for the establishment.
   D.   Written proof that the applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or
older.
   E.   The number of adult arcade machines to be installed, if any, and the
name, address and employer of the owner of said machines. If the owner is a
corporation, the names and resident addresses of each of the officerS,
directors and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more
that ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation and the address of the
corporation itself, if different from the address of the proposed
establishment.
   F.   A scaled plot plan of the premises.
   G.   The date on which the applicant intends to open for business.
   H.   A legal description of the real property on which the premises is
located, the name and address of the record owner; the name and address of each
lien holder; the name and address of each party to a valid and subsisting
contract of sale, deed of trust or other agreement, the subject of which is the
aforesaid real property. If any of the persons sought to be identified by this
section is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of the officers,
directors and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more
that ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation and the address of the
corporation itself, if different from the address of the proposed
establishment.
   I.   If any of the information supplied pursuant to this section becomes
outdated by virtue of changes in the operation of the business or otherwise
needs to be supplemented, the licensee shall provide the city clerk with the
modified or supplemental data within ten (10) days of the change or addition
being effected. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
2-2-5: INVESTIGATION, BACKGROUND CHECK BY CITY:
Each and every applicant owner/operator shall be required to submit to a
background check conducted by or at the request of the city. In addition, a
report shall be submitted to the city council within fifteen (15) days after
receiving license application stating whether the establishment is in
compliance with applicable ordinances, state law and regulations. (Ord. 250,
12-3-2002)
2-2-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   When report is received by city clerk, not later than thirty (30) days
after filing of the application, the city clerk shall submit the license
application and/or report to the city council for inclusion on the council
agenda.
   B.   Licenses are prohibited to applicants with any felony convictions. A
business license under this chapter shall not be granted to an applicant if it
appears there has been a misrepresentation or fraud in his application. (Ord.
250, 12-3-2002)
2-2-7: LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE:
Licenses under this chapter are nontransferable to other persons, applicants or
to other business locations. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
2-2-8: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to ensure that there does
not develop a pattern of adult businesses which, by their location or
concentration, would have a deleterious effect on the peace, safety and economy
of the surrounding neighborhood.
   B.   Prohibited Locations: No adult store, adult theater, or business
operation of an adult arcade machine may be located within two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500') of:
      1.   Any religious institution;
      2.   Any school (to include preschool);
      3.   The boundary of any residential zone;
      4.   A public park adjacent to any residential zone.
   C.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations: Any adult store, adult theater or
business operating an adult arcade machine must be located only where proper
zoning exists and must comply with all zoning regulations. (Ord. 250, 12-3-
2002)
2-2-9: LIGHTING OF PREMISES:
The parking spaces and the five foot (5') radius surrounding the entrance to an
adult business shall be illuminated to provide a light intensity of not less
than one foot-candle at ground level. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
2-2-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING:
   A.   Revocation Authority: The licensee shall be responsible for the
operation of the licensed premises in conformity with the ordinances of city
and the state of Idaho. Upon a conviction of the licensee or the agent or
employee of the licensee of violating any law or ordinance, including this
chapter, intended to protect the health, welfare or safety of individuals in
this state and which violation occurs in the course of the main business
activity licensed under this chapter, and not incidental thereto, the city
council may revoke all licenses held by the licensee under this chapter.
   B.   Hearing; Council Determination:
      1.   Any revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not occur
until a hearing is held before the city council. The licensee shall have the
right to appear at said hearing in person or by counsel to present evidence and
argument on the licensee's behalf and cross examine witnesses.
      2.   The city council shall make a ruling based on the evidence presented
to it at the hearing. Thereafter, the licensee shall be informed in writing of
the council's decision. If the council by majority vote favors revocation, such
revocation shall take effect when personal service of the written decision is
made upon the licensee or an agent or employee of said licensee. (Ord. 250, 12-
3-2002)
2-2-11: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be a misdemeanor for an applicant or licensee to make a material
misrepresentation on his application, to perpetrate a fraud on any
investigative official or agency or to operate a business licensed under this
chapter in contravention to the laws of the state of Idaho or the ordinances of
the city. (Ord. 250, 12-3-2002)
CHAPTER 3
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Authorization
2-3-2: Purpose
2-3-3: Registration Required
2-3-4: Registration Fee
2-3-5: Required Information
2-3-6: Eligibility
2-3-7: Term And Updating Product Information
2-3-8: Identification And Display Of Registration
2-3-9: Prohibited Conduct
2-3-10: Exemptions
2-3-11: Violations And Penalties
2-3-1: AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the City's general police power and the
authority granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution
and Idaho Code section 50-302. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the activities of door to door
solicitors in order to protect against criminal activity, including fraud and
burglary, to minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption
of privacy, and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety and welfare of
citizens of the City.
This chapter is not intended to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by
the First Amendment but merely to regulate specific activities which are
commercial in nature. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to solicit door to door without first registering
with the City of Athol unless exempt by State or Federal law.
For the purposes of this chapter, "door to door solicitation" means any
unsolicited contact by a person with any person at a residence or dwelling in
the City of Athol. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
A registration fee in the amount set by resolution of the City Council must be
paid at the time the registration application is submitted. (Ord. 416, 3-21-
2018)
2-3-5: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Applicants for registration must present a current government issued photo
identification to the City Clerk, allow the Clerk to take a photograph of the
applicant, and fill out a registration application to be provided by the City
Clerk, including the following information:
   A.   Name and permanent home address of the applicant;
   B.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or
services to be sold or provided;
   C.   Name and address of the person's employer, together with an explanation
of the exact relationship between the person and the employer;
   D.   Length of time for which the door to door solicitation will occur;
   E.   A statement as to whether or not the person has been convicted of any
crime or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and
where the offense was committed. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-6: ELIGIBILITY:
Persons convicted of a felony within five (5) years prior to the date of
application are prohibited from door to door soliciting within the City limits
of Athol. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-7: TERM AND UPDATING PRODUCT INFORMATION:
   A.   A new registration must be filed with the City Clerk annually.
   B.   Each registrant must submit a revised product and/or services
description, on a form provided by the City Clerk, before selling door to door
any products or services not listed on the original registration application.
(Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-8: IDENTIFICATION AND DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION:
All registrants must visibly display the City issued proof of registration on
the outside of their clothing any time they are soliciting within the City
limits of Athol. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-9: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   No person, registered or not, shall solicit business at any home or
business when such location has clearly posted any sign indicating that
solicitation or peddling is prohibited.
   B.   No person, registered or not, shall continue with door to door
solicitation at any home or business when requested to leave by the owner,
authorized agent of the owner, or any other person that resides or works on the
premises.
   C.   No person may provide false information on a registration or background
check application.
   D.   No person, registered or not, may conduct door to door solicitations
before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   E.   No person, registered or not, may misrepresent the purpose of or
affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation, or make misrepresentations or
false statements when conducting the solicitation.
   F.   No person, registered or not, may represent that the City of Athol
endorses the solicitation. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-10: EXEMPTIONS:
The fee provisions of this chapter do not apply to persons qualifying as a
nonprofit business, including charitable activities, within the meaning of
section 503 of the United States Internal Revenue Code. Possession of a
certificate of such status from the Internal Revenue Service is required to
qualify for this exemption. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-3-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the mandatory provisions or requirements of this
chapter is guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as follows:
   A.   Initial violations of any provision are an infraction subject to a fine
of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   Second and third violations of the same section are an infraction
subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   C.   Any additional violations of the same section are a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Purpose
2-4-2: Applicability
2-4-3: License Required
2-4-4: Exemptions
2-4-5: License Application
2-4-6: License Fee
2-4-7: Display Of License
2-4-8: Change Of Ownership, Management, Nature Of Business Or Location Of
Business
2-4-9: Compliance With Laws
2-4-10: Failure To Comply
2-4-11: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
2-4-12: Appeal
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide personnel charged with the
responsibility of protecting the health and safety of the public and the
environment with information relating to business operations within the City
that will aid them in providing police, fire, and environmental protection as
well as information regarding contact persons in the event of an emergency. It
is the further purpose of this chapter to provide the City with information
regarding the types of businesses operating within the community in order to
facilitate recruitment and retention of businesses and to further the economic
development of the community. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-4-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all wholesale and retail
businesses and all activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits or
professions that conduct business from a location within the City of Athol with
the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage or that operate a business at
a special event, or use the public right-of-way for a special event, on a
temporary basis, including mobile food vendors. Each business location shall be
deemed a separate business unless it is a specific annex to the main location
of the business. The license is not intended to repeal any license or franchise
provisions of any other ordinance of the City of Athol, nor is the license to
be considered a waiver of any other requirements of compliance with any
Federal, State and local laws. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall engage in any business within the City of Athol for
which licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a license
application to the City Clerk and receiving a general business license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This license shall be in
addition to any other license or permit required by other sections of this
Code. Such license shall be valid so long as the ownership, management, nature
of the business or location of the business remains unchanged.
   B.   No person shall engage in any temporary business within the City of
Athol for which licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted
a temporary license application to the City Clerk or a designee and receiving a
general business license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Such license shall be valid for no more than six (6) months. Only one temporary
license may be granted per year. Persons having a general business license are
exempt from obtaining a temporary business license when engaging in business at
a special event.
   C.   No person shall engage in any mobile business within the City of Athol
for which licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a
license application to the City Clerk and receiving a mobile business license
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This license shall be in
addition to any other license or permit required by other sections of this
Code. Such license shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord.
430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Persons qualifying as a nonprofit business, including charitable
activities, within the meaning of section 503 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code. Possession of a certificate of such status from the Internal
Revenue Service shall be required to qualify for this exemption.
      2.   Any agency of the United States government and any political
subdivision of the State of Idaho.
      3.   Persons who occupy space at a flea market or farmer's market, but
shall apply to the operator of the flea market or farmer's market.
   B.   In addition, both the fee and license provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to:
      1.   Persons who make occasional sales (i.e. yard sales) of their own
household property not more than four (4) times each calendar year. Each event
shall not last more than three (3) consecutive days. Holding more than four (4)
events per calendar year at any single location is prohibited;
      2.   Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual labor not included
as temporary employees of a regularly conducted business;
      3.   Lessors of any residential property having one or two family units;
      4.   Vendors at a city-sponsored or city-managed event. (Ord. 416, 3-21-
2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A general, mobile, or temporary license application shall be provided by the
City Clerk or a designee and the application shall contain information
including, but not limited to, the name, residence address and residence phone
number of the owner and manager of the business, the street and mailing address
of the place of business, the business phone number, and the nature of the
business to be conducted at such address or special event, and any other
information deemed necessary by the City for the health and safety of emergency
service personnel or utility service providers. Every application shall be
personally signed by the owner or his agent. The application shall be submitted
no less than ten (10) business days prior to the date on which business will be
commenced. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-6: LICENSE FEE:
A license fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council shall be paid
at the time the application is submitted to the City Clerk or a designee and/or
prior to the issuance of a general, mobile, or temporary business license.
(Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every business required under this chapter to obtain a general, mobile, or
temporary business license shall display such license in a prominent location
upon the business premises or the event location in the case of a mobile or
temporary business. No business shall loan, sell, give or assign to any other
person or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or
remove, or to have in his possession any license which has been issued to said
business. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-8: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, NATURE OF BUSINESS OR LOCATION OF
BUSINESS:
   A.   Whenever the ownership, nature of the business or location of any
business within the City is changed, a new license application reflecting the
change shall be presented to the City Clerk or a designee within ten (10) days
of said change.
   B.   Whenever the management of the business changes, the City Clerk or a
designee shall be notified in writing of the name of the new manager, residence
address and residence phone number of the new manager. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018;
amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-9: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
Licensees shall comply with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and
regulations. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-4-10: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Any business license may be denied, suspended or revoked for failure of the
applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter, failure to comply with
any reasonable condition placed on the permit, or failure to comply with other
requirements of this Code. The city may charge a double application fee for
applications that are submitted after-the-fact. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord.
430, 11-17-2020)
2-4-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event it is brought to the attention of the City Clerk that a violation
has taken place, before revoking or suspending such license, the City Clerk
shall cause notice to be served upon the licensee, setting forth in general
terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed and such
notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the City Council which date
shall not be less than five (5) days or more than thirty (30) days from the
date of the service of the notice, and upon or following the hearing, if the
City Council shall find that the provisions of this chapter have been violated
or the license was issued in error, the City Clerk is authorized to revoke or
suspend such license and no refund of any unused portion of the license fee
shall be made to the licensee. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
2-4-12: APPEAL:
Any applicant who has made application for a license under the provisions of
this chapter and who has been denied such a license, or any person holding a
license which is revoked or suspended under the provisions of this chapter, may
request a hearing before the City Council. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
TITLE 3
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Short Title
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Nuisances Prohibited; City Jurisdiction
3-1-4: Declaration Of Nuisance; Authority To Abate
3-1-5: Summary Abatement
3-1-6: Notice To Abate
3-1-7: Failure To Abate; Penalties
3-1-8: Abatement By City; Costs
3-1-9: Enforcement
3-1-10: Interference With Enforcement Officials
3-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ATHOL NUISANCE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 271, 7-1-
2008)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
JUNK: All discarded articles no longer used for the purpose for which they were
manufactured, including, but not limited to, old or rusting, dismantled or
nonoperable motor vehicles, metal, chain, rope, cordage, bags, paper, rubber,
glass or plastic.
NUISANCE: A. Anything defined as such by the Idaho Code, as its sections and
subsections may be amended from time to time.
   B.   Junk or trash which is visible from the street or other properties.
   C.   Any condition or use of a premises or property which:
1. Creates a fire hazard, including, but not limited to, the presence of weeds,
tall grass or trash.
2. Is odor offensive.
3. Is injurious to health.
4. Is otherwise injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of the city.
   D.   Any vehicle, boat, trailer, trash receptacle or other object that is
parked or kept on a public street or right of way for three (3) or more days
during any five (5) day period.
PERSON: Shall include any human, and any firm, partnership, association,
institution, company, corporation or organization of any kind.
RUBBISH: Ashes, any broken objects, tin vessels, trimmings from lawns and
flower gardens, boxes, paper sacks, straw, sawdust, packing materials, and
discarded household materials.
TRASH: Objects having no market value, unused or discarded parts of dead
animals or vegetation including, but not limited to, any dead plant life such
as tree branches, cut grass and wood scraps.
WEED: All grasses, noxious weeds (as defined in Idaho Code section 22-2402) or
other weeds over ten inches (10") tall, and all other rank uncultivated
vegetation, other than trees, bushes and cultivated plants. Flowers and
agricultural products as defined by Idaho Code. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008)
3-1-3: NUISANCES PROHIBITED; CITY JURISDICTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a nuisance to exist on or about
any real property within the city in which he has an interest by virtue of his
ownership, rental, lease or occupation of such real property. (Ord. 271, 7-1-
2008)
3-1-4: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
The city council may call a meeting at any time to declare whether any
condition existing within the city constitutes a "nuisance", as defined in
section
3-1-2 of this chapter. If a majority of the city council is present at the
meeting, and if a majority of those present determines that a nuisance exists,
the city council may take any legal steps to remove and abate such nuisance and
to prevent a reoccurrence. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008)
3-1-5: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
If the city council finds a nuisance exists and further finds that such
nuisance imminently endangers the health, safety or welfare of its citizens, it
shall immediately take such action as is necessary to protect the health,
safety or welfare of its citizens. The expense of taking such action shall be
borne by the person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the
nuisance. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008)
3-1-6: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served
by the city by written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a specified maximum period of time, not to exceed ten (10) days, for the
satisfactory correction thereof. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008)
3-1-7: FAILURE TO ABATE; PENALTIES:
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in section
3-1-6 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon being found
liable therefor shall be subject to an infraction penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00) each day. Each day that a violation of this chapter exists may be
charged as a separate infraction or misdemeanor violation, as appropriate. Any
nuisance which violates this chapter and which constitutes an immediate hazard
to the public health or which continues to exist after a finding of guilt or
liability in two (2) or more prior infraction proceedings shall constitute a
misdemeanor. In addition, any person who creates a nuisance, causes a nuisance,
commits an act which constitutes a nuisance or maintains a nuisance shall bear
the cost of preventing, removing or abating such nuisance, including attorney
fees, if any. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
3-1-8: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS:
   A.   Generally: The mayor and city council may cause the abatement of the
nuisance according to Idaho Code section 50-334, as amended. The expense of the
abatement shall be assessed as a special assessment against the real property
involved and shall be due and payable to the city clerk and, if not paid within
thirty (30) days after mailing of notification of assessment, shall be declared
delinquent and be certified to the county tax collector by the city clerk, not
later than August 1, and shall be, by said tax collector, placed upon the tax
roll and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as
other city taxes.
   B.   Abandoned Motor Vehicles: Abandoned motor vehicles which constitute a
nuisance may be disposed of in any manner authorized by Idaho law. (Ord. 271,
7-1-2008)
3-1-9: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter may be enforced by the county sheriff's office or by legal action
taken on behalf of the city. For any such legal action, if the city prevails,
court costs and attorney fees shall be borne by the person creating, causing,
committing or maintaining the nuisance. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008)
3-1-10: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
No person shall interfere with an authorized officer in his enforcement of this
chapter. A violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in subsection
1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 271, 7-1-2008)
CHAPTER 2
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Title
3-2-2: Purpose And Application Of Provisions
3-2-3: Definitions
3-2-4: General Provisions
3-2-5: Administration
3-2-6: Unlawful Acts And Penalty For Violation
3-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL. (Ord. 409, 11-
16-2016)
3-2-2: PURPOSE AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that the disposal of
sewage shall be accomplished in a safe and sanitary manner in order to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare to the greatest possible extent.
   B.   Application Of Provisions: This chapter is applicable to all
underground individual sewage disposal systems currently installed or to be
constructed or installed after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 409, 11-16-
2016; amd. Ord. 443, - -2023)
3-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The term "individual subsurface sewage disposal system" shall mean any system
of piping, treatment devices or other facilities (excluding chemical toilets)
that store, convey, treat, or dispose of sewage. (Ord. 409, 11-16-2016)
3-2-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Disposal in accordance with the sewage management plan:
      1.   Each vacant, lawfully created residential lot within the City will
be allowed at least one Dwelling Equivalent (DE) worth of subsurface sewage
disposal. A subsurface sewage disposal system will only be permitted by the
Health District providing all standards of the most current rules and
regulations of the Health District and the State of Idaho can be met.
      2.   Non-residential properties will be assigned a fixed number of DEs as
of December 16, 2015, the date of the applicable Sewage Management Plan. When
applied to structures or facilities other than housing units, a DE shall be
equal to two-hundred and fifty (250) gallons per day or equal to twenty (20)
persons using a non-residential facility on a forty (40) hour per week basis,
with no wastewater generation except from restrooms.
      3.   Non-domestic wastewaters shall not be disposed of on-site, unless
the wastewater stream can be pretreated to meet the same characteristics as
domestic wastewater.
      4.   Except as provided in subsection 9 below, DEs cannot be traded, or
transferred from one parcel or project to another.
      5.   Large undeveloped parcels will be allotted one (1) DE per whole five
(5) acre unit.
      6.   At the time of septic tank pumping, property owners shall assure
that all tank manholes are extended with risers to be within six inches (6") of
the surface grade. All new septic systems shall be constructed with tank risers
to be within six inches (6") of the surface. If odor may be a concern, care
should be taken to use air tight lid construction.
      7.   Additional DE's may be added to the City's total DE allotment at the
rate of one DE per whole five (5) acre unit. DE's added to the City as a result
of annexation may be clustered on a portion of the larger property to
facilitate provision of sewer service in the future. The large remainder lot
must retain at least one DE and may not be further divided without a municipal
type wastewater solution, approved by the Department of Environmental Quality.
Such clustered lots must be connected to the municipal type wastewater solution
when it becomes available.
      8.   Upon connection to a municipal type wastewater system, the DE for
the property is extinguished and removed from the City's total allotment. Such
DEs cannot be re-allocated.
      9.   DE's that are "freed up" by lot consolidation may be re-allocated by
the City Council after finding it to be in the best interest of the public to
do so. (Ord. 409, 11-16-2016; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 443, - -2023)
3-2-5: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Notice To Property Owners: The City shall provide notice to property
owners that septic tanks must be pumped when sludge depth is one-third (1/3) of
liquid depth of the tank or every five (5) years, whichever comes first.
   B.   Notice To Health District: The City will provide an annual report to
the Health District which will include annual accounting of septic tanks that
have been serviced and/or pumped by January 15 of each year.
   C.   Data Management: The City will maintain a data management system,
including a map, to track all existing and unused DEs per parcel.
      1.   The City will provide this information to the Health District in its
annual report.
      2.   All new permits as requested by the property owner will be first
given by the City and subsequently forwarded by written notice to the Health
District stating the installation and DE allotment.
      3.   An annual report shall be provided to the City Council detailing the
current standings of issued and unissued DEs as well as status on the septic
pumping for the year.
   D.   Timeline For Implementation Of The Plan: Each property owner will be
notified by U.S. Mail by the City when it has been five (5) years since the
last septic tank pumping, according to the City’s records. The following shall
be a timeline for implementation of the disposal of sewage:
      1.   Every spring, the City Clerk will identify, by map or list, and send
notice to, the groups of property owners that need to have their septic system
pumped for the current year.
      2.   The property owner will have a minimum of four (4) months from the
date of the notice to have their septic system pumped, and shall provide
documentation as evidence of such to the City Clerk no later than October 1.
      3.   If the property owner fails to comply, the City Clerk will consult
the City Attorney and a letter will be drafted and sent to the property owner
requesting compliance within thirty (30) days. A list of the property owners
that fail to comply will be presented to the City Council at the next available
meeting.
      4.   If the property owner continually fails to comply, the water to
their property may be shut off.
      5.   The City shall maintain an annual report on the status of compliance
with the Sewage Management Plan, and present the report to City Council and the
Health District. (Ord. 409, 11-16-2016; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
3-2-6: UNLAWFUL ACTS AND PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the
following acts:
      1.   To construct any subsurface individual sewage system in any other
manner than:
         a.   A separate tank with a manhole riser to within six inches (6") of
the ground surface and an inspection riser to ground surface.
         b.   Record the date of installation, location, size, and type of
component in the system, together with load size, with the City Clerk.
      2.   To fail to pump all systems when the sludge depth is one-third (1/3)
of the liquid depth of the tank or every five (5) years, whichever occurs
first.
      3.   To fail to report to the City Clerk when an existing system is
pumped and to install inspection risers to surface and manhole risers to within
six inches (6") of the surface and to record the conditions, location, size,
and type of tank and disposal system and the date of pumping.
   B.   Violation And Penalty: If the property owner fails to have their septic
system pumped every five (5) years, a letter will be sent notifying the owner
of his or her failure to comply and to allow the owner thirty (30) more days to
come into compliance. If the property owner is not in compliance upon the
expiration of the thirty (30) day extension, the water to their property may be
shut off. (Ord. 409, 11-16-2016)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
LAW ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Contract With County
4-1-1: CONTRACT WITH COUNTY:
Law enforcement for the city shall be under contract with the Kootenai County
sheriff's office. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Curfew
4-2-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known as the ATHOL CURFEW ORDINANCE.
   B.   Curfew Designated: It is unlawful for any child under the age of
eighteen (18) years to be upon, loiter or stroll upon the public thoroughfares
or any other public place between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Monday through Sunday, unless accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
   C.   Duty Of Parent Or Guardian: It is unlawful for any parent or legal
guardian of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to allow or permit
the child to go upon, or be upon, any public thoroughfares or in any public
place between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. Monday through Sunday unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
   D.   Duty Of Law Enforcement Official: Any certified law enforcement
official is authorized and empowered to detain any child violating the
provisions of this section.
   E.   Legal Authority: This section is enacted pursuant to the provisions of
Idaho Code section 20-505, Idaho Code section 50-902 and the Idaho constitution
article XII, section 2. (Ord. 251, 12-3-2002)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Animal Regulations
4-3-3: Impoundment
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AT LARGE ANIMAL: An animal that is off the premises of its owner, or if on the
premises of its owner or of another, with permission, is not on a leash or
otherwise suitably contained within a fenced enclosure such that it is under
the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal.
EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk,
fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, non-poisonous snakes more than three
feet (3') in length, members of the feline species other than domestic cat
(Felis domesticus), members of the canine species other than domestic dog
(Canis familiaris) or any other animal that by virtue of strength or inherent
temperament or disposition would require a standard of care and control greater
than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or
domestic farm animals.
KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats, or any combination
thereof, are kept or boarded. An adult dog or cat shall be construed to mean an
animal of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six (6)
months. Other domesticated animals commonly construed to fall under the
generalized term of household pets shall also be subject to this definition
(i.e., ferrets, guinea pigs, and mice). Kennels are addressed in title 8 of
this Code.
LARGE ANIMAL: Animals including, but not limited to, horses, donkeys, burros,
mules, llamas, bovines, alpacas, goats, sheep, swine, and other animals or
livestock of similar size and type. The young of horses, donkeys, burros,
mules, and llamas under one year in age, bovines under ten (10) months in age,
and alpacas, goats, sheep, and swine under three (3) months in age shall not be
included when computing intensity of large animals. Miniature large animals are
included in this definition.
SMALL ANIMAL: Animals or fowl, other than household pets (as addressed in the
definition of kennel) or large animals including, but not limited to, chickens,
guinea hens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pigeons, rabbits, mink, chinchilla, otters,
gnawing animals in general, and other animals or fowl of similar size and type.
Young small animals or fowl under three (3) months in age shall not be included
when computing intensity of small animals or fowl. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd.
Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
4-3-2: ANIMAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It shall be the purpose of this section to provide standards
and procedures for the care and ownership of certain domestic animals within
the incorporated areas of the City. This section does not address all aspects
of animal ownership, rather it establishes some minimum standards for animal
care, control and treatment for public safety and animal welfare; the
responsibility for actions and behavior of domestic animals remains with the
owner. For purposes of this chapter, all species of animals shall be classified
as either a large animal or a small animal in keeping with the definitions of
section
4-3-1. Any codes not covered in this code shall be required to follow the codes
of Kootenai County with respect to procedures for animal care and impoundment.
   B.   Requirements For Keeping:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the City on
a parcel of less than one acre in size to maintain any horse, cow, bull, or any
other large animals as defined herein. The number of animals shall be limited
as outlined in subsection C of this section.
      2.   On parcels over one acre, the following requirements shall be in
force:
         a.   All excreta from the animal shall be removed daily from any
building or shelter where the animal is kept, or from any yard or enclosure
where the animal is permitted. This excreta shall be buried in the ground or
placed in a covered container. Subsequent and final disposal thereof, if made
in the City, shall be done by burying the same in the ground.
         b.   No large animals shall be kept or permitted in any building,
shelter, yard enclosure or pasture, unless the parcel is a minimum size of one
acre and is at least one hundred fifty feet (150') from any residence, street
or highway in the City, except the residence of the owner.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to
refuse or fail to provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious
food, water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and
treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal to intolerably hot,
stormy, cold or inclement weather without adequate shelter.
      4.   No owner or custodian of any animal shall abandon such animal on any
street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the
care of another responsible person. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
animal to fail to keep such animal under restraint or permit such animal to run
at large upon the streets and public ways of the city or upon private property
without consent of the owner or present occupant. It shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section when an animal is found by an animal
safety officer or police officer while it is away from its owner (or
responsible person).
      5.   If a person feeds or harbors any animal, they shall be considered an
owner or custodian for purposes of this chapter.
      6.   Every owner and custodian of animals shall be responsible for any
damage done by their animals to another person's property.
   C.   Keeping Of Exotic Or Wild Animals: It shall be unlawful for anyone to
own, harbor, or permit at large any wild or exotic animal without the express
written authorization of the Athol City Council. Such authorization may be
given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the council that the
animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. The City
Council may conduct a public hearing to obtain the opinions of adjoining
residents and property owners when considering such requests. The City Council
may charge an applicant for such authorization an appropriate fee to recover
the authorization processing costs incurred by the City.
   D.   Animal Intensity: The following animal intensity limits shall apply:
      1.   Large animals - One large animal per acre of total parcel area.
      2.   Small animals - One small animal or fowl for each two thousand
(2,000) square feet of parcel area.
   E.   Remedy For Violation: Any person who violates any provision of this
section may be subject to civil remedy, as necessary, to assure compliance with
this section. Cost of this remedy shall be defrayed by the owner of the animal.
(Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
4-3-3: IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal
safety officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to
an animal shelter or hospital any of the following animals:
      1.   Any animal at large, including cats;
      2.   Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to
the public;
      3.   Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement
order of the Panhandle health district, a Post Falls animal safety officer or
any standing quarantine or confinement order of any public officer;
      4.   Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of
care;
      5.   Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or
neglected;
      6.   Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
      7.   Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or
dangerous where the city council or animal safety officer determines that there
is a threat to public health and safety; including illegal exotic and wild
animals;
      8.   Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered
impounded or destroyed;
      9.   Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in
situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or has been evicted
from his regular place of residence;
      10.   Any animal that has been declared vicious and the owner or harborer
fails to adhere the established guidelines set forth in section
4-3-2 of this title.
   B.   An animal safety officer or police officer may also, or in lieu of
impoundment of a cat or dog running at large, issue to the owner a notice of
violation which calls for payment of an animal control fee or, in the
alternative, may issue a uniform citation charging the owner with a criminal
violation of this chapter. The animal safety officer or police officer may
issue a uniform citation or refer the matter to the city prosecutor in order to
initiate misdemeanor criminal proceedings for the underlying violation of this
chapter. Such citation or complaint shall be punishable as a criminal
misdemeanor as otherwise provided by this code. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
TITLE 5
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Vehicle Weight Limit
5-1-2: Air Compression And Jake Brakes
5-1-1: VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMIT:
   A.   Findings: It is hereby determined that the roads and streets within the
boundaries of the City are being damaged and will continue to be damaged by
certain heavy vehicles and that the damage to said roads has interfered and
will continue to interfere with the safe and efficient use of the roads and
streets of the traveling public within the City limits.
   B.   City Authority: It is hereby determined that pursuant to Idaho Code
section 49-1005, the City has the authority to make regulations reducing the
permissible weights of vehicles operated on the streets and roads within its
jurisdiction as may be necessary for the protection of the road or for public
safety and that the City shall erect and maintain signs designating such
regulations.
   C.   Weight Restriction; Exception: It is unlawful for any person to drive
or operate any vehicle of a gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000)
pounds per axle upon any street or highway within the City, except:
U.S. Highway 95 and Highway 54, when such streets or highways are properly
posted pursuant to Idaho Code section 49-1005.
   D.   Penalties: Persons violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined, but not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not
more than thirty (30) days in the Kootenai County Jail, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 150, 3-1-1977; amd. 2006 Code)
5-1-2: AIR COMPRESSION AND JAKE BRAKES:
   A.   Definitions:
    AIR COMPRESSION BRAKE: Any type of friction brake for vehicles in which
compressed air pressing on a piston is used to apply pressure to the brake pad
to stop the vehicle.
   JAKE BRAKE: Any engine braking mechanism which, when activated, opens
exhaust valves in the cylinders after the compression cycle, releasing the
compressed air trapped in the cylinders, and slowing the vehicle.
   B.   Use Of Air Compression And Jake Brakes Prohibited: The use of any air
compression or "jake" brakes by vehicles or trucks within the City limits is
hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful, except under emergency circumstances
where the use of air compression or "jake" brakes is necessary to prevent an
accident or injury to persons or property.
   C.   Penalty: Any person who uses air compression or "jake" brakes in
violation of the law shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, punishable by a
fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 401, 4-7-2015)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
CEMETERY
SECTION:
6-1-1: Purpose
6-1-2: Fees Set By Resolution
6-1-3: Approval Of Maintenance And Operation
6-1-4: Grave Decorating Restrictions
6-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for
the protection, health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants of the
city to hire and control all labor used in maintenance and operation of the
Mountain View Cemetery. (Ord. 262, 6-14-2005)
6-1-2: FEES SET BY RESOLUTION:
The city council shall, by resolution, from time to time, fix and change the
charges for setting of markers and monuments, for opening and closing graves,
and the prices of lots and charges for interment in accordance with any
applicable state and local laws. (Ord. 262, 6-14-2005)
6-1-3: APPROVAL OF MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION:
The city council shall approve all labor used in the maintenance and operation
of the cemetery. All maintenance, construction, landscaping and monument
setting shall be done only under supervision of the city maintenance
department. (Ord. 262, 6-14-2005)
6-1-4: GRAVE DECORATING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Restrictions: Fresh flowers or artificial seasonal bouquets will be
allowed but will be removed at any time they become unsightly or deteriorated.
The use of wire for attaching memorials is prohibited. Jars, glass containers,
cans and other inappropriate objects are not allowed and will be removed by the
cemetery staff. No planting or digging is allowed. Decorations will only be
allowed at the head of the grave site. Fences, rocks or other objects to circle
the grave site will not be allowed. All decorations must be removed by April 15
in order for the cemetery staff to prepare the cemetery for Memorial Day.
   B.   Nonliability Of City: The city shall not be liable for loss of vases,
floral arrangements or any type of memorial decoration.
   C.   Maintain Beauty Of Cemetery: It is the goal of the city to maintain the
general beauty of the Mountain View Cemetery for all people and avoid anything
that would detract from the appearance and harmony of the cemetery. (Ord. 262,
6-14-2005)
CHAPTER 2
WATER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Application For Services
6-2-3: Water Use Stated In Application
6-2-4: Access To Water Line
6-2-5: Supply To Separate Premises
6-2-6: Installation And Connection Fees, Rates And Charges
6-2-7: Billing, Payment, Delinquency, Lien
6-2-8: Extension Of Water Lines; Costs
6-2-9: [Reserved]
6-2-10: Tampering With Or Obstructing Hydrants, Water Gates
6-2-11: Tampering With Water Meters
6-2-12: Waste Of Water
6-2-13: Emergency Declaration; Cease Or Cut Back Water Use
6-2-14: Water Contamination
6-2-15: Property Owner Responsible For Services
6-2-16: Appeals
6-2-17: Sprinkling Times
6-2-18: Violation, Misdemeanor
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this
chapter shall be as follows:
COMMERCIAL: Any thing not meeting the definition designated as residential
dwelling unit; and may range from one (1) up to twelve (12) units. This
includes light industrial use. Churches are excluded.
DEPARTMENT OR CITY WATER OPERATOR: The Athol Water Department.
PATRON OR CONSUMER: Property owner or his agent.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: Any structure designed to house one (1) family
(includes single-family duplex, and multi-family units), or church
congregation. This includes mobile homes, group homes, and home occupations.
(Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-2: APPLICATION FOR SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to any water main or
service pipe through which water is supplied by the department to water
consumers or to interfere or tamper in any manner with such mains or pipes, to
use any water supplied by the department without first having made application
to the City Clerk on forms furnished by the City and having received written
consent. All meters remain the sole property of the City. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-3: WATER USE STATED IN APPLICATION:
   A.   Use Only For Stated Purposes:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person supplied with water from the
department mains to be entitled to use water for any purposes other than those
stated in his application or to supply water in any way to other persons.
      2.   Should the owner or occupant of any premises desire additional
outlets or fixtures or desire to use water for a purpose not stated in the
original application, a new application must be made and a new permit obtained
from the City Clerk. (Ord. 195A, 3-16-1982; amd. 9-3-2002)
   B.   Truthful Statement; Compliance With Rules: The applicant must state
fully and truthfully all purposes for which water is to be used and must agree
to conform to the rules and regulations as a condition for the use of water.
All work performed on the water meter must be done or coordinated by the City.
(Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-4: ACCESS TO WATER LINE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to access the water main or service pipe by
any method other than the application process expressly set forth in this
chapter. Access easements or other alternative methods to obtain access for the
water main or services pipes are not permissible. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-5: SUPPLY TO SEPARATE PREMISES:
The service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or
premises may be controlled by a separate stop cock placed as the water operator
shall prescribe. Where water is already supplied through one service to several
houses, families or persons, the City may continue to allow service in this
manner, until such time there is a request for any type of change to the
current water service. Extension of any existing line to provide service in
such a manner is prohibited. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-6: INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
Every new tap to the water main, where there has been no prior service to the
land, premises, or building, shall be required to pay an installation fee, as
set forth in the most current City fee resolution. Every lot is required to
hook up to City water. No private wells will be allowed inside the City limits.
No construction or water meter installation shall be done during the winter
months, unless conditions are favorable for such installation, as determined by
the City. Prepayment of installation fees may be allowed up to thirty (30) days
prior to the anticipated date of installation.
   A.   Installation And Connection Fees: For every water connection to the
water main of the City, a hookup charge or connection fee shall be charged in
such amount as shall be determined by the City Council and approved by
resolution set forth in the minutes of the meeting at which said fee is
adopted.
   B.   Commercial And Residential Water Rates: Commercial and residential
water rates charged shall be as set by the City Council by a proper resolution
filed in the Office of the City Clerk, and open to inspection during business
hours.
   C.   Minimum Meter Rates:
      1.   Residential: There shall be a per month meter charge when the meter
is off, the City does not pro rate. Only the City is permitted to turn the
water meters on or off. Those desiring to have meters removed may do so on
arrangement with the City. Any subsequent re-hookup shall require payment of
the current hookup or connection fee. Any party desiring meter removed shall
request same in writing and shall further agree to the subsequent hookup fee.
      2.   Commercial: There shall be a per month meter charge when the meter
is off, the City does not pro rate. Only the City is permitted to turn the
water meters on or off. Those desiring to have meters removed may do so on
arrangement with the City. Any subsequent re-hookup shall require payment of
the current hookup or connection fee. Any party desiring meter removed shall
request same in writing and shall further agree to the subsequent hookup fee.
(Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
6-2-7: BILLING, PAYMENT, DELINQUENCY, LIEN:
   A.   Due Date: All charges for water are due upon receipt and considered
late if not received by the fifteenth day of each month. All charges shall
continue to be levied against any premises and shall be payable by the
applicant or owner upon which water is supplied. In the event that water
charges shall remain due and payable for a period of sixty (60) days, any
person authorized by the City Council shall be empowered to shut off the supply
of water to said premises until the full amount of the charges due and payable
have been paid in full, subject to the provisions of subsection B of this
section; and if water is thereafter supplied to the premises, a charge shall be
made as a reconnecting fee, and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than
one authorized by the City Council, to make such reconnection. (Ord. 411, 2-21-
2017)
   B.   Delinquency; Denial Of Service; Pre-Termination Hearing:
      1.   If bills are not paid before the fifteenth day following the first
day of the month, the same shall become delinquent. Water consumers should be
notified of this delinquency, and if the bill is not paid in full within
fifteen (15) days after mailing of this notification on the water consumer, the
right to water may cease and terminate. A hearing upon request of a water
consumer denied water service for nonpayment of the bill shall be held as
expeditiously as possible and held in the manner and accordance with the
procedure for pre-termination hearings delineated in this subsection.
      2.   The City, in its delinquency notice to all water consumers, shall
inform in writing all consumers of their right to a pretermination hearing,
with such hearing to be held with the due process protection described in this
subsection; and will not discontinue water service to any water consumer prior
to a fair and impartial hearing, after timely and adequate notice and an
opportunity to confront witnesses, to personally appear with retained counsel
to be judged on facts adduced at the hearing and to otherwise be heard and
defend the claim made by the City. If a pretermination hearing is requested by
any water consumer, the City Council shall have the responsibility of holding
the pretermination hearing. The City Council shall make a record of any
pretermination hearing. The City Council shall render its decision in writing,
giving the reasons for its determination. In decisions adverse to the water
consumer, the City Council shall inform the water consumer of the right to
appeal the decision pursuant to the Idaho State Administrative Procedures Act 1
.
      3.   The City shall not initially deny water service to any water user
for whatever reason without informing the water consumer of the right to a
hearing before the City Council on the issue of whether the City can initially
deny water service. (Ord. 195A, 3-16-1982; amd. 9-3-2002; 2006 Code; Ord. 411,
2-21-2017)
   C.   Lien Upon Property: All water charges shall constitute a lien upon the
property to which service is made, and the City Clerk shall certify to the
County Treasurer of Kootenai County, Idaho, at the same time as other levies
are certified, the amount of unpaid water charges on each parcel of property
within the City. (Ord. 195A, 3-16-1982; amd. 9-3-2002; Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-5201 et seq.
6-2-8: EXTENSION OF WATER LINES; COSTS:
Each property owner requesting water where there has been no prior service to
the land, premises, or building, shall be required to pay for all costs
associated with the extension of the water line, this may include costs of
boring and road patches. Where city water mains are extended at the request of
a private property owner to provide water service, the water main shall be
extended through the property to the property line, to facilitate future
expansion as required by the City. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-
2020)
6-2-9: [RESERVED]:
6-2-10: TAMPERING WITH OR OBSTRUCTING HYDRANTS, WATER GATES:
   A.   General Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person except a
firefighter in the performance of his duty to open or in any way tamper with
any fire hydrant connected with the water system unless permission first be
obtained from the water operator. No person shall place upon or about any water
gate connected with the water system any material substance whatsoever which
will prevent access at all times to such hydrant or gate, and no vehicle shall
be allowed to stand within eight feet (8') of such hydrant.
   B.   Use Of Private Hose: The use of private hose in time of or during an
alarm of fire is strictly prohibited unless for protection of property. (Ord.
195A, 3-16-1982; amd. 9-3-2002; Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
   C.   Snow And Debris: It shall be the responsibility of the property owner
to keep all fire hydrants clear from snow and debris, at three feet (3') around
it. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-11: TAMPERING WITH WATER METERS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to in any way tamper with a water meter, unless
permission is first obtained from the water operator. Tampering with a water
meter shall constitute a misdemeanor, in accordance with section
6-2-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-12: WASTE OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit water to run or waste; all
outlets must be kept closed except during the time which water is being drawn
for necessary use. Letting the water run to keep water cool in warm weather is
prohibited, unless authorized by the water operator. The owner of any premises
shall keep his faucets, closets and other fixtures and his pipes to the curb
line in good repair and free from leaks. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-13: EMERGENCY DECLARATION; CEASE OR CUT BACK WATER USE:
   A.   Declaration Of Necessity: The City Council hereby finds and declares
that the patrons of the City water system shall cease from using water, or cut
back on the use of water, when the City Council or Mayor declares it necessary.
   B.   Notice To Comply; Reconnection Fee: Violators shall be given notice,
and if they fail to comply, their water will be shut off at the meter. A
reconnection fee will be charged to turn the water back on. (Ord. 411, 2-21-
2017)
6-2-14: WATER CONTAMINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to contaminate or befoul any reservoir,
stream or watershed, spring or other source from which the supply of water for
the City is obtained, or any pipe, fountain or any other device forming a part
of the City water system. Backflow devices are required on all service
connections 1 . (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. See also article A of this chapter.
6-2-15: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR SERVICES:
Each property owner, tenant, renter, occupant or water user shall maintain the
service line from the meter box to the premises. Property owners are also
encouraged to add a shut-off valve somewhere between the meter and their house,
for ease to turn on and off in the event of emergencies. Only the City is
allowed to turn the water on and off at the meter. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
6-2-16: APPEALS:
   A.   Procedures: Appeals shall be filed within a reasonable period of time,
not to exceed fourteen (14) days, by filing with the Council through the City
Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City may charge a
reasonable fee to be paid at the time of filing the appeal. The Council shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give legal public notice
to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time
following the hearing. At the hearing, any affected party may appear in person,
by agent or attorney.
   B.   Appeal Stays Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Council finds, after the
notice of appeal is filed with it, that by reason of facts stated in the
appeal, a stay would, in their opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the courts after having due cause
shown. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
6-2-17: SPRINKLING TIMES:
Sprinkling times may be set by the Mayor or water operator. (Ord. 411, 2-21-
2017)
6-2-18: VIOLATION, MISDEMEANOR:
Persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 411, 2-21-2017)
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Purpose
6-2A-2: Applicability
6-2A-3: Definitions
6-2A-4: Cross Connections Prohibited
6-2A-5: Installation Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies
6-2A-6: Plan Review
6-2A-7: Types Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies Required
6-2A-8: Location
6-2A-9: Installation
6-2A-10: Approval Of Assemblies
6-2A-11: Testing And Maintenance Of Assemblies
6-2A-12: Termination Of Services For Noncompliance
6-2A-13: Right To Change Regulations
6-2A-14: Enforceability Clause
6-2A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article, in conjunction with IDAPA 16.01.08 Idaho rules for
public drinking water systems, and section 1003 of the uniform plumbing code,
is to protect the public health by the control and prevention of actual and
potential cross connections by requiring the proper installation and
safeguarding of service lines leading to premises where cross connections exist
or are likely to occur, by periodic inspection and by regulating plumbing
within premises or to the public water system itself. An additional purpose is
to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection
control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water delivered by the city water system. (Ord. 257,
3-2-2004)
6-2A-2: APPLICABILITY:
This article applies throughout the city to every premises and the owners and
occupants thereof served by the water system of the city. It applies to all
systems installed prior to or after its enactment. Every owner and occupant of
any premises covered by this article is responsible for compliance with its
terms and shall be strictly liable for all damage incurred as a result of
failure to comply with the express terms and provisions contained herein. The
water operator will administer the provisions of this article. Any deviation,
modification, or changes from approved standards must be approved by the city
water operator. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AIR GAP (AG) SEPARATION: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle, and must be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel. In no case may the
gap be less than one inch (1").
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water source or system other than the city of Athol water
system that may be available in the building or on the premises.
BACKFLOW: The flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign
liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution of the public water system.
Back Pressure: Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means
that could create pressure within the system greater than the potable water
supply system.
Back Siphonage: A form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric pressure
within the water system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly to counteract back pressures or
prevent back siphonage.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water system is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nonportable water system,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other
device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other
waste liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of
which, backflow may occur, are considered to be cross connections.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA): An assembly composed of two (2) single,
independently acting check valves, including resilient seated, tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and equipped with properly
located resilient seated test cocks for testing the water tightness of each
check valve.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER BACK SIPHONAGE PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (PVBA): An assembly
containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an
independently operating internally loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with properly
located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated
shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed
to protect against a back siphonage condition only.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (RPBA): An assembly
incorporating two (2) or more check valves and an automatically operating
differential relief valve located between the two (2) checks, two (2) resilient
seated shutoff valves, one located at each end of the assembly and equipped
with properly located resilient seated test cocks for testing. The assembly
must operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check
valves, less than the pressure on the public water system side of the assembly.
At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves must be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve must operate to maintain the reduced pressure by
discharging to the atmosphere thereby providing an atmospheric zone between the
two (2) check valves. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-4: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
   A.   All cross connections, whether or not they are controlled by automatic
devices such as check valves or by hand operated mechanisms such as gate valves
or stop cock, are prohibited.
   B.   Any reinjection of water by individual, commercial, or industrial uses
to the public water system is specifically prohibited. Water-to-water and
water-to-air heat exchangers are considered a cross connection because of
health risks. Any modifications allowing reinjection are prohibited.
   C.   Failure on the part of persons, firms or corporations to discontinue
the use of all cross connections is sufficient cause for the immediate
discontinuance of public water service to the premises. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-5: INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed at the service connection or
within any premises where, in the judgment of the water operator, the nature
and extent of activity on the premises, or the materials used in connection
with the activities, or materials stored on the premises would present an
immediate and dangerous hazard to health should a cross connection occur, even
though such cross connection does not exist at the time, the backflow
prevention device is required to be installed. This includes:
   A.   Premises having auxiliary water supply.
   B.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable, or
intricate plumbing arrangements that make it impractical to ascertain whether
or not cross connections exist.
   C.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficient short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist.
   D.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   E.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water system, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This includes the handling of process waters
and cooling waters, and/or boilers.
   F.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
such that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard may result.
   G.   The following types of facilities require mandatory service protection,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Hospitals.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Sewage treatment plants.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants using a water process.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Hot water and steam boilers for individual, commercial and
industrial uses.
      12.   Dialysis.
      13.   Farms.
      14.   Others specified by the water operator. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-6: PLAN REVIEW:
All backflow prevention assemblies which are required to be installed shall be
shown and specified on all required building and engineering plans. Approval of
the intended assembly installation is required prior to water service being
provided by the city. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-7: TYPES OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES REQUIRED:
The type of prevention device required depends on the degree of hazard that
exists:
   A.   An air gap separation or reduced principle backflow prevention assembly
shall be installed where the water supply may be contaminated by sewage,
industrial waste of a toxic nature or other contaminant, which could cause a
health or system hazard.
   B.   In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous
to health, an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly, or a double check valve assembly shall be installed.
   C.   Lawn sprinkler systems, which are supplied by city water only, shall be
required to have a double check valve backflow prevention assembly, or a
pressure vacuum breaker assembly depending on the design of the sprinkler
system and potential risk to the potable water supply. For backflow prevention
assemblies larger than one inch (1"), design shall be submitted, and approval
shall be made by the water operator.
   D.   Any new backflow prevention device installed on any part of the city's
water system shall meet the International Plumbing Code standards, as adopted
by the State of Idaho. This requirement shall also apply to any backflow
prevention device that is replaced due to a failed test performed by a
certified backflow assembly tester.
   E.   All assemblies and underground lawn irrigation and sprinkler systems
must be tested within ten (10) days of spring start-up, and no later than June
30 of each year. All other assemblies must be tested by September 30. Proof of
required yearly testing must be supplied to the City Clerk and Public Works
Director/Water Operator by the testing deadline respective to each assembly
system. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-2A-8: LOCATION:
Backflow prevention assemblies required by this article must be installed at
the direction of the city, at the premises so as to be readily accessible for
maintenance and testing, where no part of the device will be submerged or
hidden from proper inspection. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-9: INSTALLATION:
   A.   Types Of Assemblies Allowed: Backflow prevention assemblies required by
this article must be inspected and approved by the city. Acceptable types: Any
protective device required by this article shall be a model approved by the
city. A double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly will be approved if it has successfully passed performance
tests of the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research, or other testing laboratories satisfactory to
the city. Backflow prevention assemblies which are in service but are not
listed shall be permitted to remain in service, provided they:
      1.   Were listed on the current approved cross connection control
assembly list at the time they were installed;
      2.   Are properly maintained;
      3.   Are commensurate with the degree of hazard; and
      4.   Are tested and successfully pass the test annually.
   B.   Moving Or Replacing Assemblies: When these assemblies are moved, or
require more than minimum maintenance, they shall be replaced by an assembly
that is on the current list of approved assemblies. To maintain their approval
status, all assemblies must be delivered to the job site and be installed with
the shutoff valves no. 1 and no. 2 and test cocks which are supplied by the
device manufacturer, but only if it can be tested. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-10: APPROVAL OF ASSEMBLIES:
The term "approved assembly" shall mean any backflow prevention assembly which
has satisfactorily completed laboratory and field test by an independent
laboratory recognized by the Idaho department of health and welfare, division
of environmental quality. A backflow device shall be of the correct type as
required by the division of environmental quality. A backflow device shall be
of the correct type as required by the city and be selected from the state
approved list. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-11: TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Testing For Proper Functioning: Each backflow prevention assembly shall
be tested to ensure that it functions properly:
      1.   Upon installation.
      2.   After repairs.
      3.   After being relocated, moved, or reinstalled.
      4.   Annually.
   B.   Notice Of Required Annual Test; Owner Responsibility: The assembly
owner shall be notified one month prior to the date for annual testing. It is
then the assembly owner's responsibility to acquire the services of a certified
tester to test the assembly and provide the city a copy of the test results. If
the test indicates the assembly must be repaired, a record of the repair work
and a report of a satisfactory final test must be sent to the city. The annual
testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be done prior to any repair work
or flushing of the relief valve, to properly reestablish its operating status.
Failure to test and maintain backflow prevention assemblies is grounds for the
city to discontinue water service. Random inspections by the city water
operator will be done at any time to assure protection of the city water
system. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
6-2A-12: TERMINATION OF SERVICES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
The failure to comply in the installation, maintenance, testing and inspection
of backflow prevention assemblies required by this article is grounds for
termination of water service to the premises. Unauthorized connection or
reconnection of a service which has been disconnected from the city water
system for noncompliance with this article shall be a misdemeanor. Each day of
a violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004; amd.
2006 Code)
6-2A-13: RIGHT TO CHANGE REGULATIONS:
The city reserves the right to make changes by resolution or ordinance at a
regular meeting of the city council. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004; amd. 2006 Code)
6-2A-14: ENFORCEABILITY CLAUSE:
The city shall enforce and seek remedies for breaches of the terms of this
article, as provided by the laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 257, 3-2-2004)
CHAPTER 3
CATV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Short Title
6-3-2: Statement Of Intent And Purpose
6-3-3: Definitions
6-3-4: Grant Of Authority And General Provisions
6-3-5: Cable Communications System
6-3-6: Construction Provisions
6-3-7: Service Provisions
6-3-8: Consumer Protection And Rights Of Individuals
6-3-9: Franchise Fee
6-3-10: Insurance
6-3-11: Indemnification
6-3-12: Violations; Revocation Procedure
6-3-13: Foreclosure, Receivership And Abandonment
6-3-14: Removal, Transfer And Purchase
6-3-15: Miscellaneous Provisions
6-3-16: Publication
6-3-17: Acceptance
6-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the ATHOL FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. Within
this chapter, it shall also be referred to as "this franchise" or the
"franchise". (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-2: STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The grantor intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to continue the
development and operation of a cable system. This development can contribute
significantly to the communications needs and desires of many individuals,
associations and institutions. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense,
words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meanings.
BASIC SERVICE TIER: A service tier which includes the retransmission of local
television broadcast signals.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984 as amended by the cable
television consumer protection and competition act of 1992, the
telecommunications act of 1996 and any amendments thereto.
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming
or other programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which
is provided to multiple subscribers within a community as defined in the cable
act.
FCC: The federal communications commission, its designee, or any successor
thereto.
GROSS REVENUES: All revenues from the operation of the system within the
franchise area received by the grantee from subscribers from the basic service
tier of programming and for any optional tier of programming service,
(including premium and pay per view services) customer equipment and
installation charges, disconnecting and reconnection charges, revenues from
advertising sales less agency fees and home shopping revenues. "Gross revenues"
shall not include deposits, refunds and credits made to subscribers, bad debt,
nonsubscriber revenues, revenue from subscribers designated by the grantee as
payment of its franchise fee obligation, or any taxes imposed on the services
furnished by the grantee herein which are imposed directly on the subscriber or
user by the local or any governmental unit and collected by the grantee on
behalf of that governmental unit.
PERSON: Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or
not for profit.
SIGNAL: Any transmission of radio frequency energy or of optical information.
STREET: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, public
road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public way,
public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway,
public drive and any public easement or right of way now or hereafter held by
the grantor which shall entitle the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose
of installing or transmitting over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other
property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a system.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person or entity who lawfully subscribes to any cable service
whether or not a fee is paid for such cable service. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-4: GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Grant Of Franchise: The grantor hereby grants to the grantee the
nonexclusive right to construct, operate and maintain in, on, along, across,
above, over and under the streets, alleys, lanes and public places of the
grantor, the poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
facilities necessary for the maintenance and operation of a cable system
throughout the entire territorial area of the grantor to provide cable service
and other communications and information services.
   B.   Level Playing Field:
      1.   The grantor agrees that any grant of additional franchises or other
authorizations including OVS authorizations by the grantor to any other entity
to provide video or other services similar to those provided by the grantee
pursuant to this agreement and over which the grantor has regulatory authority
shall require that service be provided for the same territorial area of the
grantor as required by this agreement and shall not be on terms and conditions
(including, without limitation, the franchise fee obligations) more favorable
or less burdensome to the grantee of any such additional franchise than those
which are set forth herein.
      2.   In any renewal of this franchise, the grantor, should it seek to
impose increased obligations upon the grantee, must take into account any
additional franchise(s) or authorizations previously granted and find that the
proposed increased obligations in the renewal are not more burdensome and/or
less favorable than those contained in the additional franchise(s) or
authorizations.
   C.   Acceptance; Effective Date; Franchise Term: The franchise granted
herein will take effect and be in full force from such date of acceptance by
the grantee recorded on the signature page of this chapter. The franchise shall
continue in full force and effect until it expires on November 22, 2018. This
franchise will be automatically extended for an additional term of five (5)
years unless either party notifies the other, in writing, of its desire to
terminate this agreement at least one year before the commencement of the five
(5) year extension.
   D.   Area Covered: This franchise is granted for the entire territorial
limits of the grantor (franchise area). The grantee, upon request, will make
service available to all residences within the territorial limits of the
grantor and any annexed territory in the event that: 1) such existing or
annexed territory has a density of at least twenty five (25) homes per linear
strand mile of cable as measured from existing cable system plant (excluding
homes subscribing to direct satellite); 2) any such residence requesting
service can be provided with service by a standard installation which will be
no more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the existing distribution
system (standard installation); and 3) such existing or annexed territory is
not being served by a cable television system operator other than the grantee
or its affiliates, an open video system or a satellite master antenna
television system. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-5: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM:
   A.   System Maintenance Or Upgrade:
      1.   The grantee agrees to comply with the terms set forth in this
franchise governing construction and technical requirements for maintenance of
the cable system, in addition to any other requirements specified by this
franchise and any applicable law which is generally applicable to all entities
involved in construction in the grantor's rights of way.
      2.   The grantee warrants that the cable system has been upgraded to a
minimum capacity of 750 MHz, including digital capacity with return
capabilities for delivery of a combination of analog and digital services. The
grantee may modify the design of the system and its use of transmission
technology as future upgrades progress.
   B.   Technical Standards: The system shall be designed, constructed and
operated so as to meet those technical standards promulgated by the federal
communications commission relating to cable systems contained in subpart K of
part 76 of the FCC rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be amended.
   C.   Emergency Alert System: The grantee will comply with the FCC emergency
alert system requirements throughout the term of this franchise. (Ord. 255, 10-
6-2003)
6-3-6: CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS:
   A.   Construction Standards:
      1.   All installations of electronic equipment shall be durable and
installed in accordance with the provisions of the national electrical and
safety code and national electrical code, as amended.
      2.   Antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and
regulations of the federal aviation administration and all other generally
applicable state or local laws, codes and regulations.
      3.   The grantee's plant and equipment for the provision of cable
service, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, headend and
distribution system shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in
accordance with good engineering practices.
      4.   The grantee shall employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
   B.   Construction Codes And Permits: The grantee shall obtain all legally
required permits before commencing any work requiring a permit, including the
opening or disturbance of any street, or public property or public easement
within the community. The grantee shall strictly adhere to all building and
zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to construction, operation or
maintenance of the system in the community, provided such codes apply to all
other similarly situated entities.
   C.   Repair Of Streets And Property: Any and all streets or public property
or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of
the system shall be repaired by the grantee, at its expense, to a condition as
good as that prevailing prior to the grantee's construction.
   D.   Use Of Existing Poles: The grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any
pole on or along any street in an existing aerial utility system without the
advance written approval of the grantor, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The grantee shall exercise its best efforts to negotiate
the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole owners for all
aerial construction.
   E.   Undergrounding Of Cable:
      1.   Cable plant shall be installed underground at the grantee's expense
where all existing telephone and electrical utilities are already underground.
The grantee shall place cable underground in newly platted areas in concert
with both the telephone and electrical utilities, to the extent the grantee is
notified of such placement. In the event that any telephone or electric
utilities are reimbursed by the grantor or any agency thereof for the placement
of cable underground or the movement of cable, the grantee shall be reimbursed
upon the same terms and conditions as any telephone, electric or other
utilities.
      2.   Extensions into new underground subdivisions shall be partial
expense of the developer. The minimum improvements which a developer shall make
shall include provisions for cable television substructure including trench and
installed conduit suitable for installation of cable television distribution
facilities. Developer's agreement shall be given in writing prior to the
approval by the city of any preliminary subdivision map. The developer shall
bear all costs of installing underground conduit in order to make cable
television service available to each separate lot within the subdivision. The
developer may engage the franchised cable television operator within the city
to perform the foregoing construction, or may engage an independent contractor
of its choice to do so. If an independent contractor is engaged, construction
shall be subject to final approval of the franchised cable television operator
within the city. The city council shall have authority to promulgate such
policy or policies as it deems are required to effect the implementation of
this section.
   F.   Reservation Of Street Rights:
      1.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent the grantor
from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating sewers; grading,
paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any street;
constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or relocating any water
mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or
other public work.
      2.   All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such a
manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the
poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of the grantee.
      3.   If any such property of the grantee shall interfere with the
construction or relocation, maintenance or repair of any street or public
improvement, whether it be construction, repair, maintenance, removal or
relocation of a sewer, public sidewalk, or water main, street or any other
public improvement, thirty (30) days' notice shall be given to the grantee by
the grantor and all such poles, wires, conduits or other appliances and
facilities shall be removed or replaced by the grantee so that the same shall
not interfere with the said public work of the grantor, and such removal or
replacement shall be at the expense of the grantee herein. Should, however, any
utility company or other entity be reimbursed for relocation of its facilities
as part of the same work that requires the grantee to remove its facilities,
the grantee shall be reimbursed upon the same terms and conditions as such
utilities or other entities.
   G.   Reasonable Care: Nothing contained in this franchise shall relieve any
person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to
avoid injuring the grantee's facilities while performing any work connected
with grading, regrading, or changing the line of any street or public place or
with the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system.
   H.   Trimming Of Trees: The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees
upon and hanging over streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the
grantor so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires and cables of the grantee; provided, however, all trimming shall be
done at the expense of the grantee.
   I.   Movement Of Facilities: In the event it is necessary to temporarily
move or remove any of the grantee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities
placed pursuant to this franchise, in order to lawfully move a large object,
vehicle, building or other structure over the streets of the grantor, upon two
(2) weeks' notice by the grantor to the grantee, the grantee shall move, at the
expense of the person requesting the temporary removal, such of his facilities
as may be required to facilitate such movements. The grantee reserves its right
to request that such expenses be paid in advance. Any service disruption
provisions of this franchise shall not apply in the event that the removal of
the grantee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities results in temporary
service disruptions. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-7: SERVICE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Programming Decisions: The grantee will provide broad categories of
programming services in accordance with the cable act.
   B.   Cable Service Connections To Schools And Grantor Facilities:
      1.   Cable Service: The grantee, upon written request of the grantor,
will provide and maintain one connection for basic service to each elementary
and secondary public school, library, and the grantor administration facility,
within the geographical limits of the grantor which is located within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of the grantee's distribution plant and listed in
exhibit A attached to ordinance 255 on file in the office of the city clerk.
The grantee will bring its connection to a specified exterior demarcation point
mutually agreed upon by the grantee and such institution.
      2.   PEG Access Channels: The grantee will comply with the PEG access
requirements set forth in exhibit B attached to ordinance 255 on file in the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003; amd. 2006 Code)
6-3-8: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS:
   A.   Subscriber Complaint Practices:
      1.   The grantee shall maintain an office which shall be open during
normal business hours and shall maintain a publicly listed toll free telephone
number. The grantee shall maintain adequate telephone lines and personnel to
respond in a timely manner to schedule service calls and answer subscriber
complaints or inquiries. The grantee shall follow all applicable federal and
state regulations in responding to complaints by customers. A "complaint", as
used in this franchise, will mean notice by a subscriber of a billing dispute
or problem with picture quality which is not resolved during or subsequent to
the initial telephone or service call.
      2.   The grantee shall render efficient cable service, make repairs
promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible.
   B.   Parental Control Option: The grantee shall provide parental control
devices, at reasonable cost, to subscribers who wish to be able to prevent
certain cable services from entering the subscriber's home.
   C.   Rights Of Individuals Protected:
      1.   Discriminatory Practices Prohibited: The grantee shall not deny
service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or age. The grantee shall
comply at all times with all other applicable federal and state laws relating
to nondiscrimination.
      2.   Subscriber Privacy: The grantee shall comply with all privacy
provisions of the cable act, as amended. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-9: FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   The grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee equal to three
percent (3%) of the grantee's "gross revenues", as defined in section
6-3-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Payments due the grantor under this provision shall be computed
quarterly and shall be due and payable quarterly. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-10: INSURANCE:
The grantee will maintain in full force and effect for the term of the
franchise, at the grantee's expense, a comprehensive liability insurance policy
with the grantor as an additional insured, written by a company authorized to
do business in the state in which the cable system is located, or will provide
self- insurance reasonably satisfactory to the grantor protecting the grantor
against liability for loss, personal injury and property damage occasioned by
the operation of the cable system by the grantee. Such insurance will be
maintained in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00). The grantee will also maintain workers' compensation coverage
throughout the term of this franchise as required by law. Evidence in the form
of a certificate of insurance or such self-insurance will be provided to the
grantor upon request. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-11: INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   The grantee will indemnify the grantor and will pay all damages and
penalties which the grantor may legally be required to pay which result from
any negligence by the grantee in the operation of the cable system throughout
the territorial area of the grantor. The grantor shall give the grantee timely
written notice of the making of any claim or of the commencement of any action,
suit or other proceeding covered by the indemnity in this section. In the event
any such claim arises, the grantor shall tender the defense thereof to the
grantee and the grantee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise
any claims arising hereunder and the grantor shall cooperate fully herein. If
the grantor determines in good faith that its interests cannot be represented
by the grantee, the grantee shall be excused from any obligation to represent
the grantor.
   B.   The grantee will not be required to indemnify the grantor for the
negligent acts of the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or
employees. Further, the grantor will indemnify and hold the grantee harmless
from any claims or causes of action arising from any negligent acts by the
grantor, its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees. (Ord. 255,
10-6-2003)
6-3-12: VIOLATIONS; REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Franchise Violations: Whenever the grantor believes that the grantee
has allegedly violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this
franchise, a written notice shall be given to the grantee. The written notice
shall describe in reasonable detail the alleged violation so as to afford the
grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation. The grantee shall have thirty
(30) days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to either correct the
violation or, if the violation cannot be corrected within the thirty (30) day
period, to have commenced and be diligently pursuing corrective action. The
grantee may, within ten (10) business days of receipt of notice, notify the
grantor that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in
fact, occurred. Such notice by the grantee to the grantor shall specify with
particularity the matters disputed by the grantee and shall stay the running of
the above described time.
      1.   The grantor shall hear the grantee's dispute at a regularly or
specially scheduled meeting. The grantee shall have the right to subpoena and
cross examine witnesses. The grantor shall determine if the grantee has
committed a violation and shall make written findings of fact relative to its
determination. If a violation is found, the grantee may petition for
reconsideration.
      2.   If, after hearing the dispute, the claim is upheld by the grantor,
the grantee shall have thirty (30) business days from such a determination to
remedy the violation or failure.
The time for the grantee to correct any alleged violation shall be extended by
the grantor if the necessary action to correct the alleged violation is of such
a nature or character to require more than thirty (30) days within which to
perform, provided the grantee commences the corrective action within the thirty
(30) day period and thereafter uses reasonable diligence to correct the
violation. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the grantee does not waive any
of its rights under federal law.
   B.   Franchise Revocation: In addition to all other rights which the grantor
has pursuant to law or equity, the grantor reserves the right to revoke,
terminate or cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining
thereto in accordance with the following procedures and applicable federal law,
in the event that:
      1.   The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts,
or is adjudged as bankrupt and grantee's creditors or trustee in bankruptcy do
not agree to fulfill and be bound by all requirements of this franchise; or
      2.   The grantee violates a material provision of this franchise after
being notified of such violation and being given time to cure or refute the
alleged violation in accordance with subsection A of this section.
   C.   Revocation Procedures: In the event that the grantor determines as set
forth above that the grantee has violated any material provision of the
franchise, the grantor may make a written demand on the grantee that it remedy
such violation and that continued violation may be cause for revocation. If the
violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect is not remedied within thirty
(30) days following such demand or such other period as is reasonable, the
grantor shall determine whether or not such violation, breach, failure, refusal
or neglect by the grantee is due to acts of God or other causes which result
from circumstances beyond the grantee's control. Such determination shall not
unreasonably be withheld.
      1.   A public hearing shall be held and the grantee shall be provided
with an opportunity to be heard upon fourteen (14) days' written notice to the
grantee of the time and the place of the hearing. The causes for pending
revocation and the reasons alleged to constitute such cause shall be recited in
the written notice. Said notice shall affirmatively recite the causes that need
to be shown by the grantor to support a revocation.
      2.   If notice is given and, at the grantee's option, after a full public
proceeding is held, the grantor determines there is a violation, breach,
failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee which is not an event of force
majeure, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or remedy the same
within such reasonable additional time, in such manner and upon such reasonable
terms and conditions as the grantor may direct.
      3.   If, after a public hearing, it is determined that the grantee's
performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations, or requirements of
the franchise was prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable
control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be
deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result
thereof, provided the grantee has notified the grantor in writing within thirty
(30) days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. Such causes
beyond the grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall
include, but shall not be limited to, acts of God, civil emergencies and labor
strikes.
      4.   If, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option, a full
public proceeding is held, the grantor determines there was a violation,
breach, failure, refusal or neglect, which is not an event of force majeure,
then the grantor may declare, by resolution, the franchise revoked and canceled
and of no further force and effect unless there is compliance within such
period as the grantor may fix, such period not to be less than thirty (30)
days.
      5.   If the grantor, after notice is given and, at the grantee's option,
a full public proceeding is held and appeal is exhausted, declares the
franchise breached, the parties may pursue their remedies pursuant to franchise
or any other remedy, legal or equitable. The grantee may continue to operate
the system until all legal appeals procedures have been exhausted.
      6.   Notwithstanding the above provisions, the grantee does not waive any
of its rights under federal law or regulation. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-13: FORECLOSURE, RECEIVERSHIP AND ABANDONMENT:
   A.   Foreclosure: Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the system,
the grantee shall notify the grantor of such fact and such notification shall
be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken
place.
   B.   Receivership: The grantor shall have the right to cancel this franchise
subject to any applicable provisions of state law, including the bankruptcy
act, one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless
such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
      1.   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his election or
appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have complied with all the material
provisions of this franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
      2.   Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred twenty (120) days,
shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having
jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and
agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this franchise. (Ord. 255,
10-6-2003)
6-3-14: REMOVAL, TRANSFER AND PURCHASE:
   A.   Removal After Revocation:
      1.   Upon revocation of the franchise, as provided for herein, the
grantee shall proceed to remove, at the grantee's expense, all or any portion
of the system from all streets and public property within the territorial
boundaries of the grantor. In so removing the system, the grantee shall be
responsible for any repairs or damages caused by its removal and shall maintain
insurance during the term of removal.
      2.   If the grantee has failed to commence removal of the system, or such
part thereof as was designated within thirty (30) days after written notice of
the grantor's demand for removal is given, or if the grantee has failed to
complete such removal within one year after written notice of the grantor's
demand for removal is given, the grantee may abandon such system to the
grantor.
   B.   Franchise Binding: This franchise shall be binding on successors,
assigns, and transferees. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-15: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Laws: The grantee and the grantor shall conform to all
state and federal laws and rules regarding cable service as they become
effective, unless otherwise stated. The grantee shall also conform during the
entire term of the franchise with all generally applicable ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted pursuant to
the grantor's lawful police powers that do not materially impair or abrogate
any of the grantee's contractual rights under this franchise and that are not
preempted by state or federal law.
   B.   Separability: If any term, condition or provision of this franchise or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be
held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application
of such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than
those as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be
affected thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions and
conditions hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and to
be complied with. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the
provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
the law, rules and regulations then in effect, said provision shall thereupon
return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the grantee
and the grantor.
   C.   Administration Of Franchise: This franchise is a contract and, except
as to those changes which are the result of the grantor's exercise of its
police power in management of its rights of way and its generally applicable
regulation of commerce, neither party may take any unilateral action which
materially changes the explicit mutual promises in this contract. Any changes
to the franchise must be made in writing, signed by grantee and grantor.
   D.   Franchise Requirement: In accordance with applicable law, from and
after the acceptance of the franchise, the grantor shall not allow and it shall
be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any street
within the territorial boundaries of the grantor, or within any other public
property of the grantor, or within any privately owned area within the
territorial limits of the grantor which has not yet become a public street but
is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative
subdivision map approved by the grantor, or the grantor's official map or the
grantor's major thoroughfare plan, any equipment or facilities for distributing
any cable service through a cable system, unless a franchise authorizing such
use of such street or property or areas has first been obtained.
   E.   Reservation Of Rights: Acceptance of the terms and conditions of this
franchise will not constitute, or be deemed to constitute, a waiver, either
expressly or impliedly, by the grantee of any constitutional or legal right
which it may have or may be determined to have, either by subsequent
legislation or court decisions. The grantor hereby acknowledges that the
grantee reserves all of its rights under applicable federal and state
constitution laws and regulations.
   F.   Force Majeure: With respect to any provision of this franchise chapter,
the violation, or noncompliance with, which could result in the imposition of a
financial penalty, forfeiture or other sanction upon the grantee, such
violation or noncompliance will be excused where such violation or
noncompliance is the result of an inability to secure materials, an act of God,
war, civil disturbance, strike or other labor unrest, or any event beyond the
grantee's reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable.
   G.   Captions: The subsection captions and headings in this franchise are
for convenience and reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the
meaning or interpretation of this franchise.
   H.   Calculation Of Time: Where the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, payment or thing is required hereunder and the period of time or
duration for the performance thereof is prescribed and fixed herein, the time
shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the
prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the period
falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted from
the computation.
   I.   Written Notice: All notices, reports or demands required to be given in
writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered
personally to the person designated below, or when five (5) days have elapsed
after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with
registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, or on the next business
day if sent by express mail or overnight air courier addressed to the party to
which notice is being given, as follows:
 
                Mayor, City of Athol
If to grantor:  PO Box 249
                Athol, ID 83801
                Adelphia Communications Corporation
If to grantee:  Attn: Legal Department
                One North Main Street
                Coudersport, PA 16915
                Kootenai Cable, Inc.
With a copy to: General Manager
                2305 W. Kathleen
                Coeur d'Alene, ID 83815
 
Such addresses and phone numbers may be changed by either party upon notice to
the other party given as provided in this section.
   J.   Entire Agreement: This franchise contains the entire understanding
between the parties with respect to the subject matter hereof and supersedes
all other prior understandings and agreements, oral or written. This agreement
may not be modified except in writing signed by both parties. (Ord. 255, 10-6-
2003)
6-3-16: PUBLICATION:
This franchise shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The
franchise shall be published in accordance with the requirements of the grantor
and state law and shall take effect upon acceptance by the grantee as set forth
in section
6-3-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
6-3-17: ACCEPTANCE:
The grantor by virtue of the signatures on said ordinance and the grantee by
virtue of the signatures set forth on said ordinance, agree to be legally bound
by all provisions and conditions set forth in this chapter, together forming a
mutually binding contractual agreement which cannot be amended without a
writing executed by both parties. (Ord. 255, 10-6-2003)
CHAPTER 4
SNOW REMOVAL
SECTION:
6-4-1: Short Title
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Power Of Maintenance Superintendent
6-4-4: Prohibited Acts
6-4-5: Penalty
6-4-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ATHOL SNOW REMOVAL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 270, 7-
1-2008)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
SNOW ACCUMULATION: Any accumulation of four (4) or more inches of snow falling
within a twenty four (24) hour period.
STREET: Any improved and maintained public right-of-way, including the shoulder
used for vehicle traffic or parking.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person hired by the City as its maintenance employee. (Ord.
416, 3-21-2018)
6-4-3: POWER OF MAINTENANCE SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   At any time after a snow accumulation the Superintendent or Mayor may
declare to commence plowing operations, which time shall be duly recorded.
   B.   A snow accumulation shall remain in effect until terminated by the
Superintendent or the Mayor.
   C.   During a snow accumulation, the Superintendent is empowered to direct
the removal of any vehicle or other object in a street that in the
Superintendent's judgment impedes plowing operation. The means and manner of
such removal are in the discretion of the Superintendent. (Ord. 270, 7-1-2008)
6-4-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave a parked vehicle
or other object upon a street within the City during a snow accumulation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle or other object
parked or left on a street after a snow accumulation to fail to immediately
remove the vehicle or object upon being directed by the Superintendent to do
so.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to block, stop, or otherwise impede any snow
plowing vehicle or snow plowing operation conducted by or on behalf of the
City.
(Ord. 270, 7-1-2008; Ord. 422, 1-15-2019)
6-4-5: PENALTY:
   A.   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction.
   B.   The owner of any vehicle or object removed from a street at the
direction of the Superintendent during a snow emergency shall be liable for all
costs incurred for that removal. (Ord. 270, 7-1-2008)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYFIELDS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Authority For Posted Regulations
6-5-2: Glass And Litter
6-5-3: Alcoholic Beverage Prohibitions
6-5-4: Camping
6-5-5: Park Hours
6-5-6: Fires And Fireworks
6-5-7: Animals In Parks Or Playfields Restricted
6-5-8: Use Of Vehicles Restricted
6-5-9: Funerals Prohibited
6-5-10: Penalties
6-5-11: Severability, Preemption And Precedence
6-5-12: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
6-5-1: AUTHORITY FOR POSTED REGULATIONS:
   A.   The City of Athol shall have ultimate authority to establish and post
rules and regulations, in addition to those set forth in this chapter, at
public parks and playfields in order to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of residents and citizens. For the purpose of this chapter a
"playfield" shall mean any property set aside by the City of Athol for
baseball, softball, soccer, football or other outdoor sports or recreational
activities.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person in any public park or playfield to
violate any posted regulations. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-2: GLASS AND LITTER:
It is unlawful for any person to cause to be deposited on the premises of any
public park or playfield any glass container or litter of any type, except in
designated trash receptacles. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-5-3: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to consume any beer, intoxicating liquor or wine,
or to have in their possession any open containers or receptacles containing
any beer, intoxicating liquor or wine in any public park or playfield. Special
exceptions to this prohibition may be granted by express authority of the City
Council when the use or activity is of general community benefit or of
particular benefit to the City. Approval of any such exception shall be
evidenced by a permit or letter of authorization to that effect which shall be
exhibited to any employee of the City upon request. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-4: CAMPING:
It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, or use any equipment,
facilities, accessories, or appliances for camping purposes or overnight
sleeping in any public park or playfield. Special exceptions to this
prohibition in the form of overnight camping permission authorization may be
granted by express authority of the City Council when the use or activity is of
general community benefit or of particular benefit to the City. Approval of any
such exception shall be evidenced by a permit or letter of authorization to
that effect which shall be exhibited to any employee of the City upon request.
Appeal of any denial of such a request may be made to the Council. (Ord. 405,
10-20-2015)
6-5-5: PARK HOURS:
It is unlawful for any person to be in any public park or playfield between
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-6: FIRES AND FIREWORKS:
   A.   It is unlawful to possess or use fireworks of any kind in any public
park or playfield.
   B.   It is unlawful to have an open fire in any place in any public park or
playfield in an area that is not specifically designated by the City for such
use by the installation by the City of a fire pit or an outdoor cooking
facility. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-7: ANIMALS IN PARKS OR PLAYFIELDS RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful to bring, harbor or be in control of any domestic animal,
including dogs or cats, exotic animals or farm animals upon the premises of any
public park or playfield, whether such animals are on a leash or not, except
for animals trained and used as service animals. This restriction shall not
apply to specially designated and signed parks, or to organized animal shows or
competitions sanctioned by a bona fide breeders' or owners' association which
has been granted permission for such event or show by the City Council when the
use or activity is of general community benefit or of particular benefit to the
City. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-8: USE OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in control of any motor
vehicle, except for park maintenance and emergency vehicles, in any public park
or playfield except on designated or established roadways or vehicle drives
within said public park or playfield unless said person is operating or
controlling said vehicle pursuant to a valid authorization from the Council or
Mayor. For the purpose of this chapter, "motor vehicle" shall be any
automobile, truck, motorcycle, moped, motorbike or any other vehicle which
travels on wheels or tracks and is driven by an engine or motor. If such an
authorization is granted, the Council may impose any restriction deemed
necessary to protect the condition of the public park or playfield or to
protect the public safety. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-9: FUNERALS PROHIBITED:
Funeral services that include the presence of human remains are prohibited in
any public park or playfield. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-10: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any rules issued
hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for up to one hundred eighty (180)
days, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-11: SEVERABILITY, PREEMPTION AND PRECEDENCE:
This chapter is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this
chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry
out the purpose(s) of this chapter before the declaration of partial
invalidity. In the event that Federal or State laws, rules or regulations
preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this chapter,
then the provision shall be read to be preempted only to the extent and for the
time required by law. In the event such Federal or State law, rule or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so
that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such
provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter
be binding without the requirement of further action by the City, and any
amendments to this chapter adopted as a result of such provision being
preempted shall no longer be of any force or effect with respect to that
provision. (Ord. 405, 10-20-2015)
6-5-12: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter to the extent of such conflict are hereby repealed. (Ord. 405, 10-20-
2015)
CHAPTER 6
STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Excavation/Encroachment Permits
6-6-2: Deposits On Roads, Streets And Highways
6-6-3: Parking Within Public Rights-Of-Way
6-6-4: Access From Private Property To Public Streets
6-6-1: EXCAVATION/ENCROACHMENT PERMITS:
In order to maintain or improve water and sewer systems and other underground
utilities, it is sometimes necessary to excavate within the public rights-of-
way for streets and alleys of the City.
   A.   Except as exempted herein, any person excavating within a public right-
of-way shall notify the City Clerk prior to performing such work, pay the
necessary fees and obtain a right- of-way encroachment permit. In the event of
any emergency, the responsible party may respond and shall notify the City
Clerk within twenty four (24) hours. Encroachments that are expressly permitted
in conjunction with a site disturbance or building location permit and clearly
delineated on the site plan as work within the public right-of-way are not
required to obtain a permit under this section. Regardless of the type of
permit covering the work, compliance with all other requirements of this
section shall be required.
   B.   Notification to the Clerk shall include the date, street address,
number of square feet involved in the excavation and a diagram showing the
nature of the work. The City Clerk shall keep accurate records containing the
foregoing information.
   C.   The right-of-way, street or alley shall be restored to a condition as
good or better than the condition prior to excavation or cutting of the surface
by the person causing the excavation. All work shall be done in a good and
workmanlike manner within ninety (90) days of the date the surface was
disturbed.
   D.   The City may deny encroachment permits where, due to weather
conditions, the site cannot be restored within the ninety (90) day period. The
City may also deny such permits, if the encroachment will result in an unsafe
condition, endangers other improvements, or is otherwise not in the public
interest. Denial of a permit may be appealed in accordance with section
1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
6-6-2: DEPOSITS ON ROADS, STREETS AND HIGHWAYS:
   A.   Secured Loads: No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, road
or highway unless the vehicle is so constructed, covered or loaded as to
prevent: 1) any of its contents or load from dropping, sifting or leaking, and
2) the possibility of any of its contents or load from blowing, spilling or
otherwise escaping therefrom.
   B.   Improper Disposal:
      1.   No person shall throw or deposit nor shall the registered owner or
the driver, if such owner is not present in the vehicle, aid or abet in the
throwing or depositing upon any road, street or highway any bottle, can,
garbage, construction debris, yard waste or any substance likely to injure or
damage traffic using the roadways.
      2.   No person shall place, deposit or dump any rocks, refuse, garbage,
yard waste, construction debris, snow, ice, brush, limbs, stumps or dirt in or
on any road, street or highway, including any portion of the right-of-way
thereof, without the consent of the State or local agency having jurisdiction
over the road, street or highway.
   C.   Remedies:
      1.   Any person who drops, dumps, deposits, places or throws, or causes
or permits to be dropped, dumped, deposited, placed or thrown upon any road,
street or highway any material described in the preceding subsection shall
immediately remove the same or cause the same to be removed.
      2.   If such person fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C1
of this section, the governmental agency responsible for the maintenance of the
road, street, or highway on which the material has been deposited may remove
such material and collect, by civil action, if necessary, the actual cost of
the removal operation in addition to any other damages authorized by law from
the person made responsible under subsection C1 of this section.
   D.   Penalties: Violation of this section or any part thereof shall be a
misdemeanor subject to punishment to the maximum allowed by Idaho Code. (Ord.
410, 1-17-2017)
6-6-3: PARKING WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Parking Prohibited: Parking of motor vehicles is generally prohibited
within the publicly maintained rights-of-way in the City, unless signs are
erected by the City specifically stating that parking is allowed in a defined
area.
   B.   Prohibited Activity: Unlicensed or inoperable vehicles are prohibited
from parking within public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the City has
specifically allowed motor vehicle parking in a defined area. Trailers of any
type, which are not attached to a properly licensed and operable motor vehicle
capable of legally towing said trailer are also prohibited. Placement or
storage of any other material, parts, garbage or other items within public
rights-of-way is strictly prohibited.
   C.   Enforcement And Penalty:
      1.   A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an
infraction.
      2.   The City Maintenance Superintendent or Mayor is empowered to direct
the removal of any unauthorized vehicle, trailer, or other object. The owner of
any vehicle or object removed from the right-of-way at the direction of the
Superintendent or Mayor shall be liable for all costs incurred for that
removal, including but not limited to towing, storage, and City administrative
costs. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 442, - -2023)
6-6-4: ACCESS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY TO PUBLIC STREETS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   All vehicular approaches (private, common, commercial or public
driveways) shall obtain an approach permit, prior to construction of the
approach.
      2.   A single approach for a residential parcel is exempt from the
requirement for a separate approach permit, when shown on the site plan and
submitted as part of the building location permit for the primary structure.
All the requirements of the approach standards herein shall continue to apply.
   B.   Permit Application: No approach permit under this chapter shall be
issued unless a written application for the issuance of an approach permit is
submitted to the City. The application shall be reviewed by the City. For new
commercial approaches that are anticipated to experience significant traffic
volume, as determined by the City, traffic studies and mitigation measures may
be required prior to or in conjunction with permit approval. Prior to permit
issuance, the applicant shall mark the driveway location for a site inspection
by the City. The City Clerk shall issue the permit only after all application
items have been completed or satisfactorily addressed, all reviews have been
completed and all fees have been paid.
   C.   Approach Standards:
      1.   The number of approaches serving an individual lot or parcel may be
restricted to a single two-way approach, and in some cases, common driveways
serving two (2) or more lots may be required.
      2.   The width of a single private residential driveway approach shall be
a minimum of fourteen feet (14') and a maximum of twenty four feet (24'), and
shall meet the requirements of the fire protection district.
      3.   Common residential driveways or approaches that access two or more
lots or parcels, and commercial accesses shall have a minimum width of twenty
feet (20'), and a maximum width of twenty eight feet (28'). Where additional
lanes are required to accommodate turning traffic, an approach may be up to
forty feet (40') in width when justified by an appropriate traffic study.
   D.   Permit Fees: Fees for an approach permit and inspections related to
such permits shall as set forth in the duly adopted fee resolution for the
City. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
CHAPTER 7
PARADES, PUBLIC EVENTS AND ASSEMBLY
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Permit Required
6-7-3: Exceptions To Permit Requirement
6-7-4: Application And Proper Notice
6-7-5: Contents Of Permit Application
6-7-6: Application Fee
6-7-7: Standards For Issuance
6-7-8: Notice Of Determination Of Application
6-7-9: Conditional Approval
6-7-10: Appeal Procedure
6-7-11: Duties Of Permittee
6-7-12: Time, Place, And Manner Restrictions
6-7-13: Violation; Penalties
6-7-14: Emergency Cancellation; Termination
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings set out in this section:
                 Any person applying for a "permit" as defined herein. The true
APPLICANT:       applicant for any such permit shall be the sponsoring entity
                 whether such sponsoring entity is an individual person, a
                 corporation, a partnership or other legal entity of any type.
CITY CLERK:      The clerk of the city or the clerk's authorized designee.
                 A gathering or meeting of fifty (50) or more people with or
EVENT:           without vendors, including weddings, birthdays, reunions, and
                 class reunions.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Timberlake Fire Protection District.
                 Any dash, demonstration, march, marathon, meeting, motorcade,
                 parade, procession, public assembly, race, rally, or like
                 activity consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a
PARADE:          combination thereof within the city with an intent of
                 attracting public attention or achieving some other expressive
                 purpose which might interfere with or has the potential to
                 interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon
                 the streets.
                 The permit as required by this chapter for a "parade", "public
PERMIT:          assembly" or "event" as defined herein. An approved
                 application will serve as the permit.
                 Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
PERMITTEE:       company or organization of any kind granted a permit for an
                 activity regulated by this chapter.
PERSON:          Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
                 company or organization of any kind.
                 Any meeting, demonstration, rally or gathering of fifty (50)
                 or more persons for a common purpose as a result of prior
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: planning that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere
                 with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular
                 traffic or occupies any street or other public property
                 managed by the city of Athol, including parks.
SHERIFF:         The Kootenai County sheriff or the sheriff's authorized
                 designee.
SIDEWALK:        Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for
                 purpose of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
                 Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
STREET:          primary purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or
                 shoulder, parkway, right of way, or median strip thereof.
                 (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
 
6-7-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, participate in, or conduct any "parade", "public
assembly" or "event" as defined by this chapter unless a permit has been issued
by the city clerk for the date and location involved. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Funeral processions;
   B.   Government agencies acting within the scope of their function;
   C.   Regular park usage by family, charitable, fraternal or other groups in
the ordinary traditional use of the park, when the anticipated number of
participants is less than fifty (50) where no vendors are present;
   D.   Community block watch events that are organized and working with
Kootenai County Sheriff's Office or city government;
   E.   Students going to and from classes or participating in educational
activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities;
   F.   Other activities sponsored by the city of Athol in its municipal
capacity. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-4: APPLICATION AND PROPER NOTICE:
A person seeking a parade/event permit shall obtain an application form and
file a completed application with the city clerk on forms provided.
An application for a permit shall be filed with the city clerk as soon as the
applicant knows sufficient information to complete an application and at least
thirty (30) days and not more than one year before a parade or public assembly
is proposed to commence. The time frame set forth herein may be waived in the
discretion of the city clerk for good cause and upon a finding that such waiver
would not compromise the ability of the city to prepare for the activity for
which the permit is requested.
Good cause may be shown when the parade or event is related to an unanticipated
or recently announced or occurring event and the application for permit or
public assembly can be processed in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter in sufficient time to allow the parade or event to proceed as scheduled
without causing fiscal or operational hardship to the city's operations.
This section is subject to amendment or replacement at any time, and any
application for a parade or event permit shall be issued pursuant to the
ordinance in effect at the time of application, but conduct during the parade
or assembly shall be governed by standards of behavior legally required at the
time the event occurs. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-5: CONTENTS OF PERMIT APPLICATION:
Each permit application shall state at least the following, and the applicant
shall adhere to and be bound by any commitments made in an application
submittal:
   A.   The full name, street address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
facsimile number, if any, of the person or organization sponsoring the parade
or event;
   B.   The name, street address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
facsimile number, if any, of the person in charge of the parade or event;
   C.   The date when the parade or event is to be conducted;
   D.   The name of the parade or event, if any;
   E.   The time the parade or event will begin to form, and the time the
parade or event will begin movement;
   F.   The place the parade or event will form;
   G.   The route of the parade or event selected from the preapproved routes
maintained by the city clerk;
   H.   The place the parade or event will disband;
   I.   The approximate number of participants, not including spectators, who
will participate in the parade or event and the maximum number who will be
allowed to participate;
   J.   The number of marchers, animals, floats, automobiles, or other vehicles
in the parade or event;
   K.   The prior parade or event history of the applicant within Athol, or the
state of Idaho history if no Athol history exists, including the number of
permits previously applied for;
   L.   A thoroughly documented plan for controlling disorderly or violent
conduct if such might reasonably be expected, a plan for maintaining traffic
flow to commercial and other establishments, a plan for sanitary and medical
facilities, and for cleanup;
   M.   Attach the required certificate of insurance, if applicable, as set
forth elsewhere within this chapter;
   N.   Identify any requested exception from any requirement established by
this chapter premised upon the unique circumstances associated with the parade/
event for which application has been made;
   O.   Any other information required by the city clerk or sheriff to enable
them to understand the impacts of the proposed parade or event. (Ord. 430, 11-
17-2020)
6-7-6: APPLICATION FEE:
A non-refundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of the city
council to cover the expenses incident to processing the application for parade
or event permit shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of filing of the
application. This fee is not refundable unless the application is withdrawn on
the same date it is submitted. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-7: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to set forth
the standards of issuance for a parade or event permit. It is further the
purpose of these regulations to:
      1.   Assure that emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance
services are available for a parade or event taking place within the corporate
limits of the city of Athol; and
      2.   Assure that emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance
services are not unreasonably inhibited in their ability to travel on and to
cross public streets or property used by parades or events; and
      3.   Assure that private business activities in Athol are not
unreasonably impacted by parades or events; and
      4.   Assure that traffic on public streets is not unreasonably disturbed
or disrupted by parades or events; and
      5.   Assure that public safety can be maintained; and
      6.   Assure that public property can be protected from harm.
   B.   Permit Issuance: Only one parade or event permit will be granted for
the same calendar day unless absolute assurance can be provided that the
permitted events will not conflict and that public service obligations will not
exceed the fiscal and operational limits of city personnel. The city clerk
shall issue the permit on a first come, first served basis. Except for the city
and other public agencies, individual persons/organizations/corporations shall
be limited to one parade and/or one public assembly per month. Prior to
issuance of the permit for any group over fifty (50) people where vendors will
be present for a public event, the applicant shall provide a certificate of
liability insurance in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00). Private events such as weddings, birthdays or family reunions
shall not be required to provide insurance.
   C.   Health District Requirement: No permit shall be granted unless the
applicant obtains the approval of Panhandle Health District indicating that the
applicants for the permit have complied with the health requirements of such
district for like or similar facilities. Such approval shall include the type
and adequacy of water supply to be provided, the type and adequacy of toilet,
waste collection and washing facilities to be provided, and if there is food or
drink served on the premises, the type and adequacy of food and drink
preparation, and food and drink service facilities to be provided.
   D.   Application Form; Approval: Affected city departments, if any, may
request such information from the applicant as necessary to demonstrate
compliance with applicable provisions of law. Information may be requested on
the permit application form, through written instructions communicated from the
city clerk, or through written or oral inquiries addressed to the applicant by
any designated city staff member. The time for considering the permit may be
extended by the time taken by the applicant in responding satisfactorily to any
inquiry, not to exceed five (5) business days.
   E.   Discrimination Prohibited: There shall be no discrimination in
granting, denying, or conditionally granting permits under this chapter based
upon statutorily protected or constitutionally guaranteed individual rights.
   F.   Permit Denial: The city clerk may deny a permit if the applicant or the
person on whose behalf the application is made has on prior occasions made
material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of a parade or event
previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on
behalf of the applicant; or if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the
application was made has on prior occasions damaged city property and not paid
in full for such damage.
   G.   Additional Reasons For Denial; Halting Of Event: A permit may be denied
where the city clerk, upon the advice of the City Council, sheriff, or fire
department determines that the parade would unreasonably disrupt traffic or
public services or where there is clear and convincing evidence that the
applicant, not opponents of the applicant, intends to engage in violence and
that the time, place, and manner of the event cannot be adjusted such that the
city will be able to control such potential violence without injury to
bystanders, participants, or police. A parade or event may be halted by the
sheriff or fire department if at any time participants fail to conform to the
permit or if an imminent risk of violence arises in the course of the parade or
event. No application for a permit shall issue if the applicant fails to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of law, including the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-8: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION:
The city clerk shall act upon the application for a permit promptly after the
filing thereof accompanied by the applicant's submission of complete
information. The clerk shall make a reasonable effort to notify the applicant,
by facsimile, personal service, or certified mail, of any notice of denial or
conditional approval and the reason(s) for denial or conditions as soon as
practical upon the clerk's decision. Such decision shall be made with a
promptness adequate to allow an opportunity for appeal pursuant to provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-9: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
The city clerk may authorize the conduct of the parade or event requiring a
permit at a date, time, place or in a manner different from that named by the
applicant and may tender a conditional permit setting forth proposed modified
terms which differ from those set forth in the application. An applicant
desiring to accept a conditional permit shall, within five (5) days after
notice of the action of the city clerk, file a written notice of acceptance
with the city clerk. If the applicant fails to provide written notice of
acceptance of the conditional permit within the time prescribed, the parade or
event shall not be held. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the clerk's denial of a permit or
imposition of conditions to the city council. The denied applicant must make
any appeal within forty eight (48) hours after receipt of the denial or
conditional approval from the city clerk by filing a written notice of appeal
with the city clerk setting out the reasons therefor in writing. The city
council will hear the appeal at a regular or special meeting, when available,
and reach a determination prior to the planned date and time of the parade/
public assembly, and in each instance no more than ten (10) business days after
the date the notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk unless a quorum of
the city council cannot be obtained. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-11: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit conditions and with all
federal, state and local laws. The following shall be attached to the parade or
event application:
   A.   Approval of the Panhandle Health District indicating that the applicant
has met all of the health requirements of the district for like or similar
facilities.
   B.   If sponsor operated motor vehicles are involved, proof of comprehensive
automobile liability insurance from an insurance company authorized to do
business in Idaho. This coverage shall be in the amount required by Idaho Code.
The city clerk may require a higher limit when in the opinion of the city clerk
or sheriff the event demands a higher limit. Such reasons for higher limits
shall be set forth in writing.
   C.   A performance bond may be required to guarantee damage repair to any
structure within the public right of way or other public property, if in the
opinion of the city clerk the nature of the activity is likely to cause damage
to city property. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-12: TIME, PLACE, AND MANNER RESTRICTIONS:
The following prohibitions and regulations shall apply to activities requiring
a permit:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of, a duly permitted activity requiring a permit to knowingly fail
to comply with any condition of the permit.
   B.   No permit shall be issued for a parade or event to commence before
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. All parades and/or public assemblies shall terminate
prior to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. No parade requiring a permit shall exceed
two (2) hours in length. City street setup and dispersal, including barricade
removal, shall not be included in the activity time limit.
   C.   All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at the time and
location designated in the parade permit and shall disperse from public
property after the conclusion of the parade in order that regular traffic
patterns might be restored.
   D.   Parade or assembly organizers shall assure to the satisfaction of the
sheriff: 1) do not intend to engage in violence or other unlawful conduct, and
2) do not intend to incite others to do so.
   E.   The permit may limit or condition the number of participants, the
length of the event, the time and location of the event, or the manner of the
event where necessary to prevent violence; to avoid serious inconvenience to
those needing access to commercial or public services; to avoid interference
with movement of police or fire vehicles or ambulances and where such
limitations or conditions provide ample opportunity for exercise of
constitutionally protected rights.
   F.   The permit may require that the applicant provide water supply and/or
toilet, waste collection and washing facilities for participants and attendees
of the parade or event. Permittee is required to work with the health district
if additional portable facilities are required. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-13: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or who, having obtained a permit hereunder, fails to comply with the
conditions set forth in the approved permit is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in subsection
1-4-1A of this code. (Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
6-7-14: EMERGENCY CANCELLATION; TERMINATION:
Notwithstanding issuance of a permit pursuant to provisions of this chapter,
the mayor is authorized to revoke a parade/event permit if the mayor
determines, based upon competent evidence, that the conduct of the parade or
event would bring about violence which would, with reasonable certainty, result
in injury to the public or to public safety personnel or which would result in
damage to private property. Any such cancellation shall be communicated to the
sponsor/applicant as soon as possible after such determination has been made.
(Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
TITLE 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Septic System Permits
7-1-2: Building Location/Land Use Permits/Plot Plan
7-1-3: Site Disturbance Permits
7-1-4: Portable Restroom Required
7-1-1: SEPTIC SYSTEM PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to implement the Sewage
Management Agreement with the Panhandle Health District. It is not intended to
substitute for or duplicate the Health District's permitting process.
   B.   Agency Coordination: As required in the Sewage Management Agreement,
the Panhandle Health District will not issue any subsurface sewage permits
within the City until a written notice is received from the City approving the
application and dwelling equivalent allotment. Upon receipt of notice from the
Health District of a permit application, the City shall review the permit for
compliance with the City's dwelling equivalent allotment and review the
location of the proposed system for conflicts with the City's water system. The
City shall promptly notify the district in writing of its decision on the
application, and in the case of denial, the reason(s) for denial. If the permit
is approved by the City, it shall be added to the City's schedule for periodic
septic tank pumpouts, if applicable.
   C.   Fee For Review: The City may charge a fee for the review of such
permits in accordance with the City's adopted fee resolution. (Ord. 410, 1-17-
2017)
7-1-2: BUILDING LOCATION/LAND USE PERMITS/PLOT PLAN:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this title, no land
use shall be established nor shall any structure be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, set, placed, installed, enlarged, extended, moved or converted
without first procuring a building location permit prior to the start of
construction. The City may charge a fee for such permits in accordance with the
City's adopted fee resolution.
   B.   Exceptions To Permit Requirements:
      1.   Fences not greater than six feet (6') in height and complying with
the dimensional requirements of this Code.
      2.   An accessory, non-habitable structure used for storage or for
keeping of animals with not more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor
area. Portable carport structures and the like, commonly composed of vinyl or
plastic tarp over a pole frame, shall not require a permit unless greater than
two hundred (200) square feet in size. The exception to the permit requirement
does not except any such structures from meeting the setback requirements of
the applicable zone.
   C.   Application And Plot Plan: All applicants for building location permits
are required to submit a completed application, on a form provided by the City.
In addition, a plot plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted showing the
following items:
      1.   Lot lines;
      2.   Easements on the property, if known;
      3.   Septic tanks and drainfields;
      4.   Water and electrical lines;
      5.   All existing and planned structures on the property;
      6.   Distances to property lines and between structures or other
improvements.
   D.   Review For Code Compliance: Prior to issuance of the permit, the
Administrator shall review the application and plot plan to ensure the proposed
structure complies with setbacks, use restrictions, and other requirements of
this Code. Permit applications found not to comply with this Code shall be
denied. Parcels with existing Code violations shall not be eligible for
building location/land use permits, unless the requested permit is necessary to
rectify the Code violation.
   E.   Inspection Required: At any time prior to construction, during
construction, or after construction is complete, the Administrator may conduct
inspections as necessary to verify the construction is in compliance with the
permit and this Code. If the work is found not to be in compliance, the
Administrator may "stop work" on the site, in accordance with the enforcement
procedures of section
8-2-2 of this Code.
   F.   Permit Expiration Or Abandonment: Building location permits shall
expire if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six (6)
months from the date of issuance of the permit, or if the work authorized by
the permit is not completed within one year from the date of issuance of the
permit. Before work can re-start on any partially completed structure where the
permit has expired, a new permit must be obtained, including payment of new
permit fees.
   G.   Permit Extension: Prior to expiration of the permit, a permittee may
request one extension of the permit by filing an extension request with the
Administrator demonstrating good cause for the request. The Administrator may
extend the permit for one year. No permit shall be extended more than once.
(Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
7-1-3: SITE DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this
section, a site disturbance permit shall be required prior to the start of
construction for the following activities:
      1.   Construction of new driveways, parking lots, private or public
roads, or infrastructure authorized through the subdivision or special use
permit process;
      2.   Excavation for the construction of structures, where such structure
has not been issued a building location permit, if one is required for such
structure;
      3.   All other excavation and grading activity.
   B.   Exceptions To Permit Requirements:
      1.   Cemetery graves.
      2.   Installation or repair of utility lines including, but not limited
to water and sanitary sewer lines, electrical lines and natural gas lines.
      3.   Installation or repair of septic tanks and drainfields when properly
permitted by Panhandle Health District.
      4.   Road, driveway or parking lot maintenance where work is limited to
the existing road surface.
      5.   In any twelve (12) month period, excavation or placement of fill
less than fifty (50) cubic yards in volume.
      6.   Excavation for the construction of a structure for which a valid
building location permit has been issued.
      7.   Any activities undertaken or performed by a governmental entity.
   C.   Application And Plot Plan: All applicants for site disturbance permits
are required to submit a completed application, on a form provided by the City.
In addition, a plot plan, drawn to scale, shall be submitted showing the
following items:
      1.   Lot lines;
      2.   Easements on the property, if known;
      3.   Septic tanks and drainfields;
      4.   Water and electrical lines;
      5.   All existing and planned structures on the property;
      6.   Location and extent of the site disturbing activity;
      7.   Distances to property lines and between structures or other
improvements. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
   D.   Review For Code Compliance: Prior to issuance of the permit, the
Administrator shall review the application and plot plan to ensure the proposed
work meets the requirements of this Code. Permit applications found not to
comply with this Code shall be denied. Parcels with existing Code violations
shall not be eligible for site disturbance permits, unless the requested permit
is necessary to rectify the Code violation. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
   E.   Inspection Required: At any time prior to construction, during
construction, or after construction is complete, the Administrator may conduct
inspections as necessary to verify the construction is in compliance with the
permit and this Code. If the work is found not to be in compliance, the
Administrator may "stop work" on the site, in accordance with the enforcement
procedures of section
8-2-2 of this Code. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
   F.   Permit Expiration Or Abandonment: Site disturbance permits shall expire
if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within six (6) months
from the date of issuance of the permit, or if the work authorized by the
permit is not completed within one year from the date of issuance of the
permit. Before work can re-start on any partially completed project where the
permit has expired, a new permit must be obtained, including payment of new
permit fees. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
   G.   Permit Extension: Prior to expiration of the permit, a permittee may
request one extension of the permit by filing an extension request with the
Administrator demonstrating good cause for the request. The Administrator may
extend the permit for one year. No permit shall be extended more than once.
(Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
7-1-4: PORTABLE RESTROOM REQUIRED:
Portable restroom facilities shall be required on all active construction sites
that have been issued a building location/land use permit or a site disturbance
permit. Sites with existing restroom facilities that are available to the
contractors working on-site are exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 442, - -
2023)
TITLE 8
PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Title
8-1-2: Purpose
8-1-3: Interpretation
8-1-4: Definitions
8-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall consist of this text and the official zoning map and together
shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF ATHOL PLANNING AND ZONING
ORDINANCE. The official zoning map will be designated by affixing the date of
adoption and the signature of the Mayor and attest of the City Clerk-Treasurer.
The map will be maintained and kept in the City Hall. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to designate and regulate the location and use of
buildings, structures, and land to protect residential, commercial, industrial,
and recreation/open space areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible
uses. To achieve these purposes, the City is divided into zones of such number,
shape, and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the regulations of
this title and provide for their enforcement. Such regulations are deemed
necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of the land; to
conserve and enhance the value of property; to maximize the quality of the
environment; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air; to provide
protection against fires; to provide housing for all economic and social
segments of the community; to conserve and improve the condition of the
existing affordable housing stock and preserve existing housing and
neighborhoods; to regulate and encourage uses and development consistent with
the provisions for community utilities and facilities such as transportation,
water, septic (and future sewer), electricity, parks, and other public
requirements; all in order to promote and protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare and economic viability of the community in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The provisions of this title shall be held to be
minimum requirements for promotion of the health, safety, and general welfare
of the public. Therefore, where this title imposes a greater restriction upon
the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires
larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other laws, ordinances,
codes, easements, regulations, or covenants, the provisions of this title shall
control.
   B.   Violation Or Noncompliance: Nothing in this title shall be interpreted
as permitting violation of or noncompliance with the regulations of this title
or any change whatsoever which would further violate the provisions of this
title or intensify an existing substandard noncompliance condition.
   C.   Enforcement According To Official Zoning Map: The text of this title
shall be administered, interpreted, and enforced in accordance with the
official zoning map.
   D.   Requests For Rulings And Interpretations: Requests for rulings and
interpretations as to the meaning, intent, or proper general applications of
this title to development and use of land or structures shall be made in
written form by any interested citizen or public official. The City Council
shall submit a ruling or interpretation in writing and in a timely fashion to
the person submitting the request.
   E.   Zone Boundary Interpretations: In case of any questions as to the
location of any boundary line between zoning classifications, a request for
interpretation of the official zoning map must be made in writing to the City
Council. A determination shall be made by the City Council, and the ruling or
interpretation shall be submitted in writing to the person submitting the
request. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   "Lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel" or "tract".
   B.   "Person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
   C.   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive; and "should" is a preferred
requirement.
   D.   "Used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended", "designated" or
"arranged to be used" or "occupied".
   E.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
   F.   Terms used in this title, but which are not defined herein, shall be
construed as defined in the Idaho Code, or Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and terms, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings given herein:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A detached subordinate building or structure,
the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building(s) or
use(s) on the same lot. Portable storage container, as defined in this section,
shall not be included in the definition of accessory building or structure.
ACCESSORY LIVING UNIT: A building or portion(s) of a building, located on the
same lot, but separate from the principal dwelling with habitable space and any
combination of sink, toilet, kitchen, or bathing facility that could enable the
residential occupation of the structure or portion of the structure. A garage,
shop or storage building with a toilet and a sink shall not be considered an
accessory living unit.
ACCESSORY USE: On the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
ADMINISTRATOR: Mayor of the City, who shall have the authority to delegate Code
administration to an employee or contractor of the City with appropriate skills
and experience for the task, also as defined at subsection
1-6-6B8 of this Code.
AGRICULTURAL USES: Uses producing field crops, including, but not limited to,
grains, feed crops, fruits, and vegetables.
ALLEY: An unnamed public right-of-way, twenty feet (20') or less in width, that
is primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the rear or side of those
properties whose principal means of access is via an abutting public street.
ALTERATION OR ALTERED: Any change or modification in the construction of a
building or structure, other than for repairs.
AUTO WRECKING, JUNK, AND/OR SALVAGE YARDS:
   A.   Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, structure, or part thereof,
where waste, garbage, discarded or salvaged materials are exchanged, handled,
bought, sold, baled, packed, stripped, stored, dumped, or disassembled,
including, but not limited to, inoperable vehicles, machines, or remnants
thereof, and/or metals, paper, rags, tires, and bottles.
   B.   The following uses shall not be considered to be an "auto wrecking,
junk, and/or salvage yard" when all activity, storage, odor, and noise is
confined wholly within an enclosed building, and within a zone which allows
such a use:
      1. The private, noncommercial storage of inoperable vehicles and remnants
thereof;
      2. Pawnshops, secondhand stores, and used furniture stores;
      3. Open sales lots for the sale of new and used vehicles and machinery
which are in operable condition; or
      4. Vehicle towing services and auto and/or body repair establishments
which do not store inoperable vehicles for more than ninety (90) days.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: The repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of motor vehicles
or parts thereof, including collision service, painting, and steam cleaning of
vehicles.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A residence where sleeping, bathing and toilet
accommodations and one or more meals daily for one or more persons, are
provided for hire on a daily or weekly basis, and where the living spaces of
the residents are shared by the paying guests. Such facilities shall not have
more than five (5) bedrooms available for paying guests.
BUILDING: Anything constructed having a roof supported by columns or walls for
the purpose of housing, shelter, or enclosure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is situated.
BUSINESS OR COMMERCE: The purchase, sale, exchange, or other transaction
involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, or commodity
for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings,
offices, recreation or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use of
offices or professions and trades rendering services.
CENTERLINE (Of Street): The center of the public right-of-way as established by
the City Council or the City's Engineer.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the City
Council, including such things as the general location and extent of present
and proposed physical facilities including housing, commercial and industrial
uses, major transportation routes, parks, schools, and other community
facilities.
COUNCIL: The duly constituted legislative authority of the City, being the City
Council.
COVERAGE: The ground area occupied by any building or structure not completely
open to the sky.
DAYCARE CENTER: A facility operated by a person, corporation, or association in
which less than twenty four (24) hour per day nonmedical care and supervision
is provided, outside the home, for minor children or elderly persons, provided
such facility is licensed by the State. This definition includes the following:
   A.   Family Daycare Home: Providing for the care of six (6) or fewer
children or elderly persons within a residence, pursuant to the terms listed
above, where only family members operate the facility (i.e., no outside
employees);
   B.   Group Daycare Center: Providing for the care of between seven (7) and
twelve (12) children or elderly persons within a residence, pursuant to the
terms listed above, where only family members operate the facility (i.e., no
outside employees); and
   C.   Daycare Center: Providing for the care of thirteen (13) or more
children or elderly persons within a residence, pursuant to the terms listed
above, where only family members operate the facility (i.e., no outside
employees).
DENSITY: A unit of measure pertaining to the number of dwelling units per acre
of land.
Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be
developed, including public and/or private rights-of- way.
Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land, wherein the acreage
involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, and which excludes
public and/or private rights-of-way, and other nonresidential uses.
DETACHED: Any building or structure separated by at least five feet (5') in
horizontal distance from any other building or structure.
DWELLING: A building, or any portion thereof, designed exclusively for
residential purposes, including single, duplex, and multiple-family residential
dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, and other places without
individual kitchen facilities.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building designed for occupancy by two (2) persons or
households living independently of each other.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building designed for occupancy by three (3) or more
persons or households living independently of each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for occupancy exclusively by one
person or household, including supervised housing for special needs populations
as defined in Idaho Code section 67-6531.
DWELLING UNIT: A single housekeeping unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one person or household, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
EASEMENT: Authorization, by a property owner, for the use by another individual
or public agency, for a specified purpose, of any designated part of said
owner's property.
ENLARGED: An increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
FAMILY: One or more persons, but not more than four (4) unrelated persons,
whether or not related to each other by blood or marriage, occupying a single
dwelling unit and using common cooking facilities.
FENCE: A barrier composed of posts or piers connected by boards, rails, panels
or wire, or a masonry wall, designed for the purpose of enclosing space or
separating parcels of land. Fences shall be constructed with traditional
fencing materials such as wood, vinyl, wire or wire mesh and shall not be
constructed out of used pallets, tires, metal siding or roofing material, or
similar materials not commonly used for fencing. "Fence" does not include
retaining walls.
FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot which abuts a public street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the main
building, designed and/or used for shelter or storage of automobiles, boats,
and/or other vehicles owned and operated by the occupants of the main building.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas within the surrounding
walls of the several floors of a building, including interior balconies and
mezzanines, but not including exterior terraces and exterior stairs.
HEIGHT: The vertical dimension from the lowest point of the building,
structure, or fence exposed above the ground surface, to the highest point of
the roof, parapet, or other uppermost part. Chimneys, vents, or utility service
connections shall not be included in the measurement of height.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation carried on entirely within a residence or a
residential accessory building, which is clearly incidental to the use of the
residence as a dwelling, employs no more than two (2) people that do not reside
in the dwelling on- site, and does not change the residential character of the
premises.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building containing guest rooms where lodging, with or
without meals, is provided for compensation, and where no provision is made for
cooking in any individual room or suite. A facility containing five (5) or
fewer guest rooms may be construed to be a bed and breakfast inn.
HOUSEHOLD: All the persons who occupy a single residential dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: Those areas defined as "coverage" plus those additional
areas occupied by driveways, walkways, parking lots, steps and landings,
patios, and the like, all such additional surfaces not defined as "coverage"
and being uncovered and open to the sky.
INOPERABLE: When a vehicle or machine does not function as it was originally
designed because an essential component has stopped functioning properly, is
missing, or absent.
KENNEL: A place where four (4) or more adult dogs or cats, or any combination
thereof, are kept or boarded. An adult dog or cat shall be construed to mean an
animal of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six (6)
months. Other domesticated animals commonly construed to fall under the
generalized term of household pets shall also be subject to this definition
(e.g., ferrets, guinea pigs, mice, etc.).
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open off street area of land, not
on a public street or other public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers,
situated so as to avoid undue interference with travel on public streets and
alleys.
LOT: A parcel of land containing at least the minimum sufficient size to meet
zoning requirements for use, coverage, area, and yards. Such lot shall have
frontage on an improved public street. Such lot may consist of: a single lot of
record; a portion of a lot of record; a combination of complete and/or partial
lots of record; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds. No division
or combination of parcels of land shall be created which does not adhere to the
minimum lot area standards of this title.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal square footage area within the boundary lines of
a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The portion of a lot, stated in terms of percentage, which is
covered by all buildings, and/or structures or paved surfaces. This shall be
deemed to include all buildings, porches, breezeways, patio roofs and the like,
whether open box type or lathe roofs, or fully roofed, but shall not be deemed
to include fences, or walls, or swimming pools. It shall also include all
surfaces with concrete or asphalt paving, such as patios, driveways, parking
lots and sidewalks when surfaced with pavement. Gravel surfaces, bricks,
pavers, and similar "hard" surfaces shall not be included in lot coverage
calculations.
LOT DEPTH: The distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the
foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the
side lot lines in the rear of a lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot, other than a corner or through lot, with frontage only on
one street, other than an alley.
LOT LINE: Any ownership line defining the external limits of a lot, including
the street right-of-way line of any street abutting such lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: For interior lots, the lot line abutting a street. For a
corner lot or a through (double frontage) lot, the front lot line shall be
determined by the City, and shall take into consideration the lengths of the
lot lines abutting streets, and the predominant street fronting orientation of
surrounding properties.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and farthest from the front lot line. For
a pointed or irregular lot, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line,
parallel to and farthest from the front lot line, being not less than ten feet
(10') long and wholly contained within the lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. In the case
of a corner lot, the lot line abutting the side street shall be known as the
"flanking street lot line". All other side lot lines shall be known as the
"interior side lot lines".
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the Office of
the County Recorder, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description
of which has been duly recorded with the County Recorder.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot, other than a corner lot or interior lot, with frontage on
more than one street, other than an alley, and which may also be referred to as
a "double frontage lot".
LOT WIDTH: The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot
lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear lot lines at each side
of the lot, and measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided,
however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they
intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of
the required lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of a
cul-de-sac, where the eighty percent (80%) requirement shall not apply.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance
with the HUD Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is
transportable in one or more sections, which, in travelling mode is eight (8)
body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or
when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and
complies with the standards established under 42 USC section 5401 et seq.
MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures generally constructed
prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service connections and
made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on their own running gear
and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME COURT OR PARK: A parcel of land or premises under
unified ownership or management which has been planned, designed, and
constructed for the placement of owner occupied, leased, or rented independent
manufactured homes, mobile homes, or modular homes for use as single-family,
detached, one-story residences on individual rented or leased spaces, including
any land, buildings, structures, or facilities used by occupants of such
premises. Such uses are regulated as nonconforming in accordance with chapter
14 of this title. Individual structures within such courts or parks shall be
regulated under subsection
8-10-2B of this title. This Code makes no specific provision for the creation
of new mobile home/manufactured home courts or parks. Such parks may be
permitted through the planned unit development and/or subdivision processes.
MODULAR HOME: Any prefabricated unit (constructed off site), intended to be a
dwelling unit or intended to house a nonresidential use, designed to be used
with a permanent foundation, has been equipped with built-in utility and
service connections, which is movable in two (2) or more parts by a separate
mode of transportation.
NONCONFORMING: A building, structure, or portion thereof, or use of a building
or land which lawfully existed and was not unlawfully used before the effective
date of the requirement to which it does not conform.
OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. For
the purposes of this title, a change of occupancy is not intended to include
change of tenants or proprietors, but is intended to indicate a change in the
type of use.
OPEN SPACE: An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot
with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental
features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, and any other
recreational facilities that the City deems permissible. Streets, parking
areas, structures for habitation, and the like, shall not be included.
PARKING AREA OR LOT: An area, other than a street, alley, or right-of-way, used
for the parking or storage of one or more vehicles. Such area shall be graded
and surfaced for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and available to the public,
whether for compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: An area accessible and available for the parking of one motor
vehicle, within a public or private parking area or a building, having minimum
dimensions of nine feet (9') in width by twenty feet (20') in depth, exclusive
of access drives, aisles, or ramps for the storage of one passenger automobile
or commercial vehicle, other than a vehicle for sale, lease, or rent, exclusive
of areas intended for other uses and of physical obstructions.
PERFORMANCE BOND OR SURETY BOND: A financial guarantee by a developer, person,
or subdivider, with the City, guaranteeing the completion of physical
improvements according to plans and specifications, within the time prescribed
by the agreement set forth in the bond documents.
PERSONAL SERVICE: Any enterprise conducted for gain which primarily offers
services to the general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, barbershops,
beauty parlors, and similar activities.
PLAT: A map or representation of a subdivision or division of land into lots,
blocks, tracts, streets, roads, alleys, etc., to be filed as a public document
of record.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, municipal corporation, health
district, school district, irrigation district, special improvement or taxing
district, or any other political subdivision or public corporation organized
and existing by virtue of the laws of the State of Idaho.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER: A railroad car, truck cargo container or trailer,
or shipping container that is transported to a location for storage or any
other purpose.
PRINCIPAL USE: The specific purpose for which a lot or parcel is arranged,
intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
PROFESSIONAL ACTIVITIES: The use of offices and related spaces for such
professional services as are provided by medical practitioners, lawyers, urban
planners, architects, engineers, and similar professions.
PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC UTILITY: Any use of land by a governmental agency, or by
any person, firm, or corporation licensed or franchised by such a government
agency, involving the transportation or transmission of materials, signals, or
electrical energy by vehicle or through conduit, wire, pipe, or similar device.
Typical examples include water systems, sanitary sewer systems, electricity and
natural gas services, television or telephone systems, refuse collection, and
public transportation services.
PUBLIC USE: Any use of land by a Federal, State, County, or local government
agency, including a special purpose district.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches and other houses of religious worship, Sunday
schools, parochial schools, colleges, hospitals, and other facilities of an
educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic, or nonprofit nature.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A portable vehicular unit or structure used primarily for
vacations, extended travel, camping, and sports. Recreational vehicles (RVs)
may be self-propelled or towed. RVs may include, but are not limited to, motor
homes, converted buses, pickup campers, and travel trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A parcel of land upon which two (2) or more
recreational vehicles are located, established, or maintained for occupancy of
recreational vehicles by the general public as temporary living quarters for
recreation or vacation purposes.
REPAIR: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for
the purpose of its maintenance.
RESTAURANT: An establishment which is engaged in the business of preparing and
serving food for consumption on the premises or "to-go".
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In
addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, gutters, lawn
strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special
features (required by the topography or treatment), such as grade separation,
landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges.
ROOF: A part of a building completely covering any portion of such building and
permanently attached, but excluding chimneys, antennas, vents, and mechanical
equipment.
SCHOOL: An organization specializing in the instruction of students.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE: An organization specializing in the instruction of students,
not operated by a local governmental entity but operated by a private person or
entity.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC: A free, tax supported school controlled by a local government
authority.
SERVICE STATION: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires, and motor vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail,
plus motor vehicle repairs made.
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and
measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building
or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in this
title.
SIGN: Any structure or natural object, such as a tree, rock, bush, and the
ground itself, or part thereof or device attached thereto or painted or
represented thereon, which shall be used to attract attention to any object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, or
which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant,
insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an
announcement, direction or advertisement. For the purpose of this definition,
the word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation,
state, city, or other political unit.
SPECIAL (OR CONDITIONAL) USE: A use, other than a principal permitted use,
which, because of its characteristics, may be authorized within a particular
zone through the issuance of a specific permit by the City Council, which
permit will specify conditions and design requirements to assure compatibility
of the use within the zone and its surroundings.
STREET: A right-of-way, more than twenty feet (20') in width, which has been
dedicated to the public and designated for public use as a street, and which
affords a primary means of vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting
property. The term "street" also includes the terms "highway", "thoroughfare",
"parkway", "road", "avenue", "boulevard", "lane", "place", and other such
terms.
STREET CLASSIFICATIONS:
Arterial: Primary through traffic and commercial traffic streets which connect
the City's street system to the State's network of regional highways.
Collector: Travel routes which collect traffic from local access streets (where
the land access function is dominant), and channel it to the network of
arterials (where service to through traffic is dominant).
Local Access: Streets whose most important function is to provide direct access
to abutting lands and which are tributary to the system of collector streets.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street that is not accepted for public use or maintenance
which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground
or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. "Structures"
include buildings, manufactured and mobile homes, walls and fences, billboards
and poster panels.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into lots, parcels, tracts, or sites for
purposes of sale or lease, whether immediate or future, and shall include a
redivision of land or future division.
USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated, arranged,
intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: An authorized relaxation of the terms of this title where such
variance will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, the literal enforcement of this title would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship. As used in this title, a variance is authorized only for
height, area, and size of structures, or size of yards and open space, or size
of parking spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited
shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of
the presence of nonconforming uses in a zone.
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place for the care, grooming, diagnosis
and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, and those who are in
need of medical or surgical attention, and may include overnight accommodations
on the premises for treatment, observation and/or recuperation. It may also
include boarding of small animals that is incidental to the primary activity.
VICINITY MAP: A drawing which sets forth by dimensions or other means, the
relationship of the proposed development to other nearby developments or
landmarks and community facilities and services within the general area in
order to better locate and orient the area in question.
WALKWAY: A public way, four feet (4') or more in width, for pedestrian use
only, whether or not along the side of a street.
YARD: A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or
portion of a structure from the ground upward; provided, however, that fences
may be permitted in yards subject to the limitations set forth in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of the
lot and abutting the front property line. Depth of required front yards shall
be measured at right angles to the property line. In the case of through lots,
the front yard shall apply to both street frontages.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between side lot lines.
In the case of through lots, there will be no rear yard. Depth of required rear
yards shall be measured at right angles to the property line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to
the rear lot line. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from
the rear lines of the front yards required. In the case of a corner lot, the
side yard will apply only to the interior side property line. Width of required
side yards shall be measured at right angles to the property line.
ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by the City Clerk authorizing the uses of land
and structures, and the characteristics of the uses. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd.
Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 432, 4-20-2021; Ord. 442, - -2023)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Compliance Required
8-2-2: Noncompliance, Enforcement And Penalties
8-2-3: Zone Classifications
8-2-4: Standards For Zoning Of Annexed Territory
8-2-5: Adoption Of Official Zoning Map
8-2-6: Severability
8-2-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
All new construction, building improvements, alterations, or enlargements, and
all new or altered uses of land, undertaken after the effective date hereof,
and all new uses or occupancy of premises within the City, shall conform with
the requirements, character, and conditions as to use, height, and area for
each of the several zones as described in this title. No person shall design,
erect, construct, establish, move into, alter, enlarge, or use, or cause or
permit to be erected, constructed, established, moved into, altered, enlarged,
or used, any building, structure, improvement, or use of premises located in
any zone described in this title in any manner contrary to the provisions
herein. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-2-2: NONCOMPLIANCE, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Noncompliance: The City shall not issue permits unless existing and
intended structures, the parcel of land, and uses of the buildings and land,
conform in all respects with the applicable provisions of this Code. Whenever
any construction or site work is not in compliance with this title, specific
conditions of approval, or other related laws, ordinances or requirements, the
City may issue a Notice of Violation and order any work stopped by written
notice. Such Notice of Violation or Stop Work Order may be served on any
persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and upon such
service, persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City to
proceed. If no persons are present then the Stop Work Order shall be posted in
a conspicuous location at the site.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: A copy of the Notice of Violation shall be mailed
to the property owner of record and any known holder of any legal interest in
the property, if applicable. The notification shall include:
      1.   The property owner and the legal description of the parcel, as well
as the street address, if any;
      2.   A detailed description of the nature of the violation;
      3.   A description of remedial actions that could be undertaken to
resolve the violation; and
      4.   The length of time allotted to resolve the violation.
The property owner shall have forty five (45) days from the date the Notice of
Violation was mailed to resolve the violation. If resolution does not occur
within those forty five (45) days, the Notice of Violation may be recorded in
the Office of the County Recorder, with a copy mailed to the owner.
   C.   Appeals: The Notice of Violation shall also advise the owner of the
process for appeals of Notices of Violation and Stop Work Orders. An owner or a
holder of any legal interest in the property may appeal a Notice of Violation
or Stop Work Order pursuant to section
1-1-5 of this Code. The appeal shall be heard in accordance with subsection
1-1-5B of this Code. If the appeal is denied (i.e., the action is affirmed),
the City Council shall specify an exact number of days to gain compliance with
this title before the Notice of Violation is recorded, and may add or remove
conditions of remedial action. If the appeal is approved (i.e., the action is
reversed), the City Council shall specify actions to be taken to release the
violation.
   D.   Fees: Prior to or at such time as a violation is resolved, the owner
shall pay the fee specified in the current adopted fee schedule unless the
enforcement action was reversed by the City Council or a court of competent
jurisdiction. Upon payment of such fees or a determination that payment of fees
is not necessary, the City shall cause a Release of Notice of Violation to be
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. The release shall contain all of
the information contained in the Notice of Violation, as well as the corrective
action taken to resolve the violation. A copy of the release shall be mailed to
the owner.
   E.   Complaints: Any affected person may file a written complaint alleging
that a violation of this Code has occurred. Such complaint, stating fully the
causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City shall
investigate the allegations made in the complaint, and, if it appears that
there is reasonable cause to find that the alleged violation did occur, shall
take action thereon as provided in this chapter.
   F.   Penalties: Penalties for failure to comply with or violations of the
provisions of title 7, 8, or 9 of this Code shall be as follows:
      1.   A first violation of any of the provisions of title 7 or 8 of this
Code, or failure to comply with any of their requirements shall constitute an
infraction punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1B of this Code.
      2.   A second or subsequent conviction for violation of any of the
provisions of title 7 or 8 of this Code, or failure to comply with any of their
requirements within twelve (12) months of the first violation shall constitute
a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in subsection
1-4-1A of this Code, with a maximum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and
ninety (90) days in jail, per Idaho Code.
      3.   Each day on which a violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation for purposes of both civil and criminal action. The
landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, or any other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may be found guilty of
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council or
any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of title 7 or 8 of this Code,
or of Idaho Code.
      4.   The City Attorney or other attorney who represents the City may also
take civil action in District Court to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any
action taken, or which may be taken, in violation of title 7 or 8 of this Code,
to vacate any subdivision or condominium plat recorded in violation of title 9
of this Code, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this Code. In addition
to other actions that may be ordered by the court, if the City prevails, the
violator shall pay to the City all fees associated with the violation then due
and owing. The City may also seek the imposition of a civil penalty in an
amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day,
with a total maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
      5.   In cases where multiple individuals, firms, corporations or agents
participated in violating title 7 or 8 of this Code, they may be held jointly
and severally liable for any remedies, penalties or payments.
      6.   The City may withhold issuance of permits for subdivisions, lots, or
parcels of land that are in violation of any provision of title 7, 8 or 9 of
this Code. Withholding of permits may be appealed in accordance with section
1-1-5 of this Code.
      7.   Applications for approvals authorized by this title will not be
scheduled for hearing until all violations of this Code are corrected, except
when the purpose of the approval is to correct the violations of this Code then
existing. These requirements may be appealed in accordance with section
1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-2-3: ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the City is
divided into several zones, known and designated as follows:
Residential (R) Zone
Commercial (C) Zone
Light Industrial (LI) Zone (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-2-4: STANDARDS FOR ZONING OF ANNEXED TERRITORY:
   A.   Compliance With State Law: Annexations of territory to the City shall
be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho Code title
50, chapter 2, as it now exists or as it may be subsequently amended.
   B.   Location Within Area Of City Impact Boundary: All territory hereafter
annexed to the City shall be contained within that portion of unincorporated
Kootenai County officially designated as being within the City's area of City
impact boundary as adopted by the City Council of Athol and the Kootenai County
Board pursuant to the requirements of Idaho Code section 67-6526.
   C.   Consistency With Comprehensive Plan: All territory hereafter annexed to
the City shall generally conform to the official land use designation of the
future land use plan map contained within the City's adopted Comprehensive
Plan, insofar as the same applies to the area of City impact location to be
annexed.
   D.   Agreement With City: The City Council may require, at its discretion,
as a part of any annexation proceeding, that the applicant(s) for annexation
negotiate the terms of an agreement with the City and the amount of the fee
deemed appropriate and/or infrastructure improvements deemed appropriate, for
the annexation site to acquire a share in the existing assets and services of
the City following annexation. Any such agreement negotiation and its agreed
upon outcome shall be in writing and shall take place prior to formal adoption
of the annexation by the City Council. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-2-5: ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
Adoption of the official zoning map of the City shall be by separate ordinance
from the text of this title. Adoption of subsequent amendments to the official
zoning map shall also be by separate ordinance. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-2-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this title or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such order or judgment shall be
confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered and shall
not affect or invalidate the remainder of any part thereof to any other person
or circumstances, and to this end, the provisions of each clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, or part of this title are hereby declared to be severable.
(Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
CHAPTER 3
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, AREA OF CITY IMPACT AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Purpose
8-3-2: Legal Authority
8-3-3: Authorization For Initiation
8-3-4: Coordination With Related Municipal Activities
8-3-5: Concurrency And Timing
8-3-6: Application Materials
8-3-7: Filing Fees
8-3-8: Approval Criteria
8-3-9: Amendment Procedure
8-3-10: Public Hearing And Notice
8-3-11: Council Action
8-3-12: Area Of City Impact Boundary Review
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the comprehensive plan is to set forth the city's goals,
policies, and programs and to direct and designate the desired general
distribution, location, and extent of the significant uses of the land toward
the achievement of the city's goals. The comprehensive plan is a dynamic
document based upon community values and existing and projected conditions and
needs which are in a constant state of change. The purpose of this chapter is
to set forth procedures for the amendment of the comprehensive plan so that it
may be updated and modified as necessary in response to changing circumstances.
   A.   The comprehensive plan shall include all components of Idaho Code
section 67-6508 for property within existing municipal corporate limits.
   B.   The comprehensive plan shall also include the future land use plan map
component of Idaho Code section 67-6508(c) for property within the city's area
of city impact boundary. The city council, at its discretion, may elect to
incorporate any or all other aspects of Idaho Code section 67-6508,
comprehensive plan requirements, into its comprehensive plan's future direction
for its area of city impact. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-2: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
The comprehensive plan, including its text or maps, may be amended by
resolution passed by the city council pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code
section 67-6509. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-3: AUTHORIZATION FOR INITIATION:
Applications or requests for a comprehensive plan amendment may be initiated by
either:
   A.   The verified application of the record owner or owners of the affected
property or authorized agent thereof; or
   B.   The city council through its own motion. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-4: COORDINATION WITH RELATED MUNICIPAL ACTIVITIES:
To the maximum extent practical or necessary, amendments to the comprehensive
plan shall be coordinated, procedurally and substantively, with amendments to
municipal development regulations under this title and other ordinances, as
well as with adoption of related city legislation such as the transportation
improvement program, the capital improvement program, annexations of area of
city impact lands, etc. Amendments to the city's development regulations that
require amendments to the comprehensive plan shall not proceed until such
associated amendments are made to the comprehensive plan. Upon annexation of
area of city impact lands, development review and approval for parcels that
require amendments to the comprehensive plan shall not proceed until such
associated amendments are made to the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-5: CONCURRENCY AND TIMING:
All proposed amendments shall be considered by the city council concurrently so
that their cumulative effect can be ascertained. Pursuant to Idaho Code section
67-6509(d), amendment cycles shall be no more frequent than once every six (6)
months for the future land use plan map component of the comprehensive plan;
however, amendments to the text and other aspects of the comprehensive plan may
be made at any time. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-6: APPLICATION MATERIALS:
   A.   Information Required: Applications for amendments to the comprehensive
plan shall include the following:
      1.   Description of the proposed comprehensive plan amendment, including
as appropriate, detailed amendatory language;
      2.   Rationale for the proposed comprehensive plan amendment which may
include, but not be limited to, maps, drawings to scale of land and buildings,
dimensions, descriptions, and data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed
comprehensive plan amendment is in the public interest of the city;
      3.   A review and analysis of the comprehensive impacts of the proposed
amendment;
      4.   An explanation of whether approval criteria of section
8-3-8 of this chapter are satisfied; and (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
      5.   Where an amendment is map related or is specific to a site, a
mailing list of adjacent property owners within three hundred feet (300') of
the affected site; provided, however, that where an applicant has ownership
interest in any adjacent properties, the list shall extend to a point three
hundred feet (300') beyond said ownership interest. If the city determines that
notices will be mailed pursuant to section
8-3-10 of this chapter, such notice will be sent by first class mail at the
applicant's expense. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Preparation Of Amendment Materials: Where initiated by motion of the
city council, municipal staff and/or contracted staff shall prepare the
amendment material. Where requested by the record owner or owners of the
affected property or authorized agent thereof, said party shall prepare the
amendment materials. The city clerk-treasurer or contracted staff shall notify
the record owner or owners of the affected property or authorized agent
thereof, in writing, if the amendment materials are sufficiently complete for
consideration, or of what additional information is needed to make the
amendment materials complete.
   C.   Inadequate Applications Not Considered: Applications which are not
timely, are incomplete, are substantially similar to a recent and denied
request, or do not satisfy the criteria of section
8-3-8 of this chapter shall not be considered. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-7: FILING FEES:
Filing fees in an amount specified by resolution of the city council shall be
paid upon the filing of each request for a comprehensive plan amendment for the
purpose of defraying the expenses of postage, posting, advertising, and other
costs of labor and materials incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this
chapter. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-8: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
When considering amendments to the comprehensive plan, the following criteria
shall be considered, and only those amendments which are found to be in
substantial compliance with all the criteria shall be approved:
   A.   The amendment is necessary to resolve inconsistencies between the
comprehensive plan and other municipal plans or ordinances, or to resolve
inconsistencies between the comprehensive plan and Kootenai County's plans or
ordinances, or to update the transportation improvement program and/or capital
improvement program in connection with annual budget adoption;
   B.   Potential ramifications of the proposed amendment upon all other
comprehensive plan elements have been considered and adequately addressed;
   C.   Conditions have so changed since the adoption of the comprehensive plan
that the existing text, including, but not limited to, goals, policies, and/or
map classifications, is inappropriate;
   D.   The proposed amendment is consistent with the overall intent of the
goals of the comprehensive plan;
   E.   The proposed amendment is consistent with the parameters of Idaho Code
section 67-6508 in effect at the time;
   F.   Where an amendment to the comprehensive plan's future land use plan map
is proposed, the proposed designation is adjacent to property having a similar
and compatible designation, or the subject property is of sufficient size to
buffer or otherwise mitigate incompatible land uses; and
   G.   Impacts have been disclosed, and measures have been ensured to reduce
possible adverse impacts. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-9: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
The following steps shall precede setting of the public hearing on
comprehensive plan amendments, except for those amendments undertaken to the
transportation improvement program and/or capital improvement program in
connection with annual municipal budget adoption:
   A.   All proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan's future land use
plan map shall be submitted to the city clerk-treasurer not later than May 1 of
any given year for a July city council hearing date, and not later than
November 1 of any given year for a January city council hearing date. The city
council may, at its discretion, consolidate any proposed amendments to the text
and other aspects of the comprehensive plan, so that they are concurrently
processed and heard with the proposed amendments to the future land use plan
map.
   B.   Following a city council determination to proceed with a hearing on the
proposed amendment(s), the city clerk-treasurer or contracted staff shall
prepare a comprehensive staff report and recommendations related to the
amendments, including an analysis of their cumulative impacts.
   C.   Subsection B of this section and appropriate supporting materials shall
be forwarded to Kootenai County for its preliminary review. Other applicable
state, county, and/or local agencies, including highway and school districts,
shall be similarly notified inasmuch as they may have an interest in the
amendment. Such distribution(s) shall be the responsibility of the city clerk-
treasurer or contracted staff. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-10: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
Following initiation of a comprehensive plan amendment process, the city clerk-
treasurer and/or contracted staff shall set the matter(s) for public hearing
before the city council. The city shall give notice of the hearing to be held,
which notice shall contain the date, time, and place of the hearing, a general
explanation of the matter(s) to be considered, and a general description in
text or by diagram of the location(s) of real property, if any, that is (are)
the subject of the hearing, and shall be:
   A.   Published once in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen
(15) days before the date of the city council hearing;
   B.   Notice thereof shall be posted at the city hall and other public
locations in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing; and
   C.   Where the amendment is map related or is specific to a site, additional
public notice may be given to interested or substantially affected persons and
may include direct mailing of public notices and posting of property, if
applicable, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 263, 7-12-
2005)
8-3-11: COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   The city council shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the
proposed comprehensive plan amendment(s). The city council shall amend the
comprehensive plan by resolution, which resolution shall be adopted by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the city council. The city
council shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the
recommendation of the city clerk-treasurer and/or contracted staff.
   B.   A record of the hearing, findings made, and actions taken by the city
council, including adoption resolution(s), shall be maintained by the city.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-3-12: AREA OF CITY IMPACT BOUNDARY REVIEW:
   A.   Review: In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6526, the city shall
periodically review the extent to which growth of an urban nature is occurring
within current municipal boundaries and within the unincorporated area of city
impact boundary. Based upon such review, and coordination with Kootenai County,
the city shall adjust its residential density allowances and nonresidential
intensity expectations, and/or its area of city impact boundary, as necessary,
to accommodate its urban growth expected to occur in the succeeding twenty (20)
year period.
   B.   Boundary Revisions: Revisions of the area of city impact boundary and
the regulations pertaining thereto shall be subject to negotiation with
Kootenai County's board and concurrent adoption by both the city council and
county board pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6526. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
CHAPTER 4
ZONE CHANGES AND TEXT AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purpose
8-4-2: Authorization For Initiation
8-4-3: Application Filing
8-4-4: Filing Fees
8-4-5: Review By Public Agencies
8-4-6: Public Hearing And Notice
8-4-7: Notice Of Decision
8-4-8: Reconsiderations And Appeals
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The principal purpose of this title is to provide for the proper location of
land uses by providing zones in which various types of land use shall be
permitted. This objective is ongoing and may periodically require a change of
zone from that previously established in conformance with the comprehensive
plan. Boundaries of zones, the classification of property uses therein,
development standards, and any change in wording, context, or substance, may be
changed when adopted by ordinance passed by the city council. (Ord. 263, 7-12-
2005)
8-4-2: AUTHORIZATION FOR INITIATION:
Applications for a change of zone or amendment to the text of this title may be
initiated by either:
   A.   The verified application of the record owner or owners of the subject
property or authorized agent thereof; or
   B.   The city council through its own motion. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-4-3: APPLICATION FILING:
   A.   Applications for change of zone or amendment to the text of this title
shall be made on forms available from the city. Applications shall contain all
required information relevant to the proposed action, including, but not
limited to, maps, drawings to scale of land and buildings, dimensions,
descriptions, and data necessary to demonstrate that the proposed zone change
or zoning text amendment is in conformance with the maps and other guidelines
provided in the comprehensive plan. Where an application is not in conformance
with the comprehensive plan, a concurrent application for a comprehensive plan
amendment shall also be made.
   B.   The application shall include a review and analysis of the
comprehensive impacts of the proposed change of zone or text amendment. (Ord.
263, 7-12-2005)
8-4-4: FILING FEES:
Filing fees in an amount specified by resolution of the city council shall be
paid upon the filing of each application for a zone change or zoning text
amendment for the purpose of defraying the expense of postage, posting,
advertising, and other costs of labor and materials incidental to the
proceedings prescribed in this title. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-4-5: REVIEW BY PUBLIC AGENCIES:
Prior to conducting a public hearing on any proposed amendments or additions to
the map or text of this title, such amendments or additions, together with
appropriate supporting materials, shall be forwarded to state, county, and/or
local agencies, including school districts, where any such agency may have an
interest in the amendments or additions to the map or text of this title. Such
distribution shall be the responsibility of the city clerk- treasurer or
contracted staff, and shall conform to the minimum public notice criteria of
section
8-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-4-6: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
When an application for a change of zone or text amendment of this title is
filed, or is initiated by the city council, a public hearing shall be scheduled
before the city council. The city clerk-treasurer shall give notice of the
public hearing specifying the date, time, and place of the hearing or hearings,
and providing a general description of the nature and location of the proposal
(including a location map when applicable). Such notice shall be given at least
fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing, all in accordance with the
following:
   A.   The applicant for a change of zone shall obtain the names and addresses
of all adjacent property owners/purchasers of record within three hundred feet
(300') of the property and shall furnish these names and addresses to the City
Clerk-Treasurer. If the property contiguous to that property proposed for zone
change is owned by the same person or entity, the owners of contiguous property
within three hundred feet (300') of that owned by the applicant shall also be
notified. The notice required by this chapter shall be provided to these
property owners/purchasers of record by first class mail, by the City Clerk-
Treasurer, but at the applicant's expense.
   B.   For a change of zone proceeding, the City shall cause the notice
required by this chapter to be posted, by the applicant, along all perimeter
property lines on the property involved. Such posted notice shall be
prominently displayed on a bright colored background, with the term "Public
Notice" in large enough type to be visible from a vehicle on an adjacent street
or alley, and to any person walking along adjoining interior property lines.
   C.   For either a change of zone or a planning and zoning title text
amendment proceeding, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause the notice required
by this chapter to be posted at the City Hall, and at other public locations
(such as the public library and the post office).
   D.   For either a change of zone or a zoning ordinance text amendment
proceeding, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause the notice required by this
chapter to be published once in the official newspaper of the City.
   E.   For change of zone proceedings, mailed notice to property owners shall
not be required in the following circumstances:
      1.   In the event that notice is required to two hundred (200) or more
property owners or purchasers of record, in lieu of mailed notice, the
aforestated published notice shall be at least four inches (4") by two (2)
columns in size pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6511(b), the site's posting
shall still apply, and the posting of the notice in public locations shall
still apply; or
      2.   When the matter would affect the City generally or would affect a
substantial portion of the City, rather than only a specific parcel or a few
parcels of property, the criteria of subsection E1 of this section shall apply;
or
      3.   When the hearing relates to action taken by the City Council to
establish, review, or modify all zoning classifications throughout the City,
the criteria of subsection E1 of this section shall apply.
   F.   The continuance of a public hearing through verbal motion at a regular
or special meeting of the City Council, and posting of the continuance at the
established posting places, shall be deemed as adequate notice to the public.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-4-7: NOTICE OF DECISION:
   A.   The decision of the City Council shall be in writing, by ordinance, and
shall be issued by e-mail to the applicant and parties of record (the applicant
and those others who have provided written or oral testimony during the public
hearing process and requested notice of the decision) within fifteen (15) days
after City Council written adoption of said notice of decision. Every notice of
decision shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding
the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to
section 67-8003, Idaho Code, as it now exists or is subsequently amended.
   B.   The decision of the City Council shall set forth a reasoned statement
that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant, states the
relevant contested facts relied upon, and explains the rationale for the
decision. The City Council shall analyze all proposed changes to zoning
ordinances to ensure that they are not in conflict with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
   C.   If the City Council adopts a zoning classification pursuant to a
property owner's request, the City Council shall not subsequently reverse its
action or otherwise change the zoning classification without the written
consent of the current property owner, as set forth in Idaho Code section 67-
6511(d), as it now exists or is subsequently amended. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-4-8: RECONSIDERATIONS AND APPEALS:
   A.   Reconsideration: Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial
review of the City Council's final decision must first file with the City
Council a written petition for reconsideration of the Council's decision,
specifying deficiencies in the decision for which reconsideration is sought
within fourteen (14) days.
      1.   The City Council may reconsider its decision only if it finds any of
the following:
         a.   There was a clerical error in the decision;
         b.   The decision resulted from fraud or mistake;
         c.   There is newly discovered evidence or a change in circumstances;
         d.   There was a procedural error;
         e.   The Council previously rejected the application by a tie vote; or
         f.   The decision was made in violation of substantive law.
      2.   The City Council shall review the petition for reconsideration at
its next regular meeting and decide whether to reconsider the matter. If the
City Council grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a hearing before the
City Council will be scheduled to address the specific deficiencies identified
by the applicant or affected person, which shall be conducted pursuant to the
public notice procedures set forth in section
8-4-6 of this chapter. The issues examined upon reconsideration shall be
limited to issues raised by the petition for reconsideration and the record
previously established, as well as the applicable law. The cost of all required
notices shall be borne by the party(ies) seeking reconsideration of the
decision and paid in advance.
      3.   Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the City Council may
affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, its prior decision and shall
provide a written decision to the applicant and the affected person(s) within
sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration. If the City
Council fails to timely decide, the request for reconsideration is deemed
denied.
   B.   Judicial Appeals: After a notice of decision is issued, or after a
revised notice of decision is issued under a reconsideration proceeding, any
aggrieved party with standing to appeal may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Legal Authority; Scope
8-5-2: Initiation Of Agreement
8-5-3: Time Limits
8-5-4: Form Of Agreement
8-5-5: Approval Of Agreement
8-5-6: Recordation Of Agreement
8-5-7: Duty To Comply With Agreement
8-5-8: Modification Of Agreement
8-5-9: Termination Of Agreement
8-5-10: Enforcement Of Agreement
8-5-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY; SCOPE:
Conditional zoning development agreements ("agreements") are authorized
pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6511A. Conditional zoning development
agreements may be used by the city council as a condition of rezoning. Such
conditional zoning development agreements allow a specific project with a
specific use to be developed on property in an area that is appropriately zoned
for proposed uses or conditionally allowed on the subject parcel(s), but which
use and its location may necessitate sensitive treatment in relation to its
setting. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-2: INITIATION OF AGREEMENT:
An agreement may be initiated with the consent of the applicant for the
rezoning of a particular parcel of land or collection of parcels of land
through the following methods:
   A.   By application of the property owner(s); or
   B.   By requirement of the city council. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-3: TIME LIMITS:
All time limits required by state law or local municipal ordinance may be
stayed, modified, or extended upon affirmative vote of the city council. The
council may establish time limits for submittal of an agreement. Failure by the
applicant to comply with such time limit shall be deemed just cause for
termination of conditional zoning development agreement proceedings and denial
of the zone change application. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-4: FORM OF AGREEMENT:
An agreement shall be in the form required by the city council. No agreement
shall be accepted by the city council which does not include the following:
   A.   Legal name(s), title(s), and address(es) of property owner(s) and/or
others with direct vested interest in the conditional zoning development
agreement and rezone request.
   B.   A legal description of the property that is the subject of the rezone
request, which legal description must be acceptable to the city council.
   C.   An affidavit by the owner(s) of the parcel(s) agreeing to submission of
the use and property for an agreement upon the adoption of an ordinance by the
city council approving the requested rezone of the subject parcel(s).
   D.   The current use or uses of the property for which the conditional
zoning development agreement is sought.
   E.   The proposed specific use or uses of the property for which the
conditional zoning development agreement is sought, and an explanation of how
the proposed use or uses is/are allowed or conditionally allowed in the zone
for which application has been made.
   F.   A project summary report, which shall include the following:
      1.   A narrative description of the proposed density, amenities,
improvements, or other uses sought, including, but not limited to, height,
setbacks, size, and location of all proposed structures or activities on the
property.
      2.   The estimated time of start and completion of all proposed
development activities. This may be simplified by devising a timetable that
splits development activities into phases.
      3.   Plans for use and reuse of property after proposed project
completion.
      4.   A narrative description of physical and environmental effects,
constraints, or limitations of the proposed development, including
infrastructure demands, and proposals for mitigation of identified physical and
environmental effects, constraints, and limitations.
      5.   Economic benefits gained or lost from the proposed development.
      6.   Conceptual site plans, with a reasonable representation of scale
showing the approximate location of proposed structure(s), perimeter buffer
treatment (as required), street improvements, conceptual drainage strategy, and
other proposed usage information. Exhibits on general soil types, topography,
slope, vegetation, drainage, and other pertinent land characteristics may also
be required.
   G.   Signed letters of application approval, or preapproval, from any
applicable federal, state, county, or local agencies involved in the permitting
process for the specific use proposed. Letters shall include any written
agreements made with agencies to perform specific action(s). If letters of
application approval or preapproval are not provided, acknowledgment and
consent to comply with all applicable federal, state, county, and local rules,
regulations, and standards shall be substituted.
   H.   A statement by the owner of the property that failure to comply with
the commitments in the agreement shall be deemed consent to rezone the property
to the preexisting zone. Rezoning of the subject parcel(s) will occur at the
time of termination of the development agreement and will comply with the
notice and hearing provisions of Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6511 and
section
8-4-6 of this title. Costs for such rezone shall be paid by the owner and/or
developer.
   I.   Signatures of all owners, developers, or lawfully authorized agents
shall be notarized, and, in the case of lawfully authorized agents, properly
executed powers of attorney, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, shall
be presented to the city council and be made part of the conditional zoning
development agreement, specifying the use and development of the real property
which is the subject of the rezone request.
   J.   A clause that the commitment shall run with the land and be binding on
the heirs, assigns, and successors in interest of the owners and/or developer.
   K.   Any other matter mutually agreeable to the parties. This may include,
but is not limited to, performance bonding or other fiscal guarantees. (Ord.
263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-5: APPROVAL OF AGREEMENT:
The city council may require a conditional zoning development agreement to be
executed to allow a rezone in order to ensure implementation of the project as
represented by the applicant and to promote the general health, safety,
comfort, convenience, and welfare of the citizens of the city. A conditional
zoning development agreement shall not allow a use on the property that is not
an allowed or conditionally allowed use in the requested rezone.
   A.   A conditional zoning development agreement may be approved by the city
council only after the public hearing and notice provisions of Idaho Code
sections 67-6509 and 67-6511 and section
8-4-6 of this title are implemented.
   B.   The city council may add conditions, terms, duties, or obligations to
the development agreement before its approval. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-6: RECORDATION OF AGREEMENT:
Following approval of a conditional zoning development agreement by the city
council by resolution, the agreement shall be recorded in the office of the
Kootenai County recorder at the expense of the property owner(s). The recorded
agreement shall take effect and be in force upon adoption and publication of
the companion ordinance rezoning the subject property. The agreement, and all
conditions, terms, duties, or obligations included therein, shall run with the
land and shall be considered continuing obligations of the owner(s) or
subsequent owner(s) and each other person(s) acquiring an interest in the
property. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-7: DUTY TO COMPLY WITH AGREEMENT:
An owner, subsequent owner, and each other person acquiring an interest in
property that is restricted by an agreement adopted pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall comply with the terms, conditions, obligations, and
duties contained in the agreement. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-8: MODIFICATION OF AGREEMENT:
No substantial modification of a written commitment may be made without
approval of the city council, unless the modification is required by changes in
federal or state rules, regulations, and laws.
   A.   An agreement may be modified without the notice and hearing procedures
of Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6511 and section
8-4-6 of this title, only upon written findings by the council that the
proposed modification is not a substantial change to the terms and conditions
of the agreement.
   B.   The city council may approve a substantial modification of an agreement
concerning use or development of the rezoned parcel of real property only upon
adhering to the following:
      1.   Conducting a duly noticed public hearing pursuant to Idaho Code
sections 67-6509 and 67-6511 and section
8-4-6 of this title; and
      2.   Finding, in writing, that circumstances surrounding the original
written commitment have changed and that the modification will:
         a.   Preserve the enjoyment of a substantial property right of the
owner;
         b.   Not be detrimental to the public welfare; and
         c.   Not be injurious to other property in the surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-9: TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT:
   A.   A conditional zoning development agreement may be terminated by the
city council, without the consent of the breaching party, for failure to comply
with the commitments expressed in the agreement. Such termination shall take
place after a public hearing on the termination, at which time testimony shall
be taken to establish noncompliance with the conditions, terms, obligations, or
duties contained within the agreement. The public hearing shall follow the
notice and hearing provisions of Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6511 and
section
8-4-6 of this title. A conditional zoning development agreement may contain
termination procedures, including, but not limited to, notifying the persons
bound by the agreement of the alleged violation and establishing a reasonable
time to remedy the violation prior to the initiation of termination
proceedings.
   B.   Upon termination of the agreement, the property shall revert to the
zone applicable prior to the adoption of the agreement and its companion
rezoning ordinance (pursuant to a new council resolution terminating the
agreement and a companion ordinance rezoning the property back to its earlier
designation due to the breach of the agreement). All uses of the property which
are not consistent with the subsequently applied zone, following termination of
the agreement, shall cease. The owner of the property may apply for a
conditional use of the parcel, if such use is a conditional use within the
subsequently applied zone. Any conditional zoning development agreement shall
stipulate that costs incurred to rezone the property upon termination of the
agreement be paid by the owner(s) of the property. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-5-10: ENFORCEMENT OF AGREEMENT:
Development agreements may be enforced by the city council through any means
deemed to be appropriate, including, but not limited to, specific enforcement,
injunctive relief, or damages for violation of this title. The foregoing
enforcement options available to the city shall not be deemed exclusive. (Ord.
263, 7-12-2005)
CHAPTER 6
VARIANCES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Council Authority
8-6-3: Burden Of Proof
8-6-4: Authorization For Filing
8-6-5: Application Filing
8-6-6: Filing Fees
8-6-7: Public Hearing And Notice
8-6-8: Findings Of Fact For Approval
8-6-9: Notice Of Decision
8-6-10: Reconsiderations And Appeals
8-6-11: Duration Of Variance
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a variance is to assure that no property, because of the unusual
and special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone and vicinity as a result
of undue or unnecessary hardship caused by the literal interpretation of this
title. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-6-2: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
The City Council shall hear and decide all requests for variance from the
standards set forth in this title. In granting any variance, the Council may
impose conditions to safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and
promote the general welfare, and to ensure that the development so authorized
is in accordance with approved plans and is consistent with the objectives of
this title. The extent of the variance may be reduced by the Council to conform
with the findings required by this chapter. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-6-3: BURDEN OF PROOF:
The burden of proof to establish that findings of fact can be made as required
by this chapter is on the applicant. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-6-4: AUTHORIZATION FOR FILING:
Application for a variance may be initiated by the verified application of the
record owner or owners of the subject property or authorized agent thereof.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-6-5: APPLICATION FILING:
Applications for variance shall be made upon forms available from the City, and
shall contain all information necessary to evaluate the proposal, including,
but not limited to, maps, drawings to scale of land and buildings, dimensions,
descriptions, and data to support that the required findings of fact exist with
respect to the proposed variance. The application shall contain a statement
containing any facts, arguments, or grounds in support of the variance which
the applicant wishes to make. Such applications and accompanying materials
shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-6-6: FILING FEES:
Filing fees in an amount specified by resolution of the City Council shall be
paid upon the filing of each application for a variance for the purpose of
defraying the expense of postage, posting, advertising, and other costs of
labor and materials incidental to the proceedings prescribed herein. One
variance application may request relief from more than one standard on a single
piece of property, in which case one filing fee shall be charged. (Ord. 263, 7-
12-2005)
8-6-7: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
When an application for a variance is filed, a public hearing shall be
scheduled before the City Council. The City Clerk- Treasurer shall give notice
of the public hearing specifying the date, time, and place of the hearing, and
providing a general description of the nature and location of the proposal
(including a location map when applicable). Such notice shall be given at least
fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing, all in accordance with the
following: (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
   A.   The applicant for a variance shall obtain the names and addresses of
all adjacent property owners/purchasers of record abutting the property and
shall furnish these names and addresses to the City Clerk-Treasurer. If the
property contiguous to that property proposed for variance is owned by the same
person or entity, the owners of contiguous property to that owned by the
applicant shall also be notified. The notice required by this chapter shall be
provided to these property owners by first class mail by the City Clerk-
Treasurer, but at the applicant's expense. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. 2006
Code)
   B.   The City shall cause the notice required by this chapter to be posted,
by the applicant, along all perimeter property lines on the property involved.
Such posted notice shall be prominently displayed on a bright colored
background, with the term "Public Notice" in large enough type to be visible
from a vehicle on any adjacent street or alley, and to any person walking along
adjoining interior property lines.
   C.   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause the notice required by this
chapter to be posted at the City Hall, and at other public locations (such as
the public library and the post office).
   D.   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall cause the notice required by this
chapter to be published once in the official newspaper of the City.
   E.   The continuance of a public hearing through verbal motion at a regular
or special meeting of the City Council, and posting of the continuance at the
established posting places, shall be deemed as adequate notice to the public.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-6-8: FINDINGS OF FACT FOR APPROVAL:
A variance shall be granted only if the City Council first finds, in a written
determination, that:
   A.   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the
land, structure, or building involved, and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same zone; and
   B.   The literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other premises in the same
zone under the terms of this title; and
   C.   Granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by this title to other lands, structures, or buildings
in the same zone; and
   D.   The variance, either as proposed or as conditioned by the Council, is
the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land,
building, or structure; and
   E.   Granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and
purpose of this title and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-6-9: NOTICE OF DECISION:
   A.   The decision of the City Council shall be in writing, and shall be
issued by e-mail to the applicant and parties of record (the applicant and
those others who have provided written or oral testimony during the public
hearing process and requested notice of the decision) within fifteen (15) days
after City Council's written adoption of said notice of decision. Every notice
of decision shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant
regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis
pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code, as it now exists or is subsequently
amended.
   B.   The decision of the City Council shall set forth a reasoned statement
that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant, states the
relevant contested facts relied upon, and explains the rationale for the
decision. The City Council shall analyze all proposed variances to ensure that
they are not in conflict with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord.
410, 1-17-2017)
8-6-10: RECONSIDERATIONS AND APPEALS:
   A.   Reconsideration: Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial
review of the City Council's final decision must first file with the City
Council a written petition for reconsideration of the Council's decision,
specifying deficiencies in the decision for which reconsideration is sought
within fourteen (14) days after the date of the decision.
      1.   The City Council may reconsider its decision only if it finds any of
the following:
         a.   There was a clerical error in the decision;
         b.   The decision resulted from fraud or mistake;
         c.   There is newly discovered evidence or a change in circumstances;
         d.   There was a procedural error;
         e.   The Council previously rejected the application by a tie vote; or
         f.   The decision was made in violation of substantive law.
      2.   The City Council shall review the petition for reconsideration at
its next regular meeting and decide whether to reconsider the matter. If the
City Council grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a hearing before the
City Council will be scheduled to address the specific deficiencies identified
by the applicant or affected person, which shall be conducted pursuant to the
public notice procedures set forth in section
8-4-6 of this chapter. The issues examined upon reconsideration shall be
limited to issues raised by the petition for reconsideration and the record
previously established, as well as the applicable law. The cost of all required
notices shall be borne by the party(ies) seeking reconsideration of the
decision, and paid in advance.
      3.   Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the City Council may
affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, its prior decision and shall
provide a written decision to the applicant and the affected person(s) within
sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration. If the City
Council fails to timely decide, the request for reconsideration is deemed
denied.
   B.   Judicial Appeals: After a notice of decision is issued, or after a
revised notice of decision is issued under a reconsideration proceeding, any
aggrieved party with standing to appeal may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-6-11: DURATION OF VARIANCE:
Every right or privilege authorized by the grant of a variance shall terminate
two (2) years after the granting of such variance, if variance implementation
has not been initiated via appropriate permits, and also completed during such
time frame. The Council may grant an extension for variance implementation for
cause, not to exceed one (1) year. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIAL (OR CONDITIONAL) USE PERMITS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose
8-7-2: Council Authority
8-7-3: Authorization For Filing
8-7-4: Application Filing
8-7-5: Filing Fees
8-7-6: Public Hearing And Notice
8-7-7: Findings Of Fact
8-7-8: Imposition Of Conditions
8-7-9: Notice Of Decision
8-7-10: Reconsiderations And Appeals
8-7-11: Duration Of Permit
8-7-12: Revocation Of Permit
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a special (also known as "conditional") use permit is to allow
special consideration for certain uses to be located in zones other than those
in which they are classified as permitted because of their particular
characteristics: the size of the area required for full development of such
uses; traffic and parking incidental to their operation; and/or the effect such
uses may have on adjoining land uses and on the growth and development of the
area in which they are proposed to locate. Since such uses may be suitable only
in specific locations, or only if designed and laid out in a particular manner,
or only if subjected to specific conditions to assure compatibility with its
surroundings, the peace, health, safety, and general welfare are best promoted
if such uses are authorized only by special (conditional) use permit in
accordance with the standards set forth herein. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-2: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
The city council shall hear and decide all requests for special (conditional)
use permits. In granting any special (conditional) use permit, the council may
impose conditions to safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and
promote the general welfare, and to ensure that the development so authorized
is in accordance with approved plans and is consistent with the objectives of
this title. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-3: AUTHORIZATION FOR FILING:
Application for a special (conditional) use permit may be initiated by the
verified application of the record owner or owners of the subject property or
authorized agent thereof. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-4: APPLICATION FILING:
Applications for conditional use permits shall be made upon forms available
from the city, and shall contain all information necessary to evaluate the
proposal, including, but not limited to, maps, drawings to scale of land and
buildings, dimensions, descriptions, and data to support that the required
findings of fact exist with respect to the proposed conditional use permit. The
application shall contain a statement containing any facts, arguments, or
grounds in support of the special (conditional) use permit which the applicant
wishes to make. Such applications and accompanying materials shall be filed
with the city clerk- treasurer.
   A.   The application shall include a review and analysis of the
comprehensive impacts of the proposed special (conditional) use permit.
   B.   The city council may require additional studies of social, economic,
fiscal, and environmental effects of the proposed special/conditional use in a
more specific fashion than those generally required in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-5: FILING FEES:
Filing fees in an amount specified by resolution of the city council shall be
paid upon the filing of each application for a conditional use permit for the
purpose of defraying the expense of postage, posting, advertising, and other
costs of labor and materials incidental to the proceedings prescribed herein.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-6: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
When an application for a special (conditional) use permit is filed, a public
hearing shall be scheduled before the city council. The city clerk-treasurer
shall give notice of the public hearing specifying the date, time, and place of
the hearing or hearings, and providing a general description of the nature and
location of the proposal (including a location map when applicable). Such
notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing, all
in accordance with the following: (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
   A.   The applicant for a special (conditional) use permit shall obtain the
names and addresses of all adjacent property owners/purchasers of record within
three hundred feet (300') of the property and shall furnish these names and
addresses to the city clerk-treasurer. If the property contiguous to that
property proposed for special (conditional) use permit is owned by the same
person or entity, the owners of contiguous property within three hundred feet
(300') of that owned by the applicant shall also be notified. The notice
required by this section shall be provided to these property owners/purchasers
of record by first class mail, by the city clerk-treasurer, but at the
applicant's expense. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   The city shall cause the notice required by this section to be posted,
by the applicant, along all perimeter property lines on the property involved.
Such posted notice shall be prominently displayed on a bright colored
background, with the term "Public Notice" in large enough type to be visible
from a vehicle on an adjacent street or alley, and to any person walking along
adjoining interior property lines.
   C.   The city clerk-treasurer shall cause the notice required by this
section to be posted at the city hall, and at other public locations (such as
the public library and the post office).
   D.   The city clerk-treasurer shall cause the notice required by this
section to be published once in the official newspaper of the city.
   E.   In the event that notice is required to two hundred (200) or more
property owners or purchasers of record, in lieu of mailed notice, the
aforestated published notice shall be at least four inches (4") by two (2)
columns in size pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6512(c), the site's posting
shall still apply, and the posting of the notice in public locations shall
still apply.
   F.   The continuance of a public hearing through verbal motion at a regular
or special meeting of the city council, and posting of the continuance at the
established posting places, shall be deemed as adequate notice to the public.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-7: FINDINGS OF FACT:
A special (conditional) use permit shall be granted only if the city council
first finds that each of the following exists:
   A.   The proposed use will be consistent with the various elements and
policies of the comprehensive plan;
   B.   The use and its associated structures and facilities will not be
detrimental to the public health or safety, the general welfare, or the
environment;
   C.   The use and facilities will not adversely affect or conflict with
adjacent uses or impede the normal development of surrounding property; and
   D.   Adequate public and private facilities such as utilities, landscaping,
parking spaces, and traffic circulation measures are or will be provided for
the proposed use. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-8: IMPOSITION OF CONDITIONS:
In accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6512(d), upon the granting of a
special (conditional) use permit, conditions may be attached to the same
including, but not limited to, those which:
   A.   Minimize adverse impacts on other development;
   B.   Control the sequence and timing of development;
   C.   Control the duration of development;
   D.   Assure that development is maintained properly;
   E.   Designate the exact location and nature of development;
   F.   Require the provision for on site and off site public facilities and/or
services;
   G.   Require more restrictive standards than those generally required by an
ordinance; and
   H.   Require mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service
delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts, providing
services within the city. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-9: NOTICE OF DECISION:
   A.   The decision of the City Council shall be in writing, and shall be
issued by e-mail to the applicant and parties of record (the applicant and
those others who have provided written or oral testimony during the public
hearing process and requested notice of the decision) within fifteen (15) days
after City Council's written adoption of said notice of decision. Every notice
of decision shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant
regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis
pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code, as it now exists or is subsequently
amended.
   B.   The decision of the City Council shall set forth a reasoned statement
that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant, states the
relevant contested facts relied upon, and explains the rationale for the
decision. The City Council shall analyze all proposed special (conditional) use
permits to ensure that they are not in conflict with the policies of the
Comprehensive Plan or the zoning ordinance.
   C.   The granting of a special (conditional) use permit shall not be
considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other special
(conditional) use permits.
   D.   A special (conditional) use permit shall not be transferable from one
parcel of land to another. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-7-10: RECONSIDERATIONS AND APPEALS:
   A.   Reconsideration: Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial
review of the City Council's final decision must first file with the City
Council a written petition for reconsideration of the Council's decision,
specifying deficiencies in the decision for which reconsideration is sought
within fourteen (14) days.
      1.   The City Council may reconsider its decision only if it finds any of
the following:
         a.   There was a clerical error in the decision;
         b.   The decision resulted from fraud or mistake;
         c.   There is newly discovered evidence or a change in circumstances;
         d.   There was a procedural error;
         e.   The Council previously rejected the application by a tie vote; or
         f.   The decision was made in violation of substantive law.
      2.   The City Council shall review the petition for reconsideration at
its next regular meeting and decide whether to reconsider the matter. If the
City Council grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a hearing before the
City Council will be scheduled to address the specific deficiencies identified
by the applicant or affected person, which shall be conducted pursuant to the
public notice procedures set forth in section
8-7-6 of this chapter. The issues examined upon reconsideration shall be
limited to issues raised by the petition for reconsideration and the record
previously established, as well as the applicable law.
      3.   Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the City Council may
affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, its prior decision and shall
provide a written decision to the applicant and the affected person(s) within
sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration. If the City
Council fails to timely decide, the request for reconsideration is deemed
denied.
   B.   Judicial Appeals: After a notice of decision is issued, or after a
revised notice of decision is issued under a reconsideration proceeding, any
aggrieved party with standing to appeal, may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-7-11: DURATION OF PERMIT:
Every right or privilege authorized by the grant of a special (conditional) use
permit shall terminate two (2) years after the granting of such permit, if
special (conditional) use permit implementation has not been initiated via
appropriate permits, and also completed during such time frame. The City
Council may grant an extension for special (conditional) use implementation for
cause, not to exceed one (1) year. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-7-12: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The City Council shall have continuing jurisdiction over any special
(conditional) use permit. To consider the revocation of a special (conditional)
use permit, the City Council shall hold a public hearing after giving notice in
accordance with this chapter. The City Council may revoke and terminate the
conditional use permit in whole or in part, reaffirm the conditional use
permit, modify the conditions, or impose new conditions. A conditional use
permit may only be revoked, or conditions modified or added, on any one (1) or
more of the following grounds:
   A.   The conditional use permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;
or
   B.   The conditional use permit has been exercised contrary to any of the
terms or conditions of approval; or
   C.   The use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation;
or
   D.   The use permitted is being or has been so exercised as to be
detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or so as to constitute a
nuisance. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
CHAPTER 8
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL (R) ZONE
SECTION:
8-8A-1: Description And Purpose
8-8A-2: Permitted Primary Uses
8-8A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
8-8A-4: Special (Conditional) Uses
8-8A-5: Site (Lot) Area And Frontage
8-8A-6: Yards, Lot Coverage And Building Separation
8-8A-7: Height Limits
8-8A-8: Off Street Parking And Loading
8-8A-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The Residential (R) Zone is intended as a zone which recognizes the historic
residential development patterns of the City. Standards herein have been
developed to avoid rendering existing dwellings nonconforming and to allow for
new housing in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan in order to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. (Ord. 263, 7-12-
2005)
8-8A-2: PERMITTED PRIMARY USES:
No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building, structure, or
use in the Residential (R) Zone shall be erected, structurally altered,
enlarged, or established, except for the following permitted uses:
One single-family dwelling per lot or parcel.
   A.   An attached garage, storage shed, and/or patio, shall be subject to the
same limitations as those which are defined as accessory uses.
   B.   When the permitted dwelling is a manufactured or modular home, it shall
conform to the following: comply with all provisions of chapter 10 of this
title.
   C.   "Single family dwelling" shall include any group residence in which
eight (8) or fewer unrelated persons with disabilities or elderly persons
reside and who are supervised at the group residence in connection with their
disability or age related infirmity.
   D.   A single-family dwelling shall, at a minimum, contain 500 square feet
of living space to include a toilet, sink and bathing facilities, cooking and
food preparation facilities and one bedroom area.
Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles may only be temporarily or
intermittently occupied and under the following conditions:
   A.   Occupation of a recreational vehicle is limited to thirty (30) days in
any 12-month period.
   B.   The recreational vehicle shall have current registration and shall be
in a serviceable condition so it can be operated in a safe and lawful manner on
the roads of the State of Idaho.
   C.   The recreational vehicle shall not be set on blocks or have the running
gear removed.
   D.   No decks or additions shall be attached to the recreational vehicle and
the vehicle shall not be skirted.
   E.   The recreational vehicle shall not be used as a dwelling except as
provided in this section. The occupant of an RV must have a primary residence
other than the RV.
   F.   No independent mail service shall be allowed to the recreational
vehicle.
   G.   The recreational vehicle shall not be used as rental property or used
for commercial purposes.
   H.   The recreational vehicle must be fully self- contained and removed from
the site to empty holding tanks at an approved location.
   I.   An RV may be used as a dwelling for the owners of the parcel on which
the RV is located during construction of a dwelling, or substantial remodel of
the dwelling on that parcel as evidenced by a valid permit for such
construction. In such cases, the provisions of this use regarding the owner's
primary residence, duration of occupation of the RV and mail service shall not
apply. Upon completion of the dwelling or expiration of the building permit for
the dwelling, the RV shall revert to temporary or intermittent use as provided
in this use.
Temporary construction offices within the tract or subdivision on which
buildings are being erected, and only for the duration of active construction.
(Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 442, - -2023)
8-8A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory Uses Permitted: No accessory buildings are allowed without a
permitted primary use already established on-site. The following accessory uses
shall be permitted in the Residential (R) Zone in conjunction with a permitted
primary use:
A single portable storage container, not exceeding 10' x 20' in size may be
used for temporary storage in the residential district for not more than sixty
(60) days in any twelve (12)-month period. The container may not be set within
any right of way or setback area. A building location permit shall be required
prior to setting of the container to address the location and track the arrival
and removal of the container.
Cat and dog houses, when the total number of dogs and/or cats is below the
number defined as a "kennel" in section
8-1-4 of this title, and when kept on the same lot as the residence.
Detached garages or carports for the private use of the residence, not to
exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in size in the aggregate,
except for lots greater than one (1) acre in size which shall be allowed up to
five thousand (5,000) square feet in the aggregate. Toilets and sinks are
allowed in accessory buildings, however, no cooking and/or bathing facilities
are allowed in accessory buildings. Accessory living units are prohibited.
Greenhouses solely maintained for private, noncommercial purposes.
Home occupations, when the business is conducted solely within the dwelling or
an accessory building, occupies no more than thirty percent (30%) of the usable
floor space of the dwelling (or dwelling and accessory building combined if
within an accessory building), employs no more than two (2) people that do not
live in the dwelling on-site, does not diminish off street parking required for
the residence, and does not generate undue noise, traffic, and/or parking that
would be congestive or otherwise disruptive in a residential neighborhood
environment.
In-home daycare for twelve (12) or fewer children, including the children of
the home subject to compliance with Panhandle Health District criteria.
In-home long term care of eight (8) or fewer elderly persons licensed by the
State.
Keeping of animals, in accordance with section
4-3-2 of this Code.
Outdoor fireplaces.
Radio or television antenna or tower, or a satellite communication dish
maintained for private, noncommercial purposes; provided, that: when erected
upon a structure, the height of the antenna, tower, or dish does not exceed the
height of the structure upon which it is located by six feet (6'); or, when
erected as a freestanding accessory, the height of the antenna, tower, or dish
does not exceed the height of the primary structure on the property by ten feet
(10'). Any such freestanding antenna, tower, or dish shall be set back from any
and all property lines a minimum distance equal to one foot (1') more than the
overall height of the antenna, tower, or dish.
Residential signs, unlit, subject to the following criteria: a nameplate and/or
street address sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, and containing
the name(s) of the resident(s) of the dwelling and/or the street address number
of the premises; a real estate sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area,
notifying that the premises is for sale, rent, or lease; an advertising sign
for a home occupation, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet, and containing
the name, phone number, and/or other pertinent information about the home
occupation conducted within the dwelling.
Storage shed and/or patio when attached to the main building structurally or by
a breezeway.
Swimming pools, spas, and/or unlighted tennis courts for the exclusive use of
the occupants of the premises and their guests.
   B.   Storage Restrictions:
      1.   Generally: All storage shall be wholly within an enclosed building
or shall be completely screened from view from surrounding properties and
public rights-of-way, and shall be accessory to the permitted use on the site;
there shall be no storage in any required front street or flanking street yard
area.
      2.   Inoperable Vehicles:
         a.   The private, noncommercial storage of up to two (2) inoperable or
not currently licensed vehicles, or remnants thereof, shall comply with the
provisions of this subsection.
         b.   Nonconforming rights for outdoor storage of more than two (2)
inoperable or not currently licensed vehicles shall end one year after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; Ord. 427, 10-
15-2019; Ord. 432, 4-20-2021)
8-8A-4: SPECIAL (CONDITIONAL) USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the Residential (R) Zone, subject to the
approval of a special (conditional) use permit in compliance with the
conditions and requirements set forth in chapter 7 of this title:
Bed and breakfast inns; provided, that, at a minimum: the proprietor resides in
the dwelling where the bed and breakfast business is conducted; one off street
guest parking space is provided for each guest room in addition to the parking
required for the dwelling; adequate restrooms are provided in accordance with
County and State regulations; compliance with State, County, and local fire
regulations has been demonstrated; and signage conforms to the provisions of
the Residential (R) Zone.
Churches and houses of worship; provided, that, at a minimum: parking conforms
to the requirements set forth in chapter 12 of this title; and signage conforms
to the provisions of the Residential (R) Zone.
Daycare, nursery school, or preschool facility; provided, that, at a minimum:
childcare and/or schooling serves the number of children approved by the City
Council; compliance with all Federal, State, County, and local daycare,
schooling, and fire regulations has been demonstrated; and signage conforms to
the provisions of the Residential (R) Zone.
Home gardening and/or greenhouses for commercial purposes.
Public and quasi-public facilities, including, but not limited to, substations,
pumping plants, telephone exchanges, and parks; provided, that, at a minimum:
such facilities conform to all provisions of sections
8-8A-5 through
8-8A-7 of this article.
Residential accommodations of a two-family (duplex) or multi-family nature;
provided, that, at a minimum: parking conforms to the requirements set forth in
chapter 12 of this title; a minimum of fourteen thousand five hundred twenty
(14,520) square feet of lot area is provided per dwelling unit; and signage
conforms to the provisions of the Residential (R) Zone.
Residential care facilities; provided, that, at a minimum: parking conforms to
the requirements set forth in chapter 12 of this title; compliance with all
Federal, State, County, and local residential care facility, and fire
regulations has been demonstrated; and signage conforms to the provisions of
the Residential (R) Zone.
Storage of inoperable vehicles; the private, noncommercial storage of more than
two (2) inoperable or not currently licensed vehicles, or remnants thereof;
provided, that, at a minimum: all such vehicles, remnants thereof, and parts
are stored within a completely enclosed building. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-8A-5: SITE (LOT) AREA AND FRONTAGE:
The following site size and street frontage standards shall apply to all
permitted or conditional uses in the Residential (R) Zone:
   A.   The required minimum lot area shall be fourteen thousand five hundred
twenty (14,520) square feet which is equal to one-third (1/3) of an acre.
   B.   Each lot or parcel shall have a minimum width at the building line
(front street setback) of seventy five feet (75').
   C.   Each dwelling site shall front upon a public street without any other
building site intervening between it and the street upon which it fronts. (Ord.
263, 7-12-2005)
8-8A-6: YARDS, LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING SEPARATION:
The following yard (setback), site coverage, and building separation standards
shall be observed by all uses in the Residential (R) Zone:
   A.   Street Frontage Yard: The minimum setback from any fronting street
shall be twenty five feet (25') from the street frontage property line. The
minimum setback from the flanking (side) street frontage for a corner lot shall
be twenty feet (20') from the flanking street frontage property line.
      1.   No building or fencing, nor any sight obstruction which constitutes
a hazard to the traveling public, shall be permitted on any corner lot within
the area designated as the "clear view triangle", which can be determined by
measuring fifty feet (50') from the corner of the two (2) intersecting street
frontage property lines along the property line of each street frontage, then
connecting the two (2) points with a straight line forming the hypotenuse of
the clear view triangle.
Trees within the clear view triangle shall have their branches removed from
ground level to a minimum of seven feet (7') above ground level, and shrubs
within such clear view triangle shall be maintained at a maximum height of
three feet (3') above ground level. In cases where such clear view triangle
will not provide adequate sight distance, the Administrator shall determine the
required area needed to reduce hazards to the traveling public.
      2.   Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be
located on the fronting or flanking street property line outside the area
encompassed by the clear view triangle.
   B.   Rear Yard:
      1.   Rear yards shall have a minimum depth of ten feet (10') from the
rear property line.
      2.   Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be
located on the rear property line.
   C.   Side Yard:
      1.   Side yards shall have a minimum depth of five feet (5') from one
side property line and ten feet (10') from the other side property line. In the
case of a corner lot, the interior side property line setback shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') in depth.
      2.   Fences or walls, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), may be
located on the side property line.
   D.   Yard Exceptions: Eaves and cornices may project into a required yard
(setback) area up to eighteen inches (18"); uncovered steps may project into a
required yard (setback) area; provided, that compliance with State and local
fire regulations has been demonstrated.
   E.   Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage for all buildings and structures
shall be fifty percent (50%).
   F.   Building Separation: A minimum separation distance of ten feet (10')
shall be maintained between structures. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430.
11-17-2020)
8-8A-7: HEIGHT LIMITS:
No building or structure in the Residential (R) Zone shall exceed a height of
two (2) stories or a total height above grade of thirty five feet (35'). (Ord.
263, 7-12-2005)
8-8A-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Parking and loading standards for uses in the Residential (R) Zone
shall conform to the standards set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   B.   Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined
in this title, the parking requirements for such use shall be based upon the
requirements for the most comparable use specified in this title, or other
requirements based upon the best available information concerning the proposed
use. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL (C) ZONE
SECTION:
8-8B-1: Description And Purpose
8-8B-2: Permitted Primary Uses
8-8B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
8-8B-4: Special (Conditional) Uses
8-8B-5: Site (Lot) Area And Frontage
8-8B-6: Yards And Lot Coverage
8-8B-7: Height Limits
8-8B-8: Off Street Parking And Loading
8-8B-9: Performance Standards
8-8B-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The Commercial (C) Zone is intended as a zone which recognizes the historic
commercial development patterns of the City in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. In order to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the community, and to assure compatibility with surrounding areas,
an appropriate mixture of community serving and region serving commercial uses
shall be allowed. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-8B-2: PERMITTED PRIMARY USES:
No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building, structure, or
use in the Commercial (C) Zone shall be erected, structurally altered,
enlarged, or established, except for the following permitted uses:
   A.   Commercial retail and service uses:
Any wholesale, retail and service business similar to and compatible with the
uses described in this section.
Automotive parts retail and repair services, including battery shops and tire
repair shops.
Bakeries.
Banks and other financial services.
Business and professional offices, including medical and dental offices.
Car washes.
Carpet, furniture, and upholstery cleaning and repair establishments.
Churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, and similar houses of worship.
Clothing and clothing accessory retail sales.
Contractors' offices and shops, including electrical, masonry, tile, plumbing,
heating and ventilating, plastering, carpentry, roofing, glass, insulation,
iron work, and similar services.
Convalescent homes; sanitariums, or retirement homes.
Daycare, nursery school, or preschool facilities and services.
Delicatessens and meat markets.
Drugstores and pharmacies.
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
Electrical appliance and motor repair shops.
Electronic instrument and other technology businesses.
Florist and plant shops.
Food stores and markets.
Fraternal or philanthropic lodges and institutions and other community meeting
facilities.
Furniture and other home accessory sales such as carpets, drapes, and paint.
General merchandise and other retail sales.
Hardware stores.
Hospitality businesses, including but not limited to hotels, motels, bed and
breakfast inns, meeting and convention facilities.
Household appliance repair shops.
Jewelry manufacturing and sales.
Lock and key services.
Lumber yards and building material sales.
Manufacture, sales, and service of windows, window screens, rain gutters,
shades and awnings.
Medical and dental laboratories.
Medical offices and emergency care clinics.
Mortuaries and funeral homes.
Motor vehicle and farm equipment sales, leasing, rental, and services.
Nurseries and garden supplies.
Pawnshops.
Personal services, including barber and beauty shops.
Pet shops, including grooming services.
Photographic services, including portrait studios and photo developing stores.
Printing and publishing services.
Public or private office buildings.
Radio, television, and other electronics sales and services.
Restaurants and any other eating or drinking establishments, including but not
limited to cafeterias, catering services, lounges and taverns.
Service stations.
Shoe repair and clothing alterations shops.
Small tool sharpening and repair.
Sports and athletic facilities whether indoor, outdoor or in combination.
Theaters.
Vehicle and machinery repair.
Veterinary offices, including hospitalization and boarding services.
Vocational, trade or private instructional schools.
Welding and metal fabricating shops.
Other uses which the Administrator determines to be similar in nature,
function, and operation to permitted primary commercial uses in the zone.
   B.   Other uses:
Government and utility facilities, including, but not limited to:
Elementary and secondary schools, public or private.
Government buildings and uses operated by Federal, State, County, or Municipal
government entities, or operated by special purpose districts.
Libraries.
Museums.
Open space/conservation areas.
Parks and recreation uses, including, but not limited to, tennis courts,
swimming pools, play fields, and other similar uses as determined by the
Administrator.
Publicly or privately operated public utility uses, structures, or transmission
facilities. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
8-8B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory Uses Permitted: The following accessory uses shall be
permitted in the Commercial (C) Zone:
      1.   Any accessory use allowed in the Residential (R) Zone under those
circumstances where residential uses are authorized in accordance with section
8-8B-4 of this article.
      2.   Signs in conformance with the provisions set forth in chapter 13 of
this title.
      3.   A single portable storage container, not associated with the active
operation of an allowed railroad or trucking business, and not exceeding 10' x
20' in size may be used for temporary storage in the Commercial district for
not more than sixty (60) days in any twelve (12)-month period. Containers may
not be set within any right of way, setback area, required parking space, or
required landscape or drainage area. A building location permit shall be
required prior to setting of the container to address the location and track
the arrival and removal of the container.
   B.   Storage Restrictions:
      1.   All storage must be indoors or fully enclosed within a one hundred
percent (100%) sight obscuring, nonpierced fence at least six feet (6') in
height.
      2.   Storage of petroleum in quantities of less than twenty thousand
(20,000) gallons (total for any individual site) shall be belowground and shall
meet National Fire Protection Association and Health and Welfare Department
standards. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 432, 4-20-
2021)
8-8B-4: SPECIAL (CONDITIONAL) USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the Commercial (C) Zone, subject to the
approval of a special (conditional) use permit in compliance with the
conditions and requirements set forth in chapter 7 of this title:
Any special (conditional) use listed in the Residential (R) Zone which is not a
permitted primary use in the Commercial (C) Zone.
Dance halls, skating rinks, arcades, or other commercial amusement places.
Hospitals and long term medical care facilities.
Kennels, pet boarding and animal breeding operations.
Manufacture and assemblage of components, provided that such activity: a) is
carried on in such a manner and with such precautions against fire and
explosion hazards as provided by the Fire Code, b) emits no obnoxious odor or
noise, c) exhausts no waste or dust into the air, and d) shall be conducted so
that direct and indirect illumination shall not exceed 0.2 foot-candle across
lot lines of the subject property.
Mini-storage facilities: On parcels of not less than 3.5 acres, provided
outside storage must be within a sight obscuring fence or other enclosure.
Off premises advertising signs.
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds.
Transfer, storage, and warehouse facilities which are not a permitted primary
use in the Commercial (C) Zone, provided outside storage must be within a sight
obscuring fence or other enclosure.
Uses permitted in the Residential (R) Zone, including multi-family housing,
manufactured and modular homes; provided, at a minimum, that such uses comply
with all provisions of article A of this chapter and chapter 10 of this title.
Residential Planned Unit Developments may be permitted in the Commercial Zone
without a special use permit, in accordance with the development standards of
section 8-9-6B and in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Title
8, Chapter 9. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 431, 3-16-
2021)
8-8B-5: SITE (LOT) AREA AND FRONTAGE:
The following site size and street frontage standards shall apply to all uses
in the Commercial (C) Zone:
   A.   Any authorized residential use shall observe the site (lot) area and
frontage standards of the Residential (R) Zone.
   B.   The minimum site or parcel area for all commercial development sites
shall be eight thousand seven hundred (8,700) square feet.
   C.   Each site or parcel shall have a minimum width at the street facing
property line of seventy feet (70'). (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-8B-6: YARDS AND LOT COVERAGE:
The following yard (setback) and lot coverage standards shall be observed by
all uses in the Commercial (C) Zone:
   A.   Compliance With Residential Zone Requirements: Any authorized
residential uses shall observe the yard area and lot coverage standards of the
Residential (R) Zone.
   B.   Street Frontage Yard: The minimum setback from any fronting street
shall be ten feet (10') from the street frontage property line. The minimum
setback from the flanking (side) street frontage for a corner lot shall be ten
feet (10') from the flanking street frontage property line.
      1.   No building or fencing, nor any sight obstruction which constitutes
a hazard to the traveling public, shall be permitted on any corner lot within
the area designated as the “clear view triangle”, as defined in the
“Supplemental Construction Specifications to the ISPWC & Design Standards,” as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
      Trees within the clear view triangle shall have their branches removed
from ground level to a minimum of seven feet (7') above ground level, and
shrubs within such clear view triangle shall be maintained at a maximum height
of three feet (3') above ground level.
      2.   Fences with a maximum height of six feet (6') may be located along
the fronting or flanking street property line outside the area encompassed by
the clear view triangle and located such that any required landscaping along
the frontage is outside the fence and visible from the street.
   C.   Rear Yard:
      1.   The rear yard setback from the rear property line shall be a minimum
of five feet (5'), except where the rear property line abuts property in the
Residential (R) Zone, in which case commercial buildings and structures (except
fences) shall observe the rear yard setback requirement of the Residential (R)
Zone.
      2.   Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on
the rear property line.
   D.   Side Yard:
      1.   The side yard setback from the side property line shall be a minimum
of five feet (5'), except where the side property line abuts property in the
Residential (R) Zone, in which case commercial buildings and structures (except
fences) shall observe the ten-foot (10' side yard setback requirement of the
Residential (R) Zone.
      2.   Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on
the side property line.
   E.   Exceptions: Where commercial buildings and structures are subject to
rear and side yard setbacks of the abutting Residential (R) Zone, the
exceptions authorized in the Residential (R) Zone shall apply.
   F.   Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage for development on commercially
zoned property shall be eighty percent (80%), except for residential uses which
shall have a maximum coverage of fifty percent (50%). (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018;
amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-8B-7: HEIGHT LIMITS:
The height limit for commercial buildings and structures shall be 35 feet,
except where a side or rear property line abuts property in the Residential (R)
Zone, in which case commercial buildings and structures shall observe the
height limits of the Residential (R) Zone. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 445,
5-21-2024)
8-8B-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Parking and loading standards for uses in the Commercial (C) Zone shall
conform to the standards set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
   B.   Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined
in this title, the parking requirements for such use shall be based upon the
requirements for the most comparable use specified in this title, or other
requirements based upon the best available information concerning the proposed
use. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020)
8-8B-9: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses in the Commercial (C) Zone shall be developed and used in a manner
that complies with the following performance standards:
   A.   Compliance With Federal, State And Local Standards: All uses shall
fully comply with all applicable Federal, State, and Municipal standards
governing noise, vibrations, odors, air quality, smoke, hazardous materials,
sanitary waste, and solid waste.
      1.   Further, no commercial use located within five hundred feet (500')
of a residential zone shall emit any noise, vibrations, odors, or smoke between
the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   No obnoxious odors shall be emitted at any time.
   B.   Water Contamination: All uses shall be operated in such a manner that
there is no discharge whatsoever into a public or private sewerage disposal
system or into the ground of any materials that may contaminate any domestic
water supply source or surface waters, or that may otherwise cause the emission
of dangerous or offensive elements. The standards of the State Department of
Health and the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) shall prevail.
   C.   Storage Of Flammable Materials: All flammable materials shall be stored
in accordance with the latest edition of the Fire Code in a manner satisfactory
to the Timberlake Fire District.
   D.   Lighting, Heat And Glare:
      1.   All lighting shall be arranged so as to not produce glare on public
roadways and/or upon any neighboring residential properties.
      2.   Welding, acetylene torch, or other similar processes shall be
performed so as to not be seen from outside the property lines.
      3.   All activities causing heat and glare shall be confined to its own
site and shall not extend beyond its property lines.
   E.   Dust: All roadways, parking spaces, and storage areas shall be treated
and maintained to effectively eliminate dust as a result of wind or usage. Open
spaces shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained to effectively minimize dust
and to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the use of the property.
   F.   Stormwater Runoff: All commercial uses shall collect and suitably
dispose of stormwater runoff in accordance with DEQ’s catalog of best
management practices. Any building permit application shall be accompanied by a
drainage plan prepared by an engineer or landscape architect licensed to
practice in the State of Idaho, and the approved stormwater runoff collection
and disposal system shall be installed and functional prior to commencing the
use or occupying the primary building on the property, whichever comes first.
   G.   Open Storage, Fence Required: All open storage, including, but not
limited to, raw materials, finished products, machinery and equipment, and
company owned or operated trucks and other vehicles, shall be enclosed by a
100% sight obscuring fence at least six feet (6') in height which obscures the
view of the open storage area from adjoining properties and streets. Operable
new or used automobiles, recreational vehicles, other vehicles, or machinery,
normally displayed for sales purposes on an open lot, may be so displayed.
   H.   Refuse Containers: Refuse containers shall be screened from view by a
one hundred percent (100%) sight obscuring fence that is a minimum of six feet
(6') in height. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
ARTICLE C. LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI) ZONE
SECTION:
8-8C-1: Description And Purpose
8-8C-2: Permitted Primary Uses
8-8C-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
8-8C-4: Special (Conditional) Uses
8-8C-5: Site (Lot) Area And Frontage
8-8C-6: Yards And Lot Coverage
8-8C-7: Height Limits
8-8C-8: Off Street Parking And Loading
8-8C-9: Performance Standards
8-8C-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The Light Industrial (LI) Zone is intended to accommodate certain industrial
buildings, structures, and uses having physical and operational characteristics
which might adversely affect the economic welfare of adjoining residential and
commercial uses. These regulations are designed to permit those industrial uses
which can be operated in a relatively clean, quiet, and safe manner compatible
with adjoining industrial uses and without serious impact, danger, or hazard to
nearby residential and commercial usage. Residential development is excluded,
both to protect residences from an undesirable environment, and to ensure the
preservation of adequate areas for industries, manufacturing, and processing of
raw materials. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-8C-2: PERMITTED PRIMARY USES:
No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building, structure, or
use in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone shall be erected, structurally altered,
enlarged, or established, except for the following permitted uses:
   A.   The Administrator may impose specific conditions for implementation of
any permitted use in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the intent of this title and for ensuring the public health and
safety.
   B.   Permitted primary industrial uses:
Agricultural uses of the land pertaining to crops.
Electronic instrument manufacturing and assembly.
Food and dry goods processing, packaging, and distribution operations.
Laboratories, experimental or testing.
Mini-storage facilities, provided outside storage must be within a sight
obscuring fence or other enclosure.
Optical device manufacturing and assembly.
Precision instruments manufacturing.
Recording and sensory instrument or device manufacturing and assembly.
Remanufacture of lumber goods.
Research, development, and testing, including scientific research or
experimental development of materials, methods, and products.
Warehousing and distribution.
Wholesaling.
Other uses which the Administrator determines to be similar in nature,
function, and operation to permitted primary industrial uses in the zone. (Ord.
416, 3-21-2018)
8-8C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory Uses Permitted: The following accessory uses shall be
permitted in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone:
      1.   Signs in conformance with the provisions set forth in chapter 13 of
this title.
      2.   Portable storage containers, not associated with the active
operation of an allowed railroad or trucking business, not exceeding 8' x 40'
in size and three (3) in number, may be used for storage in the Light
Industrial (LI) district. The container may not be set within any right of way,
setback area, required parking space, or required landscape or drainage area. A
building location permit shall be required prior to setting of the container.
   B.   Storage Restrictions:
      1.   All storage must be indoors or fully enclosed within an eighty
percent (80%) sight obscuring fence at least six feet (6') in height.
      2.   Storage of petroleum in quantities of less than twenty thousand
(20,000) gallons (total for any individual site) shall be belowground and shall
meet National Fire Protection Association and Health and Welfare Department
standards. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 432, 4-20-
2021)
8-8C-4: SPECIAL (CONDITIONAL) USES:
The following uses may be permitted in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone, subject
to the approval of a special (conditional) use permit in compliance with the
conditions and requirements set forth in chapter 7 of this title:
Agricultural uses of the land pertaining to livestock.
Fuel storage and distribution yards.
Kennels.
Manufacturing, processing, and fabrication uses not listed among permitted
primary uses in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone.
Off premises advertising signs. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-8C-5: SITE (LOT) AREA AND FRONTAGE:
The following site size and street frontage standards shall apply to all uses
in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone:
   A.   The minimum site or parcel area for all sites shall be fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet.
   B.   Each site or parcel shall have a minimum width at the public street
facing property line of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd.
Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-8C-6: YARDS AND LOT COVERAGE:
The following yard (setback) and lot coverage standards shall be observed by
all uses in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone:
   A.   Street Frontage Yard: The minimum setback from any fronting street
shall be ten feet (10') from the street frontage property line. The minimum
setback from the flanking (side) street frontage for a corner lot shall be ten
feet (10') from the flanking street frontage property line.
      1.   No building or fencing, nor any sight obstruction which constitutes
a hazard to the traveling public, shall be permitted on any corner lot within
the area designated as the “clear view triangle”, as defined in the
“Supplemental Construction Specifications to the ISPWC & Design Standards,” as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
      Trees within the clear view triangle shall have their branches removed
from ground level to a minimum of seven feet (7') above ground level, and
shrubs within such clear view triangle shall be maintained at a maximum height
of three feet (3') above ground level.
      2.   Fences with a maximum height of six feet (6') may be located along
the fronting or flanking street property line outside the area encompassed by
the clear view triangle and located such that any required landscaping along
the frontage is outside the fence and visible from the street.
   B.   Rear Yard:
      1.   The rear yard setback from the rear property line shall be a minimum
of five feet (5'), except where the rear property line abuts property in the
Residential (R) Zone, in which case industrial buildings and structures (except
fences) shall observe the rear yard setback requirement of the Residential (R)
Zone.
      2.   Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on
the rear property line.
   C.   Side Yard:
      1.   The side yard setback from the side property line shall be a minimum
of five feet (5'), except where the side property line abuts property in the
Residential (R) Zone, in which case industrial buildings and structures (except
fences) shall observe the ten-foot (10") side yard setback requirement of the
Residential (R) Zone.
      2.   Fences with a maximum height of eight feet (8') may be located on
the side property line.
   D.   Exceptions: Where buildings and structures are subject to rear and side
yard setbacks of the abutting Residential (R) Zone, the exceptions authorized
in the Residential (R) Zone shall apply.
   E.   Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage for all development on light
industrial-zoned property shall be eighty percent (80%). (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018;
amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-8C-7: HEIGHT LIMITS:
The height limit for all buildings and structures in the Light Industrial (LI)
Zone shall be a maximum of 35', except where a side or rear property line abuts
property in the Residential (R) Zone, in which case buildings and structures
shall observe the height limits of the Residential (R) Zone. (Ord. 263, 7-12-
2005; amd. Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-8C-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Parking and loading standards for uses in the Light Industrial (LI)
Zone shall conform to the standards set forth in chapter 12 this title.
   B.   Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically defined
in this title, the parking requirements for such use shall be based upon the
requirements for the most comparable use specified in this title, or other
requirements based upon the best available information concerning the proposed
use. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-8C-9: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses in the Light Industrial (LI) Zone shall be developed and used in a
manner that complies with the following performance standards:
   A.   Compliance With Federal, State And Local Standards: All uses shall
fully comply with all applicable Federal, State, and Municipal standards
governing noise, vibrations, odors, air quality, smoke, hazardous materials,
sanitary waste, and solid waste.
      1.   Further, no industrial use located within five hundred feet (500')
of a Residential Zone shall emit any noise, vibrations, odors, or smoke between
the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
      2.   No obnoxious odors shall be emitted at any time.
   B.   Water Contamination: All uses shall be operated in such a manner that
there is no discharge whatsoever into a public or private sewerage disposal
system or into the ground of any materials that may contaminate any domestic
water supply source or surface waters, or that may otherwise cause the emission
of dangerous or offensive elements. The standards of the State Department of
Health and the Department of Environmental Quality shall prevail.
   C.   Storage Of Flammable Materials: All flammable materials shall be stored
in accordance with the latest edition of the Uniform Fire Code in a manner
satisfactory to the Timberlake Fire District.
   D.   Lighting, Heat And Glare:
      1.   All lighting shall be arranged so as to not produce glare on public
roadways and/or upon any neighboring residential properties.
      2.   Welding, acetylene torch, or other similar processes shall be
performed so as to not be seen from outside the property lines.
      3.   All activities causing heat and glare shall be confined to its own
site and shall not extend beyond its property lines.
   E.   Dust: All roadways, parking spaces, and storage areas shall be treated
and maintained to effectively eliminate dust as a result of wind or usage. Open
spaces shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained to effectively minimize dust
and to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the use of the property.
   F.   Stormwater Runoff: All uses shall collect and suitably dispose of
stormwater runoff in accordance with DEQ’s catalog of best management
practices. Any building permit application shall be accompanied by a drainage
plan, prepared by an engineer or landscape architect licensed to practice in
the State of Idaho, and the approved stormwater runoff collection and disposal
system shall be installed and functional prior to commencing the use or
occupying the primary building on the property, whichever comes first.
   G.   Open Storage, Fence Required: All open storage, including, but not
limited to, raw materials, finished products, machinery and equipment, and
company owned or operated trucks and other vehicles, shall be enclosed by an
eighty percent (80%) sight obscuring fence at least six feet (6') in height
which obscures the view of the open storage area from adjoining properties and
streets. Operable new or used automobiles, recreational vehicles, other
vehicles, or machinery, normally displayed for sales purposes on an open lot,
may be so displayed.
   H.   Industrial Fuel: Industrial activities shall use only electricity,
natural gas, or oil for industrial fuel purposes.
   I.   Mining, Soil Stripping Operations: No industrial activities shall be
permitted which involve mining, extraction, filling, or soil stripping
operations.
   J.   Refuse Containers: Refuse containers shall be screened from view by a
one hundred percent (100%) sight obscuring fence that is a minimum of six feet
(6') in height. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
CHAPTER 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Purpose
8-9-2: Definitions
8-9-3: General Requirements
8-9-4: Location Restricted
8-9-5: Permitted Uses
8-9-6: Development Standards
8-9-7: Application For Tentative Approval
8-9-8: Application For Final Approval
8-9-9: Administration And Enforcement
8-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage imaginative design and the creation
of open space by permitting greater flexibility in zoning requirements than is
generally permitted by other chapters and/or articles of this title. Toward
this end, it is the further purpose of this chapter to:
   A.   Preserve and create environmental amenities superior to those generally
found in conventional developments;
   B.   Create or preserve usable open space for the enjoyment of the
occupants;
   C.   Preserve, to the greatest extent, the natural characteristics of the
land, including topography, natural vegetation, and views;
   D.   Encourage development of a variety of housing types;
   E.   Provide for maximum efficiency in the layout of streets, utility
networks, and other public improvements; and
   F.   Provide a guide to developers and city officials in meeting the purpose
and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words and phrases, as herein defined, shall govern the interpretation
of this chapter:
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a
combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned unit
residential development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of
residents of a planned unit development. "Common open space" may contain such
complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for
the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the planned unit development.
ENFORCING OFFICER: The mayor or the designee of the mayor who is responsible
for enforcement of the requirements applicable to any particular planned unit
development.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION: An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating
under recorded land agreements through which:
   A.   Each lot owner is automatically a member; and
   B.   Each lot is automatically subject to charge for a proportionate share
of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining common
property; and
   C.   A charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed to
be included in a planned unit development; a contract purchaser or any other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land shall be deemed
to be a "landowner" for the purposes of this chapter.
LEGAL OWNERSHIP: The proprietary interest of a "landowner" as defined above.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Any residential development approved and developed in
accordance with the terms of this title, including a plat or subdivision of
such land.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any development designed and intended primarily for
residential use regardless of the type of building in which such residence is
located; i.e., conventional single- family residences, townhouses, duplexes,
triplexes, fourplexes, or larger multi-family housing buildings. (Ord. 263, 7-
12-2005)
8-9-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Demonstrate General Public Benefit: All planned unit development
projects shall bear the burden of perimeter transition and demonstrate that
there is a general public benefit to be gained by the degree of deviation from
the zoning regulations proposed in the project, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Additional or improved relationship of open spaces;
      2.   Additional public facilities, such as pedestrian walks, traffic
circulation, or public access to recreational amenities;
      3.   Preservation of a natural asset such as an historic landmark.
   B.   Facilities Required: Planned unit developments shall provide the
following facilities:
      1.   In accordance with municipal requirements, paved streets, curbs and
gutters, sanitary sewers or their acceptable equivalent, street lighting, all
necessary landscaping, and off street parking.
      2.   As directed by the city council, sidewalks and storm water
management facilities. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-9-4: LOCATION RESTRICTED:
Planned unit developments (PUDs) apply in the city's residential (R) zone and
are achieved via an overlay of the standards in this chapter over those in the
residential (R) zone, as set forth in chapter 8, article A of this title.
Residential PUDs may also be allowed in the commercial (C) zone, subject to the
development standards of section 8-9-6B and in accordance with the requirements
and procedures of this chapter. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 431, 3-16-2021)
8-9-5: PERMITTED USES:
In a planned unit development, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Those uses permitted as a matter of right in the underlying zone;
   B.   Accessory uses specifically geared to the needs of the residents of the
planned unit development, such as schools, houses of religious worship, and
recreation facilities of a noncommercial nature; and
   C.   Any combination of the above uses; provided, that the design features
of accessory uses shall be carefully coordinated with residential development
in the planned unit development. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 431, 3-16-
2021)
8-9-6: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Article A: Planned Unit Developments In The Residential (R) Zone:
   A.   Site Acreage Minimum:
      1.   The minimum site for a planned unit development shall be three (3)
acres for exclusively residential development, and five (5) acres for
developments combining accessory uses with residential use.
      2.   The site shall abut a dedicated public street, and the main street
serving the planned unit development shall be connected to at least one
arterial or collector street as defined in the city's comprehensive plan.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size provisions of the residential
(R) zone are waived in a planned unit development, except that such minimum lot
size provisions shall serve as the criterion to determine planned unit
development densities.
   C.   Setback Requirements: Setbacks from front or flanking streets, and
interior or rear property lines in a planned unit development shall all be as
required by the city council.
   D.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in a planned
unit development in the same ratios as required for the types of uses therein
as specified elsewhere in this title.
   E.   Platting Requirements: A planned unit development shall be exempt from
the specific design requirements of the city's subdivision regulations.
However, when any parcel of land in a planned unit development is intended for
individual ownership, sale, or public dedication, the platting procedural
requirements of the city's subdivision ordinance and applicable state laws
pertaining to subdivision of land shall be followed.
   F.   Design Standards:
      1.   Open Space: Open space required shall be as follows:
         a.   Common Open Space: Each planned unit development shall provide
not less than thirty percent (30%) of the gross land area for common open
space, which shall be either:
            (1)   Held in common ownership by all of the owners in the
development area; or
            (2)   Dedicated for public use, if acceptable to the city.
         b.   Private Open Space: Private, usable open space shall be provided
for each dwelling unit in a planned unit development as follows:
            (1)   For single-family structures, detached or attached, private
open space shall be at ground level, and shall be equal to twenty percent (20%)
of the site covered by the dwelling unit, except that in no case shall this
open space be less than two hundred (200) square feet.
            (2)   For dwelling units in multiple residential structures, having
no direct access to ground level, private open space shall be provided in the
following amounts:
               (A)   For dwelling units one story above ground level, an area
(balcony or deck) equal to a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross square
footage of the dwelling unit; and
               (B)   For dwelling units two (2) or more stories above ground
level, an area (balcony or deck) equal to a minimum of five percent (5%) of the
gross square footage of the dwelling unit.
      2.   Land Area And Dwelling Unit Computations: Open space and street
areas are computed as follows:
         a.   Street Right Of Way: Streets in a planned unit development shall
be computed at twenty percent (20%) of the gross land area, regardless of the
amount of land actually used for streets in the final design.
         b.   Density And Development Formula: In a planned unit development,
the city council may authorize a dwelling unit density not more than twenty
percent (20%) greater than that permitted by the underlying residential (R)
zone; provided, that the environmental amenities sought by this chapter are
met. Development areas shall be computed according to the following formula:
   G    Is gross land area in square feet
   S    Is street area (i.e., 20 percent of G) in square feet
   C    Is common open space (i.e., 30 percent of G) in square feet
   DU    Is number of dwelling units
   M    Is minimum lot size of underlying residential (R) zone
   N    Is net developable area (G minus S) in square feet
Dwelling units permitted are computed as follows:
DU = N x 1.2 ÷ M
Example of calculations for a three (3) acre site:
G (which is 130,680 square feet) minus S (which is 26,136 square feet) equals N
(which is 104,544 square feet) times 1.2 (which is 125,433 square feet) divided
by M (which is 14,520 square feet) equals DU (which is 8.6 dwelling units)
rounded up to 9 units.
      3.   Maximum Site Coverage: Site coverage shall not be more than that
permitted by the underlying residential (R) zone (i.e., 50 percent) based on
conventional subdivision design.
      4.   Landscaping Required: All common open space shall be landscaped in
accordance with the landscaping and irrigation plan submitted by the applicant
and approved by the city council. Such landscaping shall be maintained by the
homeowners' association, and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the
city. In the event that such landscaping and irrigation is not maintained in a
reasonable manner, the city shall have the right to provide for the maintenance
thereof and bill the homeowners' association accordingly. If unpaid, such bill
shall become a lien against the homeowners' association.
      5.   Relationship To Adjacent Areas: The design of a planned unit
development shall take into account the relationship of the site to the
surrounding areas. The perimeter of the planned unit development shall be so
designed as to minimize undesirable impact of the planned unit development on
adjacent properties and, conversely, to minimize undesirable impact of adjacent
land use and development characteristics upon the planned unit development.
      6.   Setback Requirements: Setbacks from the property lines of the
planned unit development shall be comparable to or compatible with those of the
existing development of adjacent properties or, if adjacent properties are
undeveloped, the type of development which may reasonably be expected on such
properties given the existing zoning on such properties or the projections of
the comprehensive plan. In no event shall such perimeter property line setback
be less than ten feet (10').
      7.   Streets: All public streets within or adjacent to a planned unit
development shall meet city standards in force at the time of application.
Article B: Planned Unit Developments In The Commercial (C) Zone:
   A.   Relation To Subdivision Application: A residential Planned Unit
Development (PUD) in the commercial (C) zone may be processed concurrently with
a subdivision request for the same property, or may be processed as a stand-
alone PUD when no subdivision of the property is required.
   B.   Site Acreage Minimum: The minimum site area for a residential PUD in
the commercial zone shall be three (3) acres.
   C.   Wastewater Treatment: All residential PUDs in the commercial zone shall
require municipal-type wastewater treatment for the development. No residential
PUDs in the commercial zone will be allowed on septic tank and drainfield type
wastewater systems.
   D.   Density: The maximum number of residential units allowed within the PUD
shall be eight (8) units per gross acre of the parcel. If the PUD includes
commercial uses, the area dedicated to commercial use shall not be included in
the gross acreage when determining the allowable number of residential units.
   E.   Mixed Uses: The PUD may contain uses allowed in either the residential
(R) or commercial (C) zone. All proposed uses must be clearly shown on the PUD
plan and addressed in the project narrative.
   F.   Configuration: Residential uses may be in any form of single-family
residence, two-family residence (duplex), or multi-family residence that is
acceptable to the city council. The configuration of the residential units must
be clearly shown on the PUD plan and addressed in the project narrative.
   G.   Access Roads: Privately maintained roads may be allowed for access to
and within the PUD. The minimum road width shall be twenty (20) feet of
improved width with no on-street parking allowed. The horizontal road geometry
shall be evaluated as part of the PUD approval. In all other respects, roads
shall be designed to meet the most current version of the Highway Standards for
the Associated Highway Districts of Kootenai County, Idaho.
   H.   Road Frontage And Lot Width: Each residential lot shall have a minimum
of thirty (30) feet of road frontage and shall not be narrower than thirty-five
(35) feet at any point through the building envelope of the lot.
   I.   Yard Requirements And Building Separation: Yard requirements for the
development shall be clearly delineated in the PUD application, either on the
PUD plan or in the project narrative. At a minimum, all residential structures
shall have a minimum front yard of fifteen (15) feet, a minimum side yard of
five (5) feet, and a minimum rear yard of ten (10) feet. Separate buildings on
the same parcel must be separated by at least five (5) feet. Zero lot line
housing types may be allowed if specifically identified and approved in the PUD
approval process.
   J.   Lot Coverage: Residential lots shall have a maximum lot coverage of
seventy percent (70%). Commercial lots shall have a maximum lot coverage of
eighty percent (80%).
   K.   Parking: Parking for commercial uses shall be as required in Title 8,
Chapter 12. Residential lots shall have a minimum of two (2) off-street parking
spaces per dwelling unit, unless the PUD provides for on-street parking. In
such cases, off-street parking may be reduced to one (1) space per dwelling
unit. Parking spaces shall be configured to prevent blocking of sidewalks.
   L.   Open Space: Each PUD shall provide not less than ten percent (10%) of
the gross land area for common open space, which shall be either held in common
ownership by all of the owners in the development area, or dedicated to the
city for public use, if the city chooses to accept it.
   M.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be required to guide pedestrian traffic
through the PUD and to any PUD amenities. Sidewalks may be limited to one side
of a private street. Sidewalk layout shall be subject to approval of the
Administrator as part of construction drawing approval.
   N.   Platting Requirements: A Planned Unit Development shall be exempt from
the specific design requirements of the city's subdivision regulations.
However, when any parcel of land in a Planned Unit Development is intended for
individual ownership, sale, or public dedication, the platting procedural
requirements of the city's subdivision ordinance and applicable state laws
pertaining to subdivision of land shall be followed. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd.
Ord. 431, 3-16-2021)
8-9-7: APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL:
   A.   Authorized Applicants: Any owner or group of owners of property acting
jointly may submit an application for a planned unit development, or a
developer authorized to act as agent for an owner or group of owners.
   B.   Preapplication Conference: Every property owner or developer who
considers developing property in accordance with the planned unit development
provisions of this chapter is advised and urged to confer with the enforcing
officer regarding the provisions of this chapter as they would pertain to the
property under consideration. This should be done prior to submitting a formal
application and prior to incurring obligations or making binding commitments in
the preparation of plans, surveys, and other data necessary for the processing
of a formal planned unit development application.
   C.   Documents Required With Application: An application for a planned unit
development shall include the following:
      1.   Vicinity map showing the location of the site and its relationship
to surrounding areas;
      2.   A map of the site drawn to a scale of not less than fifty feet (50')
nor more than one hundred feet (100') to the inch showing the following:
         a.   Names and dimensions of streets bounding or touching the site.
         b.   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns.
         c.   Existing and proposed topography at contour intervals not less
than five feet (5') in areas having slopes exceeding five percent (5%) and not
less than two feet (2') in areas having slopes less than five percent (5%).
         d.   Proposed buildings including identification of types and number
of dwelling units in each.
         e.   Dimensions between buildings.
         f.   Off street parking facilities.
         g.   Locations and dimensions of common open space.
         h.   Other major features, such as existing railroads, rights of way,
or easements, which may affect or be affected by the proposed planned unit
development.
      3.   Preliminary building plans including floor plans and exterior
designs and/or elevation views.
      4.   Preliminary engineering plans including site grading, street
improvements, drainage, and public utility extensions.
      5.   In addition to the graphic illustrations noted above, the developer
shall submit a written statement providing the following information:
         a.   Program for development including staging or timing of
development.
         b.   Proposed ownership pattern upon completion of development.
         c.   Basic content of restrictive covenants.
         d.   Provisions to assure permanence and maintenance of common open
space through homeowners' association formation, condominium development, or
other means acceptable to the city.
         e.   Statement of tabulation of dwelling unit densities proposed.
         f.   Statement describing the relationship of the proposed planned
unit development to the city's comprehensive plan. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-9-8: APPLICATION FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
   A.   Time For Filing Application: An application for final review and
approval shall be filed by the applicant within twelve (12) months of the date
on which tentative approval was given by the city council. An extension of time
may be requested in writing by the applicant and an extension not exceeding six
(6) months may be granted by the city council. If application for final
approval is not made within twelve (12) months or within the time for which an
extension has been granted, the plan shall be considered abandoned and the
development of the property shall be subject to the normal requirements and
limitations of the underlying residential (R) zone and the city's subdivision
ordinance.
   B.   Final Approval For Part Of Planned Unit Development:
      1.   An application for final review and approval may be filed for a part
of a planned unit development area for which tentative approval has been
granted by the city council. A final plan for a part of a planned unit
development shall provide the same proportion of open space and the same
overall dwelling unit density as the overall plan tentatively approved.
      2.   If that portion of the planned unit development for which final
approval is requested does not provide such open space, the developer shall
file, in escrow, a quitclaim deed in favor of the city, for such additional
land area adjacent and accessible to the site and of sufficient size to provide
the open space required to meet the standards of this chapter. In the event
that the developer abandons the remaining portions of the tentatively approved
planned unit development, the escrow agent shall deliver the quitclaim deed to
the city.
   C.   Performance Bond: The applicant shall, if required by the city council,
furnish the city with a performance bond in order to assure implementation of
the development as specified.
   D.   Documentation Required:
      1.   A final planned unit development map shall show the same information
and the data required of regular plats as required by the city's subdivision
regulations. In addition, the map shall show all such special features and
dimensions required by the city council as a condition of tentative approval.
      2.   In addition to the above, the application shall be accompanied by
such other documentation, information, and data not lending itself to graphic
presentation, such as restrictive covenants, incorporation papers and bylaws of
the homeowners' association, dedications of easements, rights of way, and other
conditions specifically required by the city council for the particular planned
unit development. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-9-9: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Application For Construction Implementation: Buildings and other
improvements required for the construction or development of property under the
provisions of this chapter shall be authorized only when, in the opinion of the
city council, the work to be performed meets the requirements of the final plan
and program elements of the planned unit development. Applications for any form
of construction implementation shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Written statement defining starting date and completion date.
      2.   Submission of any bonds required by the city.
      3.   Deeds for public dedication.
      4.   Complete project site plan.
   B.   Minor And Major Adjustments: Minor and major adjustments shall be as
follows:
      1.   Minor adjustments may be made and approved by the city council when
construction is authorized. Minor adjustments are those which may affect
premises dimensions or siting of buildings, but which do not affect the basic
character or arrangement of buildings approved in the final plan, nor the
density of the development or the open space requirements.
      2.   Major adjustments are those which, in the opinion of the city
council, substantially change the basic design, density, open space, or other
requirements of the planned unit development. When, in the opinion of the city
council, a change constitutes a major adjustment, no construction authorization
shall be issued without prior review and approval by the city council of such
adjustment.
   C.   Filing Of Applications: Applications for tentative or final approval of
planned unit development plans shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer for
city council consideration.
   D.   Hearings On Applications: Public hearings and notice of such hearings
shall be held before the city council for both tentative and final approval of
a planned unit development, and for major adjustments thereto.
   E.   Schedule Of Fees And Charges: Fees and charges for filing planned unit
development applications shall be in accordance with fee and charge schedules
adopted by resolution of the city council.
   F.   Duration Of Control: The regulations and controls of this chapter in
effect at the time of authorization of a planned unit development shall remain
in full force and effect for the life of the project.
   G.   Time For Beginning Construction: Construction of the planned unit
development project shall begin within one year from the date of the final
approval of the plan. An extension of time for beginning construction may be
requested in writing by the applicant, and such extension, not exceeding six
(6) months, may be granted by the city council. If construction is not begun
within one year or within the time for which an extension has been granted, the
plan shall be considered abandoned, and the development of the property shall
be subject to the normal requirements and limitations of the underlying
residential (R) zone and the city's subdivision ordinance.
   H.   Resubmittal Of Applications: An application for planned unit
development approval may be resubmitted in not less than six (6) months from
the date of expiration. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
CHAPTER 10
MOBILE, MANUFACTURED AND MODULAR STRUCTURES
SECTION:
8-10-1: Intent
8-10-2: Requirements
8-10-1: INTENT:
   A.   This chapter specifies the requirements of the City to maintain and
encourage a suitable family environment and affordable housing throughout the
community, to ensure the health, safety, convenience, and general well being of
the City. This chapter also specifies the requirements of the City providing
for the use of mobile and manufactured structures for nonresidential uses,
including, but not limited to, business offices and portable classrooms.
      1.   Manufactured and modular homes are permitted in the Residential (R)
Zone, subject to the requirements stated in section
8-10-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Nonresidential mobile structures, manufactured structures and
modular structures are permitted in the Commercial (C) and Light Industrial
(LI) Zones, subject to the requirements stated in section
8-10-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Mobile, manufactured and modular homes or structures not meeting the
requirements of section
8-10-2 of this chapter will only be allowed to be sited in existing
manufactured/mobile home parks. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-10-2: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Residential Uses, Outside Of An Existing Manufactured Or Mobile Home
Park: Manufactured or modular homes may be used as a place of human habitation
outside of a manufactured or mobile home park in the City upon compliance with
the standards set forth herein:
      1.   The mobile or manufactured home shall enclose a space of not less
than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
      2.   The mobile or manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and
backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is
located not more than twelve inches (12") above grade, except when placed on a
basement foundation.
      3.   The mobile or manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a
slope of three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width, or
greater.
      4.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used on residential dwellings within the City or which is
comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as
determined by the Administrator.
      5.   The structure shall be set in accordance with the requirements of
the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety.
      6.   The structure shall comply with all setback requirements and all
other standards and requirements of this Code as if it were a permanent
structure built on-site.
   B.   Residential Uses, Within Existing Manufactured Or Mobile Home Park:
      1.   The mobile or manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a
slope of three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width, or
greater.
      2.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which
in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing
material commonly used on residential dwellings within the City or which is
comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings as
determined by the Administrator.
      3.   The structure shall be set in accordance with the requirements of
the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety.
      4.   The structure shall comply with all setback requirements and all
other standards and requirements of this Code as if it were a permanent
structure built on-site.
   C.   Non-Residential Uses: Commercial coach structures may be used for non-
residential purposes, to serve any use permitted within the zone it is located,
in compliance with the standards set forth herein:
      1.   The structure shall be set in accordance with the requirements of
the State of Idaho Division of Building Safety.
      2.   The structure shall comply with all setback requirements and all
other standards and requirements of this Code as if it were a permanent
structure built on-site. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
CHAPTER 11
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING, LOADING, AND LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
   
8-12-1: Purpose
   
8-12-2: Application Of Requirements
   
8-12-3: Computation Of Required Parking And Loading Spaces
   
8-12-4: Off Street Parking Requirements
   
8-12-5: Location Of Parking And Loading Spaces
   
8-12-6: Driveway Standards
   
8-12-7: Improvement Of Driveway And Parking Areas
   
8-12-8: Off Street Loading Requirements
   
8-12-9: Landscaping Requirements For Commercial, Industrial And Other Non-
Residential Uses
8-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of off street parking and loading requirements is to provide for
the general welfare and convenience of persons utilizing the various uses
located within the City, through the provision of suitable off street parking
and loading facilities, and to protect the public safety by lessening traffic
congestion on public streets. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-12-2: APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply and govern in all zones.
   A.   No person shall cause use or occupancy of any premises unless the off
street parking and loading facilities maintained thereon, or in connection
therewith, conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Any change to a building, or any change in use of a building or site,
shall require compliance with the provisions contained herein.
   C.   All required parking shall be made permanently available and shall be
maintained for parking purposes only.
   D.   No construction shall be authorized until plans showing provisions for
the required off street parking have been submitted and approved.
   E.   All off street parking and loading spaces being maintained in
connection with any existing building, structure, or use on the effective date
hereof, and all parking and loading spaces subsequently required by this title
for any building, structure, or use, shall be maintained as long as said
building, structure, or use remains, unless an equivalent number of parking and
loading spaces is provided conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
   F.   All applications for building location permits shall be accompanied by
a site plan, drawn to scale, that demonstrates compliance with this chapter.
For commercial, industrial and other non-residential uses, such site plan shall
be professionally prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape architect or
professional drafter. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005; amd. Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-12-3: COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
The number of off street parking and loading spaces required shall be no less
than as set forth in this chapter. In the case of a combination of uses in a
building or on a lot, the minimum number of spaces required shall be not less
than the sum total of the requirements for all the individual uses. In
computation of the total parking and loading spaces required for any use,
fractional spaces shall be rounded off to the nearest whole number; fractions
of five-tenths (0.5) or more being counted as one (1) full space. Where fixed
seats provided are either benches or bleachers, such seats shall be construed
to be not more than twenty (20) linear inches each. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-12-4: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
All off street parking shall conform to the following requirements. No on
street parking shall be considered in fulfilling the requirements for any use.
A. Residential uses:                   
  Duplex dwelling units              2 spaces per dwelling unit
                                      2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus 1/
  Multi-family dwelling units        2 space per dwelling unit for guest
                                      parking
  Single-family dwellings            2 spaces per dwelling unit
B. Commercial, educational,            
   institutional and industrial uses:
  Banks and business or professional 1 space for each 325 square feet of
   offices                            gross floor area
   Churches, synagogues, temples,     1 space for each 4 fixed seats, or for
  assembly halls, auditoriums,       each 150 square feet of assembly area
   theaters, or similar places of     where there are no fixed seats
   assembly
                                      1 space for each 6 fixed seats, or 1
  Club/lodge                         for every 10 members, whichever is
                                      larger
  Convalescent homes, and retirement 1 space for each 5 beds
   homes
  Daycare centers                    1 space per 350 square feet
  Fast food restaurants              1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                      gross floor area
                                      4 spaces for each concession, in
  Food truck, food truck court    addition to the parking required for
                                      any other use of the parcel
  Full service restaurants, taverns, 1 space for each 250 square feet of
   and lounges                        gross floor area
  Furniture, carpeting, or large     1 space for each 800 square feet of
   appliance, retail                  gross floor area
                                      1 space for each staff person, plus 1
  Group homes                        space for each 6 residents, plus 1
                                      space for each vehicle operated by the
                                      facility
  Hospitals                          1 space for each bed
   Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast  1 space per each guest room, plus one
  inns                               space for each 2 employees on the
                                      largest shift
  Indoor recreation, such as bowling 1 space per 100 square feet of gross
   alleys or skating rinks            floor area
  Industrial/manufacturing uses      1 space for each 1,500 square feet of
                                      gross floor area
  Libraries                          1 space per 250 square feet of gross
                                      floor area
  Medical and dental offices         1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                      gross floor area
                                      1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
  Motor vehicles, boats, or large    gross floor area, plus 1 space for
   machinery, retail                  each 1,500 square feet of outdoor
                                      storage and display area
   Nursery and garden supplies or construction materials, retail1 space for
  each 250 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000
   square feet of outdoor storage or display area
  Other retail and service uses1 space for each 250 square feet of gross
   floor area
  Parks or athletic fields10 spaces and 20 per each athletic field
   Recreation vehicles and manufactured homes, retail1 space for each 1,000
  square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 3,000 square feet
   of outdoor storage and display area
  Research and development uses1 space for each 600 square feet of gross
   floor area
  Schools:
                                      Elementary, junior and senior high
                                    schools1 space per classroom, 1 per
                                      office plus 1 per each 4 seats in
                                      largest gathering room
                                      Specialized schools and studios
                                    (dance, martial arts, gymnastics,
                                      fitness, etc.)1 space for each 60
                                      square feet of gross floor area
  Warehouse and wholesale1 space for each 800 square feet of gross floor
   area
 
(Ord. 407, 8-16-2016; amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-12-5: LOCATION OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be located as specified herein.
   A.   Accessibility; Location: All required off street parking and loading
spaces shall be accessible and shall be located on the same lot as the use or
building requiring such spaces, except that parking facilities for
nonresidential uses may be separated from the use or building it serves by an
alley as long as the ownership of the parking area is the same as the use or
building it serves.
   B.   Prohibited In Yard Area, Landscape Area or Buffer: Except for
residential driveways and parking areas, off street parking and loading spaces
shall not be located within any required yard area. For commercial, industrial,
or other non-residential uses, off street parking and loading spaces shall not
be located within any required landscape area or buffer.
   C.   Backing Into Public Street: Except for single-family and duplex
dwelling units, parking shall be so designed that vehicles shall not back out
into public streets.
   D.   Blocking Stairways Or Walkways: Parking and loading spaces shall not
preclude direct and free access to stairways, walkways, any pedestrian
accesses, or fire safety equipment.
   E.   Residential Uses: For residential uses, an area at least large enough
to house the parking required by subsection
8-12-4A of this chapter shall be provided on the driveway or other on site
approved parking site serving the residential use.
   F.   ADA Parking: Parking shall be installed and designated in accordance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility requirements of
the State of Idaho.
   G.   Bicycle Racks, Storage Areas: Whenever twenty five (25) or more parking
spaces are required for a building or use, bicycle racks or bicycle storage
areas shall be provided at a ratio of one bicycle rack or bicycle storage area
for each twenty five (25) required parking spaces. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd.
Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-12-6: DRIVEWAY STANDARDS:
Each parking space and loading area shall be accessible as to both entrance and
exit as provided for herein:
   A.   Curb Openings, Entryways: The curb openings or entryways to the lot and
driveways or approaches to parking spaces shall not exceed forty feet (40') or
fifty two percent (52%) of the total length of the fronting or flanking street
property line or width of the street facing yard area, except where a circular
driveway is provided and the Administrator approves the design and location of
such circular driveway.
   B.   Driveway Or Approach: Each driveway or approach to a parking area shall
be in accordance with the requirements of section
6-6-4. Two-way drive aisles in non-residential parking areas shall be a minimum
width of twenty four feet (24'). One way drive aisles in non-residential
parking areas shall be a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and shall only be
allowed in conjunction with angled parking spaces.
   C.   Vertical Clearance: The vertical clearance above the surface of the
driveway or approach to a parking space shall be not less than fourteen feet
(14'). The vertical clearance for the driveway or approach to a loading space
shall be as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
   D.   Parking Space Slope: No driveway or approach to a parking space shall
have a slope in excess of eight percent (8%), except for residential uses which
shall not exceed twelve percent (12%). For loading spaces, the slope of the
driveway or approach shall be as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
   E.   Outer Radius Of Curve: The outer radius of a curve in any driveway or
approach shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018;
amd. Ord. 430, 11-17-2020; Ord. 445, 5-21-2024)
8-12-7: IMPROVEMENT OF DRIVEWAY AND PARKING AREAS:
   A.   Grading And Surfacing: For non-residential uses all parking and loading
areas and driveway access thereto shall be paved or hard surfaced to a standard
comparable to the public street which services the driveway and parking area.
   B.   Completion Of Area; Drainage; Traffic Control Devices: All paving and
hard surfacing, or alternative improvements authorized by the Administrator,
shall be completed and provide for proper storm drainage, and allow for parking
stalls and installation of other traffic control devices as set forth by this
chapter. All traffic control devices, such as parking strips designating car
stalls, directional arrows or signs, curbs and other traffic control devices,
shall be installed by the property owner and approved by the City prior to use
or occupancy of the property and as shown on the approved plans. Paint or
markers shall be used to delineate parking stalls and directional arrows on
paved or hard surfaced areas. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 445, - -2024)
8-12-8: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Off street loading facilities are intended to provide adequate space to
accommodate outside deliveries from large vehicles which cannot be functionally
served by normal parking stalls.
   A.   Blocking Public Rights-Of-Way: Off street loading spaces must be
located in such a manner that large vehicles do not block or intrude into
public rights-of-way or block driveways or parking area circulation.
   B.   Location: In all cases, loading spaces shall be located on the same lot
as the use or structure they are designed to serve. Off street loading spaces
shall not be included in any area used to satisfy off street parking
requirements.
   C.   Design: Loading spaces shall be designed so no vehicles are required to
back to or from an adjacent street, except for minor trucking access on local
access streets in the Commercial and Light Industrial Zones. (Ord. 263, 7-12-
2005)
   D.   Combined Uses: Where a proposed building or structure is intended to be
used concurrently for different uses, final determination of required loading
spaces shall be made by the Administrator; provided, that the loading
requirement for the combined uses shall not be less than the total requirement
for each separate use. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
   E.   Dimensions Of Spaces: Off street loading spaces shall measure fifteen
feet (15') wide, sixty feet (60') long, and fifteen feet (15') high, except if
this chapter requires only one loading space, it may measure twelve feet (12')
wide, thirty feet (30') long, and fourteen feet (14') high. The width of any
driveway or aisle providing access to a loading space shall not be less than
twelve feet (12'), it shall have a vertical clearance of sixteen feet (16'),
and shall be generally level. In no event shall the outer radius of any turning
area to a required loading space be less than twenty five feet (25').
   F.   Minimum Requirements: The minimum number of off street loading spaces
for each building or structure shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Department stores, retail, and other commercial uses, and
industrial, manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, and similar uses:
 
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) Required Loading Spaces
   Less than 10,000     0
   10,000 to 25,000     1
   25,001 to 50,000     2
   50,001 to 100,000    3
   Over 100,000         3 plus 1 for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or part
                           thereof
 
      2.   Offices, hotels and motels, restaurants, hospitals, convalescent
centers, and similar businesses and institutions:
 
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) Required Loading Spaces
   Less than 10,000     0
   10,000 to 50,000     1
   50,001 to 100,000    2
   Over 100,000         2 plus 1 for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or part
                           thereof
 
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-12-9: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER NON-
RESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   Landscaping Plan required. No building construction shall be authorized
where landscaping is required until a landscaping plan, prepared by a landscape
architect licensed to practice in the state of Idaho has been submitted and
approved by the Administrator.
   B.   Required Landscaping Areas
      1.   Adjacent to Street Right-Of-Way: A ten-foot (10') wide landscaped
buffer shall be provided along the entire length of street frontage, including
flanking streets, except for driveways, provided that the plantings shall not
obstruct the sight distance required at street intersections or driveway
approaches. All road right of way adjacent to the property shall also be
landscaped as permitted by the entity that manages the right of way.
      2.   Adjacent To Residential Property: Where a commercial, industrial, or
other non-residential use abuts residentially zoned property along any interior
side or rear property line, either a wall or 100% sight obscuring fence with a
height of six feet (6').
      3.   Outside of Driveway and Parking Area: In all cases, areas of the
property not utilized for buildings, fenced outdoor storage areas, driveways,
maneuvering areas, parking stalls, loading areas and walkways shall be
landscaped.
      4.   Within parking area: Parking areas with more than 10 spaces shall
include an additional landscaped area within or adjacent to the parking area
which shall be a minimum of 10 percent of the area covered by parking spaces,
drive aisles, and driveways on the property. In addition, parking lots and the
accompanying landscaping shall be configured so that no parking space is more
than seventy five feet (75') from a landscaped area.
   C.   Planting Requirements: All landscaping shall consist of a liberal mix
of deciduous and evergreen trees, planted in wells or strips, with a variety of
ornamental deciduous and evergreen shrubs, and ground covers, the latter which
may include such features as lawn, bark, decorative rock, or gravel. Landscaped
areas shall consist of a minimum of fifty percent (50%) live groundcover
(plants), and shall include a minimum of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs for
every three hundred (300) square feet of landscaped area. At the time of
planting, deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two inch (2") caliper (as
measured 6 inches above grade), and evergreen trees shall be at least five feet
(5') tall. At the time of maturity, all trees shall be at least twenty feet
(20') tall.
      Where shrubs are required, they shall be a minimum of a three (3) gallon
tub. Where practical and feasible, existing trees shall be retained in all
landscaping areas. All such planting areas shall be automatically irrigated and
shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition. Dead or dying plantings
shall be promptly removed and replaced.
   D.   Separation From Parking Area; Curbing: All landscaped areas along the
perimeter of a parking area, driveways and drive aisles shall be separated from
such areas by six inch (6") high curbing or a similar landscaping barrier to
keep vehicles out of landscaped areas.
   E.   Time Of Installation: All required landscaping and irrigation shall be
installed prior to occupancy or use of the premises. In the event that winter
weather precludes timely completion of landscaping improvements in accordance
with the approved plans, the Administrator may allow occupancy to proceed upon
receipt of an acceptable guarantee of financial surety to complete installation
when weather conditions allow. Such guarantees shall be for 150% of the cost to
complete the work, and such work shall be completed within one year. (Ord. 416,
3-21-2018; amd. Ord. 445, - -2024)
CHAPTER 13
SIGNAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-13-1: Purpose And Scope
8-13-2: Definitions
8-13-3: Authorizations And Exceptions
8-13-4: Authorization Requests And Fees
8-13-5: Prohibited Signs
8-13-6: Signs Permitted In All Zones
8-13-7: Signs Permitted In Commercial And Industrial Zones
8-13-8: Sign Location
8-13-9: Sign Area And Calculation
8-13-10: Nonconforming Signs
8-13-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote commerce, traffic safety, and
community identity, while improving the visual environment of residential and
nonresidential areas.
   B.   This chapter shall not regulate traffic and directional signs installed
by a governmental entity or located within a private parking area; signs not
readable from, nor intended to be viewed from, a public right of way;
merchandise displays; advertising displays upon vending machines; national
flags; flags of a political subdivision; symbolic flags of an institution;
legal notices required by law; barber poles; historic site monuments and
plaques; cemetery interment markers; single purpose structures such as
telephone booths and donation or recycling containers; or lettering or symbols
painted directly onto or flush mounted magnetically onto a motor vehicle
operating in the normal course of business. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-13-2: DEFINITIONS 1 :
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric, or similar material, that is mounted to
a pole or a building on one or more edges.
BULLETIN BOARD: Any sign erected by a charitable, educational, or religious
institution, or by a public agency, which is erected upon the same site as said
institution or agency, for purposes of announcing events which are held on the
premises, and contains no advertising message for commercial purposes.
FLASHING SIGN: An illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is
not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when
in use.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A sign, strictly informational, that has a purpose secondary
to the use of the building or lot on which it is located, such as "no parking",
"entrance", "exit", "loading only", "telephone", and other similar
informational directives. No sign with a commercial message, legible from any
position off the property on which the sign is located, shall be considered to
be incidental.
OFF SITE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than
upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. The term "off site sign" shall
include an outdoor advertising sign (billboard) on which space is leased or
rented by the owner thereof to others for the purpose of conveying a commercial
or noncommercial message.
ON SITE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing on the same lot where
such sign is displayed. An "on site sign" may also display a noncommercial
message.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in a series, and usually designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a permanent
structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to,
signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; A-frame or T-frame signs;
menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for
advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible
from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day to
day operation of a licensed business.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of
advertising to the public the sale, lease, or rent of said property.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a residentially zoned area that contains
no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered
on the premises where the sign is located.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently
mounted.
WALL SIGN: Any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on
the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on
which it is mounted; provided, however, said wall sign shall not project above
the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. For the purpose of this
chapter, any sign display surface that is affixed flat against the sloping
surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a wall sign. Any sign that is
affixed to the building marquee, building awning, or a building canopy, shall
be considered a wall sign.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or
service, that is placed inside a window or upon a window. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 8-1-4 of this title for definition of "sign".
8-13-3: AUTHORIZATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Sign Design Approval: No sign shall hereafter be erected, reerected,
constructed, painted, posted, applied, or structurally altered except as
provided in this chapter and pursuant to a sign design approved by the
Administrator. A separate sign design approval shall be required for each sign
installed on a single supporting structure.
   B.   Exceptions: The following shall not require sign design approval;
provided, however, that these exceptions shall not be construed as relieving
the owner from the responsibility to comply with the provisions of this title
or any other law or ordinance:
      1.   The changing of the advertising copy or message on a lawfully
erected sign specifically designed for replaceable copy.
      2.   Painting, repainting, or normal maintenance, unless a structural or
electrical change is made.
      3.   Temporary banners and temporary signs as regulated herein.
      4.   Incidental signs.
      5.   One (1) nonelectric bulletin board as regulated herein.
   C.   Master Sign Programs: For commercially zoned properties immediately
adjacent to U.S. Highway 95, the owner may request City Council approval, at a
regular City Council meeting, of a master sign program for the site. Such a
master sign program may allow for deviations from the standards of this
chapter, in recognition of the grade separation and higher speed traffic on the
highway. Once the master sign program is approved for a property by Council,
installation of individual signs shall require sign design approval from the
Administrator, in accordance with the master sign program for the property.
(Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-13-4: AUTHORIZATION REQUESTS AND FEES:
   A.   Design Approval Required: If a sign requiring design authorization
under the provisions of the chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or
modified, the owner of the affected property shall secure sign design approval
prior to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such sign.
No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way, unless the location is
specifically approved by the entity which controls the public right-of-way. In
the case of City owned rights-of-way, approval from the City Council shall be
required. No authorization shall be issued for any sign unless such sign is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter or when a sign master program
has been approved for the property, consistent with those requirements.
   B.   Filing Request: Requests for sign design approval shall be filed with
the City Clerk and shall contain the following minimum information except that
subsections B1 and B2 of this section shall be the only information needed for
applications involving banners and A-frames:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   Site plan of the parcel showing locations of the building,
structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or advertising structure is
to be attached or erected.
      3.   Position of the sign or advertising structure in relation to nearby
buildings or structures, including dimensional data.
      4.   Blueprints of the plans with color designations, specifications,
method of construction, and attachment to the building or in the ground.
      5.   Name of the person, firm or corporation erecting the sign or
advertising structure, and contractor's registration number.
      6.   Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to
which or on which the sign or advertising structure is to be erected.
   C.   Fees: Applicable fees, as established by resolution of the City
Council, shall accompany each request. (Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
8-13-5: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following types of signs are prohibited in all zones unless otherwise
specifically permitted:
   A.   Signs which in coloring, shape, wording, or location resemble or
conflict with traffic control signs or devices.
   B.   Signs that create a safety hazard for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   C.   Flashing signs.
   D.   Portable signs exceeding nine (9) square feet.
   E.   All off site advertising signs.
   F.   All billboard type advertising signs. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-13-6: SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONES:
The following signs may be permitted in any zone, subject to the limitations as
provided herein:
   A.   Bulletin Boards: Bulletin boards on the premises of public, charitable,
or religious institutions shall be permitted subject to the following criteria:
      1.   Such sign shall contain not more than twenty five (25) square feet
in area on a face and may be double faced;
      2.   No part of the sign shall exceed a height of six feet (6') above the
ground; and
      3.   The sign, if lighted, may be indirectly lighted only.
   B.   Temporary Subdivision And Related Signs: A temporary real estate sign
advertising the initial sale, lease, or rental of a group of new lots or
dwellings within a subdivision, or condominium complex, or apartment complex,
or spaces within a business complex, shall be permitted subject to the
following criteria:
      1.   The sign shall be detached and shall be located on the premises
being sold, leased, or rented;
      2.   The sign shall not exceed a maximum of forty (40) square feet in
area on any face and may be double faced;
      3.   The sign shall remain only as long as property remains unsold,
unleased, or unrented for the first time, but not to exceed one (1) year;
provided, however, that the City Council may extend the duration limit upon the
written request of the owner or developer of the project;
      4.   The sign shall be nonilluminated; and
      5.   The top of the sign shall be no higher than ten feet (10') above the
ground level of the property upon which the sign is located.
   C.   Permanent Subdivision Or Area Name Signs: A decorative and permanent
sign, announcing the name of a subdivision or area, located at the public
street entrance or entrances to the subdivision or area, which identifies the
name of the subdivision or area, shall be permitted subject to the following
criteria:
      1.   The sign shall consist of a decorative masonry wall or wood fence
with illuminated, indirectly lighted, or nonilluminated nameplates or letters,
and shall be located in a continuously maintained landscaped area;
      2.   The wall/fence and/or sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height;
and
      3.   The location of the wall/fence and/or sign on the property shall not
be within the clear view triangle at street intersections, as delineated in the
various zoning classifications within this title.
   D.   Contractor, Financier, Architect, Surveyor And/Or Engineer Signs: One
on premises sign identifying the project, developers, financiers, contractors,
architect, surveyor, and/or engineer affiliated with a construction project may
be situated on such construction site during the construction period only and
shall be permitted subject to the following criteria:
      1.   The sign shall be placed at a location approved by the city council
on the premises being constructed;
      2.   The sign shall not exceed a maximum of forty (40) square feet in
area;
      3.   The sign shall remain only as long as the premises is under
construction, but not to exceed one year; provided, however, that the city
council may extend the duration limit upon the written request of the owner or
developer of the project;
      4.   The sign shall be nonilluminated; and
      5.   The top of the sign shall be no higher than ten feet (10') above the
ground level of the property upon which the sign is located.
   E.   Real Estate Signs:
      1.   Residential real estate signs are permitted subject to the
limitations set forth in the residential zone provisions of this title 1 . In
the commercial and light industrial zones, one temporary, on site sign is
permitted advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the building, property, or
premises; provided, that such sign is nonilluminated, does not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet in area, and does not exceed a height above ground level
of ten feet (10').
      2.   An "open house" directional sign shall be allowed on each access
street to property; provided, that it is not placed in the right of way in such
a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, it is maintained
only when the premises is actually open for immediate inspection, it is
nonilluminated, does not exceed five (5) square feet in area, and does not
exceed a height above ground level of three feet (3'). (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 8, article A of this title.
8-13-7: SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES:
Signs which pertain only to the identification of a permitted use in the
commercial and light industrial zones are permitted; provided, that such signs
are located entirely on the property with the use or business served; and
provided further, that such signs conform to the following standards:
   A.   On site signs shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   Wall signs shall not exceed the outer limits of the wall and shall
not cover more than two (2) walls. In the case of multiple businesses in a
building, wall signs shall not exceed the outer limits of the wall of each
business.
      2.   The total area of all other signs shall not exceed two (2) square
feet per lineal foot of street frontage, up to a maximum of two hundred fifty
(250) square feet of sign area, and shall not exceed a height of thirty feet
(30') above ground level.
      3.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet per lineal
foot of street frontage, up to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet of
sign area, and shall not exceed a height of thirty feet (30') above ground
level. There shall be no more than one such sign for each two hundred feet
(200') of street frontage or portion thereof.
      4.   No sign shall project over a public right of way, nor shall it be
located in such a way that it obstructs safe vision for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic either on the public right of way or at entering and exiting access
points.
      5.   Placement of lighted signs shall be such that no light extends over
property lines to any adjoining property.
   B.   Electronically changeable message signs shall be permitted subject to
the limitations in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Signs advertising the price of motor vehicle fuel sold from a fuel pump
located on the premises shall be permitted in conformance with the following
criteria:
      1.   Only one fuel price informational sign shall be permitted per fuel
pump.
      2.   Fuel price informational signs shall be limited in size to an area
of one and five-tenths (1.5) square feet.
      3.   Each fuel price informational sign shall be affixed directly to a
fuel pump and shall be stationary.
      4.   One freestanding sign to include a changeable copy sign is allowed.
The size of such freestanding sign shall be determined by using eight (8)
square feet per fuel pump up to a maximum area of forty eight (48) square feet.
The maximum size shall include company name, logo, price information, etc., if
applicable.
      5.   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of
other signs meeting the requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Outdoor menu boards are only allowed on lots which have been approved
for restaurants, full service or fast food, and shall be in conformance with
the following criteria:
      1.   Only one outdoor menu board shall be permitted on a lot.
      2.   The area of the menu board shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet.
      3.   If the sign is lighted, it shall be via internal illumination.
      4.   The menu board lettering shall not be legible from off site
properties and rights of ways.
   E.   Signs painted on, or affixed to, glass surfaces of windows or doors,
and pertaining to the lawful business conducted within the building, are
allowed without a permit. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-13-8: SIGN LOCATION:
All signs and advertising structures shall be located in accordance with the
following standards:
   A.   No sign or advertising structure shall interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian accessibility or sight distance.
   B.   All signs and advertising structures shall conform to the clear view
triangle of the zone in which it is located.
   C.   Any portion of a sign or advertising structure, including structural
supports, that is higher than three feet (3') and less than seven feet (7')
above ground level, shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any
public right of way. This requirement shall not apply when structural supports
are less than two feet (2') wide at any point on the support three (3) to seven
feet (7') above ground level. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-13-9: SIGN AREA AND CALCULATION:
   A.   Sign area is the total area of a sign visible from any one viewpoint or
direction, excluding the sign support structure, and its size shall be
calculated by measuring from the outside edge of the frame itself. This
includes only one side of a double faced sign.
   B.   Individual letters, words or symbol signs on a wall shall be calculated
by measuring the area created by drawing imaginary straight lines around the
entire copy or grouping of such letters, words, or symbols.
   C.   Module signs consisting of more than one sign cabinet shall be computed
by adding together the total area of each module.
   D.   Any portion of the sign not necessary for structural support of the
sign, or any structural support greater than two feet (2') in width, shall be
considered in the determination of the square footage of the sign. (Ord. 263,
7-12-2005)
8-13-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs, those that were permanently installed and legally erected
prior to the effective date hereof, shall be allowed to continue in use so long
as they are continuously maintained, are not relocated, and are not
structurally altered or made more nonconforming in any way. (Ord. 263, 7-12-
2005)
CHAPTER 14
NONCONFORMING USES, PARCELS AND BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-14-1: General
8-14-2: Nonconforming Structures
8-14-3: Nonconforming Use Of Structures, Land, Or Structures And Land In
Combination
8-14-4: Nonconforming Parcels Of Land
8-14-1: GENERAL:
Within the City of Athol there exist parcels of land, structures and uses which
were lawful prior to adoption of this title or under previously adopted
ordinances, but which no longer conform to the regulations for the zoning
district in which they are located. It is the intent of this chapter to permit
these nonconformities to continue until they are substantially destroyed,
removed or brought into conformance with this title, providing the
nonconformity is not enlarged or expanded. Nonconformities shall be regulated
according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-14-2: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Nonconforming structures shall not be expanded or enlarged in a way
that increases the nonconformity. For example, a home that does not meet the
rear setback requirement to the property line may not construct a deck or
addition to any portion of the house that further encroaches into that setback.
An addition may, however, be constructed to the front of the house.
   B.   A nonconforming structure that is completely demolished, removed, or
relocated from the parcel on which it was previously located may be replaced
within twelve (12) months of its demolition, removal, or relocation, provided
that no portion of any replacement structure shall increase the previously
existing nonconformity. Otherwise, any subsequently built structures shall
conform to the provisions of this title.
   C.   Ordinary repairs and additions may be performed on a nonconforming
structure, including but not limited to repair or replacement of the roof,
walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, provided that such work does not increase
the nonconformity. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-14-3: NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES, LAND, OR STRUCTURES AND LAND IN
COMBINATION:
   A.   The nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in
combination, shall not be expanded beyond that which lawfully existed on the
effective date of this title or previously adopted applicable ordinances.
Criteria used to determine use and expansion shall include hours of operation,
square footage of structures or area used, traffic generated, volume of goods
handled, number of dwelling units. A nonconforming use shall not be used as
justification for expanding or adding structures or other nonconforming uses.
   B.   Upon written request to, and approval by, the Administrator, a
nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use, providing the
new use would result in the same or greater conformity to this title, and
providing the previous use is permanently abandoned. Nonconforming uses must
progress towards conformity. For example, a nonconforming business that
produces noise and emissions could be replaced by another nonconforming
business that is quieter and does not produce emissions. If a nonconforming use
is replaced with a permitted use, nonconforming uses shall not thereafter be
allowed.
   C.   When any nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, any subsequent use shall conform to this title.
Nonconforming uses that are discontinued are also governed by the requirements
of section 67-6538, Idaho Code.
   D.   Ordinary repairs and additions may be performed on a structure housing
a nonconforming use, including, without limitation, repair or replacement of
the roof, walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that such work does not
increase the nonconformity.
   E.   A structure housing a nonconforming use that is completely removed may
not be replaced unless the use and structure are in conformance with this
title. (Ord. 416, 3-21-2018)
8-14-4: NONCONFORMING PARCELS OF LAND:
   A.   A parcel of land shall not be modified in any manner that results in it
becoming a nonconforming parcel, or that expands or enlarges an existing
nonconformity, unless the modification resulted from the exercise of eminent
domain.
   B.   Upon written request to, and approval by the Administrator, a
nonconforming parcel may be changed, providing the modification results in the
same or greater conformity with this title. Nonconforming parcels must progress
toward conformity. For example, the lot line of a lot that does not meet the
minimum size could be adjusted to increase the size of the lot, but it could
not be adjusted in a manner that would make the lot smaller. (Ord. 416, 3-21-
2018)
CHAPTER 15
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
8-15-1: Purpose
8-15-2: Intent
8-15-3: Definitions
8-15-4: Development Standards
8-15-5: Authorization Required
8-15-6: Variances
8-15-7: Additional Administrative And Permit Criteria
8-15-8: Federal Communications Commission Preemption
8-15-9: Exempt Modifications To Existing Installations
8-15-10: Obsolescence
8-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a wide range of locations and
options for siting of wireless communication facilities by encouraging creative
approaches for locating such facilities, which will blend them in with their
surroundings and minimize the potential for adverse visual aesthetic impacts.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-2: INTENT:
The performance standards and incentives set out in this chapter are
established to ensure proper siting of wireless communication facilities in
accordance with the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 263, 7-
12-2005)
8-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ACCESSORY ANTENNA DEVICE: An "antenna" including, but not limited to, test
mobile antennas and global positioning system (GPS) antennas which are less
than twelve inches (12") in height or width, excluding the "wireless
communication support structure".
ANTENNA: Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs, or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals.
ANTENNA, DIRECTIONAL: An "antenna" which transmits and receives radio frequency
signals in a specific directional pattern of less than three hundred sixty
degrees (360°) (also known as a "pane" antenna).
ANTENNA, OMNI-DIRECTIONAL: An "antenna" which transmits and receives radio
frequency signals in a three hundred sixty degree (360o) radial pattern (also
known as a "whip" antenna). For the purpose of this chapter, an "omni-
directional antenna" shall be up to fifteen feet (15') in height and up to four
inches (4") in diameter.
ANTENNA, PARABOLIC: A bowl shaped device for the reception and/or transmission
of radio frequency communications signals in a specific directional pattern
(also known as a "dish" antenna).
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A "wireless communication facility"
that is affixed to an existing structure and such existing structure shall not
be considered a component of the "attached wireless communication facility".
COLLOCATION: When more than one wireless communication provider mounts
"antenna" equipment on a single "wireless communication support structure"
(i.e., a "monopole").
EQUIPMENT SHELTER OR CABINET: A room, cabinet, or building used to house
accessory equipment for wireless communication services.
GUYED TOWER: A "wireless communication support structure" which consists of
metal crossed strips or bars and is steadied by wire guys in a radial pattern
around the tower. Guyed towers are used to support wireless communication
"antennas" and "related connecting equipment", the height of which shall be
equal to or less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
LATTICE TOWER: A "wireless communication support structure" which consists of
metal crossed strips or bars to support wireless communication "antennas" and
"related connecting equipment", the height of which is equal to or less than
one hundred fifty feet (150').
MACROFACILITY: An "attached wireless communication facility" which consists of
"antennas" equal to or less than fifteen feet (15') in height or up to four
inches (4") in diameter or a "parabolic antenna" up to one meter (39.37 inches)
in diameter and with an area not more than one hundred (100) square feet in the
aggregate as viewed from any single point.
MICROFACILITY: An "attached wireless communication facility" which consists of
"antennas" equal to or less than four feet (4') in height (except "omni-
directional antennas" which may be up to 6 feet in height), and with an area of
not more than five hundred eighty (580) square inches in the aggregate (e.g., a
1 foot diameter parabola or a 2 foot by 1.5 foot panel) as viewed from any
single point. The permitted "antenna" height includes the "wireless
communication support structure".
MINIFACILITY: An "attached wireless communication facility" which consists of
"antennas" equal to or less than ten feet (10') in height or a "parabolic
antenna" up to one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter and with an area not more
than fifty (50) square feet in the aggregate as viewed from any single point.
MONOPOLE I: A "wireless communication support structure", the height of which
shall not exceed sixty feet (60'), erected to support wireless communication
"antennas" and "related connecting equipment".
MONOPOLE II: A "wireless communication support structure", the height of which
is greater than sixty feet (60') and equal to or less than one hundred fifty
feet (150'), erected to support wireless communication "antennas" and "related
connecting equipment".
RELATED CONNECTING EQUIPMENT: All equipment ancillary to the transmission and
reception of voice and data via radio frequencies. Such "related connecting
equipment" may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit, and connectors.
TRANSMISSION TOWER: A freestanding structure, other than a building, on which
wireless communication "antenna" devices and "related connecting equipment" are
mounted. Examples include, but are not limited to, "guyed towers", "lattice
towers", and "monopoles".
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: An unstaffed facility for the transmission and
reception of low power radio signals consisting of an "equipment shelter or
cabinet", a "wireless communication support structure", antennas (directional,
omni-directional, or parabolic), and "related connecting equipment".
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE: The structure erected to support
wireless communication "antennas" and "related connecting equipment". Such
"wireless communication support structure" types include, but are not limited
to, stanchions, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles, guyed towers, or city
owned utility structures. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Microfacilities:
      1.   Microfacilities shall be permitted in all zones.
      2.   A microfacility shall be located on existing buildings, poles or
other existing support structures.
      3.   A microfacility may locate on an existing building or structure;
provided, that the interior wall or ceiling immediately adjacent to the
proposed facility is not designated as habitable space.
      4.   Antennas equal to or less than four feet (4') in height, including
omni-directional antennas, shall be exempt from the height limitations of the
zone in which they are located. Placement of any such antenna on a
nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the
nonconforming structure.
      5.   The microfacility antenna and related components shall be the same
color as the existing building, pole, or support structure on which it is
proposed to be located.
      6.   The equipment shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic
equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or located
underground. Any building or structure erected aboveground to house such
equipment shelter or cabinet shall not exceed an area of one hundred (100)
square feet.
   B.   Minifacilities:
      1.   Minifacilities shall be permitted only in the following zones:
commercial (C) and light industrial (LI).
      2.   Minifacilities may be located on buildings or structures; provided,
that the interior wall or ceiling immediately adjacent to the proposed facility
is not designated as habitable space.
      3.   The minifacility antenna and related components shall be the same
color as the existing building, pole, or support structure on which it is
proposed to be located.
      4.   The equipment shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic
equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or located
underground. Any building or structure erected aboveground to house such
equipment shelter or cabinet shall not exceed an area of one hundred (100)
square feet.
      5.   Minifacilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for
the zone in which it is to be located, except that omni-directional antennas
may exceed the height limitation by ten feet (10'), or in the case of
nonconforming structures, such antenna may extend ten feet (10') above the
existing structure. When affixed to the side of a nonconforming structure, an
antenna of rod or panel design may exceed the height limit of the zone;
provided, that it blends in architecturally with the building. Placement of any
such antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an
expansion of the nonconforming structure.
   C.   Macrofacilities:
      1.   Macrofacilities shall be permitted only in the commercial (C) and
light industrial (LI) zones. Macrofacilities may also be permitted elsewhere if
attached to public buildings or located in a public right of way.
      2.   Macrofacilities may be located on buildings or structures; provided,
that the interior wall or ceiling immediately adjacent to the proposed facility
is not designated as habitable space.
      3.   The macrofacility antenna and related components shall be the same
color as the existing building, pole, or support structure on which it is
proposed to be located.
      4.   The equipment shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic
equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or located
underground. Any building or structure erected aboveground to house such
equipment shelter or cabinet shall not exceed an area of two hundred (200)
square feet.
      5.   Macrofacilities shall comply with the height limitation specified
for the zone in which it is to be located, except that omni-directional
antennas may exceed the height limitation by fifteen feet (15'), or in the case
of nonconforming structures, such antenna may extend fifteen feet (15') above
the existing structure. When affixed to the side of a nonconforming structure,
an antenna of rod or panel design may exceed the height limit of the zone;
provided, that it blends in architecturally with the building. Placement of any
such antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an
expansion of the nonconforming structure.
   D.   Monopole I:
      1.   Monopole I facilities shall require a special (conditional) use
permit pursuant to chapter 7 of this title, and such permit shall be available
only in the commercial (C) and light industrial (LI) zones. A monopole I
facility shall not be allowed in any other zoning classification. Site design,
landscaping and/or other screening techniques deemed appropriate shall be duly
considered as part of the special (conditional) use permit process.
      2.   Macrofacilities shall be the largest wireless communication
facilities allowed on a monopole I wireless communication support structure.
      3.   Antennas which extend above the wireless communications support
structure shall not be calculated as part of the height of the monopole I
wireless communication support structure. For example, a monopole I may be up
to sixty feet (60') in height, and a macrofacility affixed thereto may be up to
fifteen feet (15') in height, thereby allowing a maximum combined height for
the monopole I wireless communication support structure and any affixed
macrofacility antennas of seventy five feet (75').
      4.   Collocation on an existing monopole I support structure shall be
permitted without an additional conditional use permit, provided there is no
change whatsoever to the monopole I support structure, or to the associated
equipment shelter or cabinet, or to the site design, landscaping and/or other
screening techniques authorized under the original conditional use permit.
      5.   The equipment shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic
equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or located
underground. Any building or structure erected aboveground to house such
equipment shelter or cabinet shall not exceed an area of two hundred (200)
square feet.
      6.   All monopole I facilities shall be set back from the nearest
property lot line a distance equal to a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
overall height of the wireless communication support structure and the antennas
affixed thereto.
   E.   Monopole II:
      1.   Monopole II facilities shall require a special (conditional) use
permit pursuant to chapter 7 of this title, and such permit shall be available
only in the light industrial (LI) zone. A monopole II facility shall not be
allowed in any other zoning classification. Site design, landscaping and/or
other screening techniques deemed appropriate shall be duly considered as part
of the conditional use permit process.
      2.   Macro facilities shall be the largest wireless communication
facilities allowed on a monopole II wireless communication support structure.
      3.   A monopole II facility shall be designed to accommodate two (2) or
more wireless communication antennas on the wireless communication support
structure.
      4.   Collocation on an existing monopole II facility shall be permitted
without an additional conditional use permit, provided there is no change
whatsoever to the monopole II support structure, or to the associated equipment
shelter or cabinet, or to the site design, landscaping and/or other screening
techniques authorized under the original conditional use permit.
      5.   Antennas which extend above the wireless communications support
structure shall not be calculated as part of the height of the monopole II
wireless communication support structure. For example, a monopole II facility
may be up to one hundred fifty feet (150') in height, and a macrofacility
affixed thereto may be up to fifteen feet (15') in height, thereby allowing a
maximum combined height for the monopole II wireless communication support
structure and any affixed macrofacility antennas of one hundred sixty five feet
(165').
      6.   The equipment shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic
equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or located
underground. Any building or structure erected aboveground to house such
equipment shelter or cabinet shall not exceed an area of three hundred (300)
square feet.
      7.   All monopole II facilities shall be set back from the nearest
property lot line a distance equal to a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
overall height of the wireless communication support structure and the antennas
affixed thereto.
      8.   Monopole II facilities shall be separated from each other by a
distance equal to or greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile (i.e., 1,320 linear
feet) in any direction.
   F.   Lattice Tower:
      1.   Lattice towers shall require a special (conditional) use permit
pursuant to chapter 7 of this title, and such permit shall be available only in
the light industrial (LI) zone. A lattice tower facility shall not be allowed
in any other zoning classification. Site design, landscaping and/or other
screening techniques deemed appropriate shall be duly considered as part of the
conditional use permit process.
      2.   Macro facilities shall be the largest wireless communication
facilities allowed on a lattice tower wireless communication support structure.
      3.   A lattice tower facility shall be designed to accommodate two (2) or
more wireless communication antennas on the wireless communication support
structure.
      4.   Collocation on an existing lattice tower facility shall be permitted
without an additional conditional use permit, provided there is no change
whatsoever to the lattice tower support structure, or to the associated
equipment shelter or cabinet, or to the site design, landscaping and/or other
screening techniques authorized under the original conditional use permit.
      5.   Antennas which extend above the wireless communications support
structure shall not be calculated as part of the height of the lattice tower
wireless communication support structure. For example, a lattice tower may be
up to one hundred fifty feet (150') in height, and a macrofacility affixed
thereto may be up to fifteen feet (15') in height, thereby allowing a maximum
combined height for the lattice tower wireless communication support structure
and any affixed macrofacility antennas of one hundred sixty five feet (165').
      6.   The equipment shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic
equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or located
underground. Any building or structure erected aboveground to house such
equipment shelter or cabinet shall not exceed an area of three hundred (300)
square feet.
      7.   All lattice tower facilities shall be set back from the nearest
property lot line a distance equal to a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
overall height of the wireless communication support structure and the antennas
affixed thereto.
      8.   Lattice tower facilities shall be separated from each other by a
distance equal to or greater than one-fourth (1/4) mile (i.e., 1,320 linear
feet) in any direction. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-5: AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
All wireless communication facilities shall be subject to city council
authorization and municipal inspection. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-6: VARIANCES:
If the effective operation of a wireless communication facility precludes
compliance with the applicable height limitations of this chapter, or precludes
compliance with the applicable equipment shelter or cabinet limitations of this
chapter, any such height or equipment shelter or cabinet exception shall be
subject to the variance proceedings set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord.
263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-7: ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND PERMIT CRITERIA:
   A.   Visual Impact:
      1.   Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting
character of surrounding buildings, land uses, and the zoning classification,
to the maximum extent feasible commensurate with the necessary operation of the
wireless communication facility. It is intended that the wireless communication
support structure be integrated, through location and design, to blend in with
the existing characteristics of the site to the maximum extent practical.
      2.   Existing on site vegetation shall be preserved and augmented to
appropriately screen the facility.
      3.   Disturbance of existing topography shall be minimized, unless such
terrain modification, upon completion, would result in a lesser visual impact
upon existing uses surrounding the project site.
   B.   Noise: As part of any wireless communication facility proposal, the
service provider or its representative shall furnish the city with information
regarding the operating decibel (dB) level of the proposed installation, as
measured at the property line nearest the proposed location, to ensure that
noise levels acceptable for adjacent uses would not be compromised by such
installation. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-8: FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION PREEMPTION:
Federal law prohibits consideration of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that the proposed facilities comply with
federal communications commission (FCC) regulations concerning such emissions.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-9: EXEMPT MODIFICATIONS TO EXISTING INSTALLATIONS:
Minor modification of existing wireless communication facilities and attached
wireless communication facilities, whether emergency or routine, shall be
exempt from further administrative or special (conditional) use permit review;
provided, however, that there is little or no change to the visual appearance.
Minor modifications are those modifications, including the addition of
antennas, to conforming wireless communication facilities and attached wireless
communication facilities that meet the performance standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
8-15-10: OBSOLESCENCE:
A wireless communication facility, or an attached wireless communication
facility, shall be removed by the facility's owner within six (6) months of the
date such facility ceases to be operational and/or within six (6) months of the
date such facility falls into disrepair. (Ord. 263, 7-12-2005)
TITLE 9
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
                              The Mayor shall serve as the Administrator of
                              this Code, and shall have the authority to
ADMINISTRATOR:                delegate Code administration to an employee or
                              contractor of the City with appropriate skills
                              and experience for the task.
BUILDING ENVELOPE:            A designated area shown on a plat within which
                              all structures must be located.
                              Describes parcels or other areas which share a
CONTIGUOUS:                   mutual boundary line. Parcels or other areas
                              which meet only at a common corner point shall
                              not be considered to be contiguous.
                              The power to take private property for public use
EMINENT DOMAIN:               by the state, municipalities and limited private
                              persons or corporations.
                              The final drawing of the subdivision and
                              dedication prepared for filing for record with
FINAL PLAT:                   the County Recorder and containing all elements
                              and requirements set forth in the Idaho Code and
                              in this title adopted pursuant thereto.
LOT:                          A platted parcel of land which has been legally
                              created.
PARCEL:                       Any portion of land that is separately described
                              in a deed of conveyance.
                              A map or representation of a subdivision, showing
PLAT:                         thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land
                              into lots, blocks, roads and alleys or other
                              divisions and dedications.
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN: A map or drawing illustrating a preliminary
                              subdivision proposal.
UTILITY LOT:                  A lot or parcel that is used exclusively for
                              utility purposes.
                              A written statement from a water and/or sewage
                              treatment provider indicating that the system has
                              the capacity to provide water or sewage treatment
WILL SERVE LETTER:            service, and that the owner is willing to provide
                              that service to the lots in a proposed
                              subdivision. (Ord. 230, 5-3-1994; amd. Ord. 410,
                              1-17-2017; Ord. 442, - -2023)
 
CHAPTER 2
SHORT PLATS
(Rep. by Ord. 410, 1-17-2017)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION PLATS
(Rep. by Ord. 442, - -2023)
CHAPTER 4
APPLICABILITY, EXEMPT DIVISIONS, AND LOT CONSOLIDATION
SECTION:
9-4-1: Description And Applicability
9-4-2: Exempt Divisions Of Land
9-4-3: Lot Consolidation
9-4-1: DESCRIPTION AND APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the division of one or more
parcels of land into two (2) or more lots, and to the reconfiguration,
combination or change in status of a lot or right-of-way (e.g., conversion of a
utility lot to a building lot), within the incorporated limits of the City of
Athol. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-4-2: EXEMPT DIVISIONS OF LAND:
The following divisions of land shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. A parcel of land created under an exemption set forth in this section
will be recognized as a separate parcel as of the day the instrument which
created the parcel is recorded.
   A.   Burial Plots: Divisions made for cemeteries or burial plots when used
for that purpose.
   B.   Conveyances To Government Agencies, Districts and Utilities: Divisions
resulting from the conveyance of a parcel to a government agency, taxing
district, or a public utility regulated by the Idaho Public Utilities
Commission.
   C.   Boundary Line Adjustments: Boundary line adjustments which comply with
the applicable requirements of this subsection shall be exempt from the
provisions of this title.
      1.   Boundary line adjustments to legally created parcels must comply
with the following requirements:
         a.   No additional or non-contiguous parcels are created;
         b.   The resulting parcels meet the minimum size for the zone and are
otherwise in conformance with all applicable provisions of City Code; and
         c.   The adjustment does not result in parcels separated by a public
road or a public or improved private right-of-way.
      2.   A boundary line adjustment may add land from an unplatted parcel to
an existing lot or from an existing lot to an unplatted parcel.
      3.   A parcel that is not eligible for development permits because it
does not conform to the applicable provisions of City Code, or was created
improperly, cannot become eligible for development permits solely as a result
of a boundary line adjustment.
      4.   In order to ensure that no additional parcels of land are
inadvertently created, boundary line adjustments should be accomplished by
recordation of a deed of conveyance for the property that is to be transferred,
and then by recordation of a second deed for the receiving parcel which
describes the new, exterior parcel boundaries. A statement should also be
included on the deeds of conveyance which indicates that those instruments are
being recorded for boundary line adjustment purposes, and that no additional
parcels are being created as a result of the adjustment.
   D.   Decedent's Estates: Divisions made pursuant to a will, testamentary
trust, testamentary provision of an inter vivos trust, or other similar
instrument associated with a decedent's estate. The instrument must contain
language providing for the division to be made. Such divisions must comply with
the following requirements:
      1.   Each parcel has legal access to a public road;
      2.   Each parcel meets the minimum size for the zone; and
      3.   Each parcel is otherwise in conformance with all applicable
provisions of this title.
   E.   Eminent Domain: Divisions resulting from the exercise of eminent domain
by an agency of the State of Idaho or by any local agency or taxing district,
including any purchase negotiated between the agency and the property owner in
lieu of eminent domain proceedings.
   F.   Parcels Created By Court Order: Parcels of land created by court order
other than one associated with a decedent's estate or exercise of eminent
domain shall be considered a legally created parcel, but shall not be eligible
for development permits until they are validated through approval of a
subdivision pursuant to this title. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-4-3: LOT CONSOLIDATION:
Consolidation of lots may be accomplished through the filing of a completed
application for lot consolidation with the City and in the Office of the
Kootenai County Assessor. The application shall be on a form approved by the
City and the Assessor. For purposes of this title, consolidation shall be
effective upon filing and approval by the City. Upon filing and approval,
interior lot lines within the consolidated lot shall be disregarded for
purposes of determining setbacks and building envelopes. Upon consolidation, no
subsequently built structures shall materially interfere with any preexisting
easements or rights-of-way. Any subsequent redivision of any consolidated lot
must be accomplished via the subdivision process, as appropriate. (Ord. 442, -
-2023)
CHAPTER 5
SUBDIVISIONS, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Description
9-5-2: General Requirements
9-5-3: Application Requirements For Preliminary Subdivision Approval
9-5-4: Processing And Preliminary Approval
9-5-5: Time Extension For Preliminary Subdivision Approval
9-5-6: Application Requirements For Final Subdivision Approval
9-5-7: Final Subdivision Approval Procedure
9-5-8: Recordation Of Plat
9-5-1: DESCRIPTION:
The subdivision process has three (3) steps: preliminary subdivision approval,
construction approval (including review and approval of plans prior to
construction and as built approval when construction is complete, if
applicable), and final subdivision approval followed by plat recordation. (Ord.
442, - -2023)
9-5-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Phasing of subdivisions and improvements is permitted, subject to the
requirements of this title.
   B.   Applications for preliminary approval of a subdivision associated with
a PUD shall be submitted concurrently with the PUD application. (Ord. 442, - -
2023)
9-5-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
Applications for preliminary subdivision approval shall comply with the
requirements set forth in this section.
   A.   The applicant shall submit one (1) application packet to the City in
electronic format except as may be approved by the Administrator, in which case
the applicant shall submit one (1) complete application packet to the City,
plus additional packets for each agency which will be requested to review and
comment on the proposal. The Administrator will determine which agencies are to
receive applications for review and comment, and will forward the application
packets to those agencies. An applicant may request that an incomplete
application be accepted by submitting a letter stating which items are missing
and giving a detailed explanation and rationale for the incomplete submission.
If the Administrator determines that the missing information is not necessary
to establish conformance with the required findings listed in subsection
9-5-4 C.2., the request may be approved, in which case, the application will be
deemed to be complete, will be vested under the then current provisions of this
chapter, and will be processed. If the Administrator denies the request, the
application will not be processed or scheduled for public hearing until it is
complete. A denial of this request may be appealed in accordance with the
provisions of City Code Section
1-1-5.
   B.   The following items constitute a complete application for preliminary
approval of a subdivision, with the items listed in subsections B1 through B4
of this section being the required elements of agency packets:
      1.   A completed application form signed by the property owner, or a
notarized letter from the property owner authorizing the applicant to file the
subdivision application.
      2.   A large plan, including supplemental pages, which meets the
requirements outlined in table B-11 of this section.
      3.   At least six (6) photographs of the site, taken at various angles,
depicting the general character of the site, accompanied by a map showing the
location and orientation of the photos.
      4.   A narrative listing the following:
         a.   The acreage of the subdivision;
         b.   The number of lots proposed;
         c.   The location, approximate dimensions, and intended use of any
nonresidential lots (e.g., utilities, schools, places of worship or assembly,
parks, or open space);
         d.   The characteristics of the site, including existing vegetation,
soils and wildlife;
         e.   Proposed water, sewer service, roads, trails and other
improvements;
         f.   Plans for preserving land for timber, agriculture, recreation,
wildlife or other open space uses;
         g.   Proposed phasing, if applicable;
         h.   Proposed conveyances, including conservation easements, if
applicable;
         i.   The proposed completion schedule for the project as a whole, and
for any proposed phases of the project;
         j.   Proposed methods of ownership and maintenance of any open space,
shared infrastructure and improvements.
      5.   Fees, as adopted by resolution of the council.
      6.   A title report or similar document dated within 6 months of the
application, containing the legal description, ownership and easements for the
property.
      7.   A list of property owners of record within 300 feet of external
boundaries of the subject property, mailing labels, and a copy of the
Assessor's map used to create the list, provided by a title company.
      8.   A map of the surrounding area and adjoining subdivisions which shows
adjoining subdivisions, including a street and lot layout sufficiently distant
from the project to illustrate the relationship to proposed streets and lots,
neighboring land owned by the same applicant, and surrounding properties within
one-fourth (1/4) mile or two (2) parcels, whichever is greater, in every
direction. The scale of this map shall be not less than one inch per four
hundred feet (1" = 400').
      9.   If new infrastructure is proposed, a conceptual engineering plan
developed by an Idaho licensed civil engineer, depicting roads, water service,
wastewater (if applicable), stormwater, utilities. If the subdivision contains
lots with slopes greater than 15% slope, the engineering plan shall also depict
proposed building sites, road and driveway grades, profiles and cross sections,
and the slope and location of cuts and fills.
      10.   When requested by the Administrator a traffic impact study shall be
submitted, which shall include the following:
         a.   Existing traffic counts and level of service on adjacent and
nearby streets;
         b.   Vehicle trips that will be generated by the development;
         c.   The effect the subdivision will have on the level of service on
affected streets;
         d.   The effect added traffic will have on signals, turn lanes, or
other transportation infrastructure;
         e.   Improvements needed to maintain adequate levels of service;
         f.   The effect the subdivision will have on pedestrian safety on
affected streets; and
         g.   Any other information required to evaluate impacts to the
transportation system.
      11.   Whenever the natural slope of any proposed building sites, roads,
driveways or other development equals or exceeds fifteen percent (15%), there
is a water table within six feet (6') of ground surface at any time of year,
soils are highly erodible, or there are scarps, slumps, seeps or other geologic
features that may be unstable, the Administrator may require submittal of a
geotechnical analysis as part of a subdivision application. The geotechnical
analysis shall:
         a.   Be stamped and signed by an Idaho licensed civil or geological
engineer having sufficient education and experience to prove competency in the
field of geotechnical engineering;
         b.   Explain the geologic and hydrologic features of the area;
         c.   Evaluate the suitability of the site for intended uses;
         d.   Identify potential problems relating to the geology and
hydrology;
         e.   Summarize the data upon which its conclusions are based; and
         f.   Propose mitigation measures.
Table B-11 - FORM AND CONTENT OF SUBDIVISION PLANS, PLATS AND SUPPLEMENTAL
PAGES
Table B-11 - FORM AND CONTENT OF SUBDIVISION PLANS, PLATS AND SUPPLEMENTAL PAGES
                                                                                  Preliminary Prelim. Plan Final
   Plat / Plan Component                                                         Plan        Supplemental Plat
                                                                                              Page
    Size and format. Must be 18" x 27" and must comply with section 50-1304,
    Idaho Code. The plat must encompass all land involved in the subdivision,
1.  including open space that will not be used for building lots, and must                                 X
    include north arrow, date, legend, vicinity map, and scale. Scale must be
    suitable to ensure clarity.
2.  Name. Subdivision names must comply with section 50-1307, Idaho Code. The     X                        X
    Kootenai County Surveyor approves all subdivision names.
3.  Location. Section, quarter section, township, range, meridian, county and     X                        X
    state
    Proposed lot lines. All lots must be numbered consecutively in each block and
4.  each block must be lettered or numbered. Adjacent parcels must be shown with  X
    dashed lines. Approximate net acreage of each lot must be shown.
    Boundaries. Final lot lines and the exterior boundary of the plat must be
    shown by distance and bearing, and must include: a description of lot corner
    and centerline monuments, including material, size, and length; initial
5.  points and basis of bearings; ties to 2 public land surveys or other                                   X
    monuments recognized by the county surveyor; curve data, including radius,
    length, delta, tangent length, chord bearings and distances; reference to
    records of survey; net lot sizes in square feet, or acreage to 3 decimal
    places.
    Roads and trails within and adjacent to the subdivision. Existing and
    proposed rights of way and easements, with centerlines, widths, and location
6.  clearly shown and instrument numbers noted. Easements and rights of way not   X                        X
    dedicated to the City or highway district must be dedicated or conveyed to
    the entity responsible for maintenance. Road names must be approved by the
    City. Privately maintained roads must be designated as such.
    Other easements. The location, dimensions, and purpose of other existing or
    proposed easements, with instrument numbers noted. Required easements must be
7.  shown for components of shared infrastructure and improvements, and for       X                        X
    individual utility lines and drainfields that will not be located on the same
    parcel as the property served thereby.
    Topographic elevations. Contours shown at vertical intervals of not more than
8.  5 feet, at a scale between 1" = 40' and 1" = 100', and identifying slopes                 X
    zones of 0 to 15%, and over 15%.
9.  Hydrography. Drainages, watercourses, water bodies and wetlands                           X            X
10. Physical features. The location of significant physical features such as                  X
    ridges, rock outcrops and wooded areas.
11. Existing built features, including structures, wells, sewage systems and                  X
    utility lines.
12. Building envelopes, if required by the City.                                                           X
13. Purpose for which lots, other than building lots are delineated or reserved.  X                        X
14. A line for referencing the book, page, instrument number and recordation date                          X
    of CC&Rs that will be recorded simultaneously with the final plat.
15. Any conditions of approval intended to run with the land in perpetuity.                                X
    The signature page for the plat, with the following unsigned certificates:                             X
    a.   A notarized owner's certification containing the legal description of
    the land, a statement as to the intent of the owners to include the property
    in the subdivision, a statement regarding the domestic water source, and if
    applicable, statements of conveyance (e.g., conveyance of easements or rights
    of way for public streets, common areas, water or stormwater systems, etc.)
    The plat must be signed by all owners of the property within the subdivision.
    b.   Certification of acceptance of rights of way or property conveyances.
    c.   Certification by an Idaho licensed surveyor that the plat is accurate
    and conforms to the provisions of Idaho Code and this chapter. The signature
16. must be dated and must include the surveyor's seal.
    d.   Health District that the plat meets the requirements for the lifting of
    sanitary restrictions under sections 50-1326 through 50-1329, Idaho Code.
    e.   Certification of approval by the city council, with signatures of the
    city clerk and city engineer. If any roads or rights of way will be dedicated
    to the public, the certification must include acceptance of the conveyance.
    f.   Certification, within 30 days prior to recording, by the county
    treasurer that the taxes on the described property are current.
    g.   Certification by the county surveyor that the plat conforms to the
    requirements of Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13.
    h.   Certification by the county recorder that the plat has been accepted for
    recording, with the date of recordation.
17. All other items required by title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, or by the                                X
    county surveyor.
 
(Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-5-4: PROCESSING AND PRELIMINARY APPROVAL:
   A.   Procedure for Processing of Applications:
      1.   Site Inspection and Sketch Plan Review: The applicant must provide a
sketch plan, consisting of simple, conceptual drawings which show the layout of
proposed streets and lots. The city planner will review the approval process
with the applicant and will confer with the applicant as to the design and
feasibility of the proposal.
      2.   Existing Code Violations: If any unpermitted site disturbance or
subdivision development has previously occurred (e.g., construction of roads,
driveways, building pads, etc.), a site disturbance permit must be obtained,
and stormwater and erosion control systems and BMPs must be installed and
approved before a subdivision application will be accepted as complete for
purposes of vesting and processing. Any other violations of City Code must also
be corrected prior to application, except to the extent that approval of the
application will remedy any such violation.
      3.   Subdivision Design: The applicant and design consultant will then
lay out the proposed subdivision, and the project surveyor will draw a proposed
preliminary plat. Surveying of lot lines shall not be necessary until after
preliminary approval is granted. Applications for phased subdivisions must
include a proposed completion schedule for each phase, and for the project as a
whole. Each phase of a phased subdivision must include at least ten (10) lots.
      4.   Application: The applicant must then submit a complete application
to the City, including a sufficient number of copies as determined by the
Administrator. The application and proposed plat must meet the requirements of
section
9-5-3. Incomplete applications will not be processed.
      5.   Agency Review:
         a.   If the application is complete, the department will forward it to
other agencies with relevant jurisdiction or expertise with a request for
review and comment within thirty (30) days of receipt. After the agency review
memo and pertinent information have been sent, the applicant should contact
each agency to determine whether there are additional requirements which will
apply to the proposed subdivision. Agency responses should explain whether the
proposal appears feasible and will meet the agency's requirements, any negative
effects that may result from the subdivision and any actions which may be
needed to mitigate those effects and ensure that the development does not
compromise the quality, or increase the cost, of public services and
facilities, any additional information that may be needed, and what is required
or recommended prior to final approval.
         b.   Agencies that may be asked to comment include, but are not
limited to, the fire protection and highway districts with jurisdiction, the
Idaho Transportation Department, the school district, Panhandle Health
District, the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality, the Idaho Department
of Water Resources, water and sewer service providers, utility providers, the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Kootenai County, and the Idaho Department of
Lands. In addition to providing general comments, the department will request
that the following agencies address these specific items:
            (1)   Panhandle Health District: The requirements for the lifting
of sanitary restrictions, as may be required prior to recordation.
            (2)   School district: Any measures which may be needed to mitigate
the effect that new students from the subdivision will have on the district, so
that there will be no substantial cost to existing residents.
            (3)   Fire protection district: The minimum required fire flows in
gallons per minute and duration.
         c.   Requests by an agency for actions to be taken, or fees to be
paid, to mitigate impacts of a subdivision should be roughly proportional, both
in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development.
      7.   Scheduling: After all required agency letters are received, the
department will review the application and schedule it for public hearing.
Prior to scheduling, the applicant may make minor changes, but once the
application is scheduled for hearing, the proposal cannot be significantly
modified. If additional information is provided after hearing on the
application has been scheduled, the Administrator may require additional agency
review or additional public notice, or both, and may reschedule or continue the
hearing to allow time for the additional information to be reviewed.
      8.   Staff Report and Recommendation: Prior to the hearing, the
Administrator will prepare a report on the proposal. The report shall include
an evaluation of the proposal's compliance with the applicable provisions of
this title, a recommendation of approval or denial, and the reasons for the
recommendation. If the recommendation is for approval, the report shall include
any recommended conditions of approval.
   B.   Hearing and Decision-Making Process:
      1.   Notice: Notice of all public hearings on applications for
preliminary subdivision approval shall be given in accordance with this
section. Prior to the public hearing, notice thereof shall be published once in
the official newspaper of the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. Notice shall be also sent by U.S. mail, postmarked at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing, to all property owners and purchasers of record
whose property is within or adjacent to the area bounded by lines three hundred
feet (300') from the external boundary of the proposal area and any additional
area that may be substantially impacted as determined by the Administrator.
Notice shall also be posted on the subject property not less than seven (7)
days prior to the hearing. All hearing notices shall include the date, time,
and place of the hearing as well as a summary of the proposal, including the
legal description of the property and its general location. It shall be the
responsibility of the Administrator to prepare the notices of public hearing
and publish, mail and post the same.
      2.   Hearing: Hearings on applications shall be conducted by the Council
as a quasi-judicial public hearing.
   C.   Required Findings:
      1.   In making a decision on an application, the City Council shall only
consider the application materials which have been submitted and the relevant
testimony and evidence in the record. The applicant shall bear the burden of
proof (including both the burden of going forward with evidence and the burden
of persuasion) that the application complies with the applicable requirements
of this chapter.
      2.   To recommend preliminary approval of an application, the City
Council must make all of the following findings:
         a.   The applicant has provided information sufficient to determine
whether the application complies with the relevant requirements of this
chapter.
         b.   The application complies with the requirements of section
9-5-3.
         c.   The application complies with, or is capable of complying with,
the requirements of this chapter.
         d.   The plan, project and lots proposed in the application are
capable of complying with all other applicable provisions of City Code without
variances.
         e.   The plan, project and proposed lots are capable of complying with
the requirements of other agencies with jurisdiction or providing services.
         f.   The proposal will contribute to orderly development of the area.
The design, density and proposed uses (including infrastructure facilities such
as wastewater treatment), are compatible with existing homes, businesses,
neighborhoods, and with the natural characteristics of the area. The
subdivision will create lots of reasonable utility and livability, which are
capable of being built upon without imposing an unreasonable burden on future
owners. Areas not suited for development are designated as open space.
         g.   The proposed subdivision will provide adequate open space for
recreation, wildlife, agriculture or timber production where appropriate. Road
construction and disturbance of the terrain, vegetation and drainageways will
be minimized and will not result in soil erosion upon completion. The design
adequately addresses site constraints or hazards and will adequately mitigate
any negative environmental, social or economic impacts.
         h.   Services and facilities such as schools, electricity, water,
wastewater disposal, stormwater management, garbage disposal, EMS, police and
fire protection are feasible, available and adequate. The proposal includes on
and off-site improvements, or payments in lieu of such improvements, to
mitigate the impacts of the subdivision so that it does not unduly compromise
the quality, or increase the cost, of public services. Any request by an agency
for actions to be taken, or fees to be paid, to mitigate impacts of a
subdivision shall not be recommended as a condition of preliminary approval
unless the proposed actions or fees are roughly proportional, both in nature
and extent, to the impact of the proposed development.
         i.   Proposed roads, sidewalks and trails establish or adequately
contribute to a transportation system for vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians
that is safe, efficient and that minimizes traffic congestion.
         j.   The proposal is not anticipated to result in significant
degradation of surface or ground water quantity or quality.
         k.   Public notice and an opportunity for interested parties to be
heard on the application have been given in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Idaho Code and this title.
      3.   If the City Council makes all of the required findings set forth in
section, it shall grant preliminary approval of the application. If the
proposal cannot meet one or more of these requirements, or if insufficient
information was provided to make that determination, the City Council shall
deny the application.
      4.   The decision of the Council shall comply with section 67-6535, Idaho
Code, and shall cite the applicable legal standards, state the evidence and
conclusions on which the decision was based, and explain any relevant contested
facts and its evaluation of these facts. If the decision is to approve, it
shall include any recommended conditions of approval.
      5.   Conditions of approval shall be roughly proportional, both in nature
and extent, to the reasonably expected impacts of the proposed development. Any
request by an agency for actions to be taken, or fees to be paid, to mitigate
impacts of a subdivision shall not be required as a condition of preliminary
approval unless the proposed actions or fees are roughly proportional, both in
nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development.
      6.   Preliminary subdivision approval shall be valid for two (2) years.
For subdivisions done in conjunction with a PUD, or that include three (3) or
more phases with a total of fifty (50) or more lots, an alternate completion
schedule may be requested in the preliminary application and may be approved by
the Council. At any time prior to expiration of the approval, the applicant may
make a written request to the Administrator for a single extension of up to two
(2) years, according to the extension process provided in section
9-5-5. For phased developments, one automatic two (2) year extension shall be
granted upon recordation of the plat for the first phase. Subsequent extensions
for phased developments may be requested in accordance with section
9-5-5.
   D.   Reconsiderations and Appeals:
      1.   Reconsideration: Every applicant or affected person seeking judicial
review of the City Council's final decision must first file with the City
Council a written petition for reconsideration of the Council's decision,
specifying deficiencies in the decision for which reconsideration is sought
within fourteen (14) days.
         a.   The City Council may reconsider its decision only if it finds any
of the following:
            (1)   There was a clerical error in the decision;
            (2)   The decision resulted from fraud or mistake;
            (3)   There is newly discovered evidence or a change in
circumstances;
            (4)   There was a procedural error;
            (5)   The Council previously rejected the application by a tie
vote; or
            (6)   The decision was made in violation of substantive law.
         b.   The City Council shall review the petition for reconsideration at
its next regular meeting and decide whether to reconsider the matter. If the
City Council grants reconsideration in whole or in part, a hearing before the
City Council will be scheduled to address the specific deficiencies identified
by the applicant or affected person, which shall be conducted pursuant to the
public notice procedures of this chapter. The issues examined upon
reconsideration shall be limited to issues raised by the petition for
reconsideration and the record previously established, as well as the
applicable law. The cost of all required notices shall be borne by the party
(ies) appealing the decision and paid in advance.
         c.   Following the hearing on the reconsideration, the City Council
may affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, its prior decision and
shall provide a written decision to the applicant and the affected person(s)
within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration. If the
City Council fails to timely decide, the request for reconsideration is deemed
denied.
      2.   Judicial Appeals: After a notice of decision is issued, or after a
revised notice of decision is issued under a reconsideration proceeding, any
aggrieved party with standing to appeal, may appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   E.   Construction Approval:
      1.   Preconstruction Plan Approval: After preliminary subdivision
approval is granted, the applicant shall submit construction plans for review
and approval by the City and other agencies with jurisdiction. The City will
review those plans for conformance with the design standards contained in title
9, chapter 7, and with any applicable conditions of approval. Construction
plans may include, without limitation, plans for roads, water and sewer
systems, trails, vegetation buffers, and stormwater, erosion and dust control.
No construction, site disturbance or other development activity may commence
until plans are approved and the appropriate development permits are issued by
the City.
      2.   Construction Approval: After construction plans have been approved
and development permits have been issued, the applicant may either install the
improvements, obtain written approval of the construction by the design
professionals and applicable agencies, and apply for final subdivision
approval, or, alternatively, may submit a financial guarantee and subdivision
completion agreement which complies with the requirements of sections
9-7-9 and
9-8-8, and are approved by the Administrator, and then apply for final
subdivision approval. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-5-5: TIME EXTENSION FOR PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
   A.   Applicability: At any time prior to expiration of preliminary approval,
one extension of up to two (2) years may be requested according to the
procedure set forth in this section. For phased developments, one automatic two
(2) year extension will be granted when the first phase is recorded. Subsequent
extensions for phased developments may be requested in accordance with this
section.
   B.   Application Requirements: The following items shall constitute a
complete application:
      1.   The application form.
      2.   Fees as adopted by resolution of the Council.
      3.   A narrative which explains the following:
         a.   The reasons why the subdivision was not developed within the
original time line;
         b.   The status of compliance with the original conditions of
approval; and
         c.   The anticipated time schedule for completion of the platting
process.
      4.   The Administrator may require additional information to determine
compliance with conditions of approval, applicable provisions of this title,
other section of City Code, or the requirements of other agencies.
   C.   Approval Requirements:
      1.   The Administrator may grant the extension upon the following
findings:
         a.   A complete application was submitted;
         b.   The project is in compliance with the requirements of the City
and other agencies in place at the time the complete preliminary application
was received by the City; and
         c.   The project is in compliance with its conditions of approval.
      2.   The Administrator shall make a decision within thirty five (35) days
of receipt of a complete application unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant.
      3.   The decision of the Administrator may be appealed in accordance with
the provisions of section
1-1-5. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-5-6: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
   A.   The following items constitute a complete application for final
approval of a subdivision:
      1.   A completed application form signed by the property owner, or a
notarized letter from the property owner authorizing the applicant to file the
application.
      2.   A completed checklist of application requirements.
      3.   Fees as adopted by resolution of the Council.
      4.   Two (2) copies of a large plat, including the signature page and all
supplemental pages, which has been prepared by an Idaho licensed surveyor and
complies with the requirements set forth in section
9-5-3, table B-11 and in title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code.
      5.   A small plat, which shall consist of an eleven inch by seventeen
inch (11" x 17") copy of the large plat, plus all supplemental pages.
      6.   A narrative which contains the following information:
         a.   An explanation of how each condition of approval has been met;
         b.   The status of phasing and infrastructure improvements;
         c.   The total acres and number of lots in the final proposal;
         d.   Any modifications from the original proposal; and
         e.   Confirmation that necessary road signs and corner monuments have
been installed.
      7.   Any documentation needed to show compliance with requirements or
conditions of approval, including a written agreement for garbage collection
service when required.
      8.   If not previously submitted, construction plans which have been
approved by agencies with jurisdiction, including plans for roads, trails,
water, sewer systems, dust control, etc. If improvements are completed, as
built plans and written approvals prepared by appropriate design professionals
are required.
      9.   If noxious weeds have been identified, an approved weed mitigation
plan and proof that the plan has been implemented (e.g., receipts for
spraying).
      10.   Copies of associated documents such as conservation easements,
restrictive covenants, and homeowners' association bylaws and articles of
incorporation that are associated with the subdivision. These must be approved
by the Administrator.
      11.   Financial guarantees. Draft copies of financial guarantees that
will be submitted for the required warranty, or in lieu of completed, approved
infrastructure improvements. Financial guarantees must be approved by the
Administrator and agencies with jurisdiction (if applicable), must comply with
the requirements of
9-7-9, and must be accompanied by a subdivision completion and/or warranty
agreement which complies with the requirements of section
9-8-8. If an agency is unable or unwilling to approve a financial guarantee,
the Administrator may assume this authority.
      12.   Letters from agencies with jurisdiction and service providers, as
determined by the Administrator, dated within six (6) months prior to
submittal. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining agency approval
letters associated with applications for final subdivision approval. The
letters must indicate the following:
         a.   Construction plans have been reviewed and approved;
         b.   If construction is complete, that it has been approved;
         c.   If construction is not complete, that the amount of proposed
financial guarantees is acceptable;
         d.   Proposed conveyances will be accepted;
         e.   Any other requirements have been met; and
         f.   The mylar plat will be signed and sanitary restrictions will be
lifted.
   B.   The applicant shall be required to submit one application packet. Any
application that is incomplete will not be processed. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-5-7: FINAL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The procedure for final approval of a subdivision shall be as follows:
   A.   Application: The applicant shall submit one complete application
packet. The application and plat must meet the requirements of section
9-5-6 and section
9-5-3, table B-11, title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, and any other applicable
provisions of this Code, and the requirements of all agencies with jurisdiction
and those providing services. If the application is not complete, it will not
be processed.
   B.   Administrator Recommendation and Required Findings: The Administrator
shall review the application and the relevant facts and evidence in the record
and issue a recommendation. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof
(including both the burden of going forward with evidence and the burden of
persuasion) that the application complies with the applicable requirements of
this chapter. To recommend final approval of a subdivision, the Administrator
must make the following findings:
      1.   The applicant has provided information sufficient to determine
whether the application complies with the relevant requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   The plat complies with the requirements of section
9-5-3, table B-11 of this chapter and title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, and is
substantially the same as was presented in the preliminary application.
      3.   The project and the lots comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
      4.   The plat, the project and the lots comply with other applicable
provisions of this code.
      5.   The plat, the project and the lots meet the requirements of all
agencies with jurisdiction and those providing services.
      6.   The subdivision creates lots of reasonable utility and livability,
capable of being built upon without imposing an unreasonable burden on future
owners.
      7.   Negative environmental, social and economic impacts have been or
will be mitigated.
      8.   On and off site improvements, or payments in lieu of such
improvements, that are roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to the
impact of the proposed development have been made in order to mitigate the
impacts of the subdivision so that it does not compromise the quality or
increase the cost of services.
      9.   The sanitary restrictions will be lifted prior to recordation.
      10.   The applicant has demonstrated that all conditions of approval have
been met.
      11.   Improvements are either complete and approved by all agencies with
jurisdiction and those providing services, or construction plans have been
approved and a financial guarantee approved by the Administrator and by all
agencies with jurisdiction and those providing services. If an agency is unable
or unwilling to approve a financial guarantee, the Administrator may assume
this authority.
      12.   If any land, shared infrastructure, or improvements will be
privately maintained, documents establishing the maintenance organization have
been approved by the Administrator and are ready to be recorded with the plat.
      13.   For phased projects, the phase for which final approval has been
applied complies with all of the requirements of this title and with those of
other agencies and service providers.
   C.   Recommendation: If the application and the subdivision comply with all
of the requirements of subsection B of this section, the Administrator shall
recommend approval. If the application and the subdivision do not comply with
one or more of these requirements, or if insufficient information was provided
to make that determination, the Administrator shall recommend denial. The
Administrator shall make a recommendation within forty five (45) days of the
receipt of a complete application unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant.
   D.   City Council Decision:
      1. The City Council shall make the final decision on applications for
final subdivision approval. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Administrator, the city clerk shall schedule the application for deliberations
before the council. Deliberations shall be conducted in accordance with the
Idaho open meetings law, title 74, chapter 2, Idaho Code, but the Council shall
not allow public testimony, nor shall it admit additional evidence into the
record.
      2.   After reviewing the evidence in the record and the standards for
approval, the Council shall then take one of the following actions:
         a.   Approve the request;
         b.   Deny the request; or
         c.   Remand the application to the Administrator.
      3.   To grant final approval of an application, the Council must make all
of the findings set forth in subsection B of this section. If the Council makes
all of those findings, it shall grant final approval of the application. If the
proposal cannot meet one or more of those requirements, or if insufficient
information was provided to make that determination, the Council may either
deny the application, remand the application to the Administrator, or schedule
a public hearing to receive additional application materials, testimony and
evidence.
      4.   The order of decision of the Council shall comply with section 67-
6535, Idaho Code, and shall cite the applicable legal standards, state the
evidence and conclusions on which the decision was based, and explain any
relevant contested facts and its evaluation of these facts. The order of
decision shall be issued within thirty five (35) days of the deliberations
where the case was decided unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. (Ord.
442, - -2023)
9-5-8: RECORDATION OF PLAT:
Within one (1) year of final subdivision approval, the applicant must submit
the mylar plat and any associated documents to the city clerk in a form ready
to record. The applicant must obtain the owner's signature and the health
district signature on the plat, before submittal to the city. All signatures
and stamps must be in reproducible, quick drying, permanent, indelible, black
ink. The Administrator will check for compliance with the final subdivision
approval and will obtain signatures on the plat from the clerk and city
engineer, before returning the plat to the applicant to obtain the remaining
county signatures and record the plat. An extension of the one-year period for
recordation may be requested prior to the expiration of the then current
period, and such requests may be granted by the Administrator. If the plat is
not submitted within one year, and a request for extension is not timely made
and granted by the Administrator, the approval shall be null and void. (Ord.
442, - -2023)
CHAPTER 6
CONDOMINIUM PLATS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Description And Applicability
9-6-2: Application Requirements
9-6-3: Approval Procedure
9-6-4: Final Approval And Recordation Of Plat
9-6-1: DESCRIPTION AND APPLICABILITY:
The procedure set forth in this chapter shall apply to approval of condominium
plats when the proposed condominium is located on one or more existing lots and
no further division of land on which the proposed condominium is located is
proposed. If the condominium plat does not meet these criteria, it must be
approved as a subdivision. The determination as to whether a proposed
condominium constitutes a division of one or more existing lots shall be within
the discretion of the Administrator, subject to the appeal procedure set forth
in Section
1-1-5 of City Code. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-6-2: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Complete Application Required: The application shall submit one (1)
application packet to the city clerk in electronic format except as may be
approved by the Administrator. The director will determine which agencies are
to receive applications for review and comment, and the department will forward
the application to those agencies. The application shall include the proposed
declaration of condominium, proposed condominium plat, and all materials
required for approval as set forth in section
9-5-3, except as may be waived by the Administrator.
   B.   Fee: At the time of filing a condominium plat application, the
applicant shall pay an application fee to the city as provided in the fee
schedule approved by resolution of the Council.
   C.   Information Required: A proposed condominium plat and declaration of
condominium shall include all information required under title 50, chapter 13,
and title 55, chapter 15, Idaho Code. The form and content of the proposed
condominium plat and supplemental pages shall also comply with the requirements
of section
9-5-3, table B-11, with the exception of final lot lines.
   D.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations:
      1.   The proposed condominium plat shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the underlying zone.
      2.   If the applicant is also applying for approval of a planned unit
development in conjunction with the proposed condominium plat, the standards
for planned unit developments shall apply, as set forth in title 8, chapter 9,
including any modifications of other zoning standards allowed therein.
Applications for approval of a condominium plat associated with a planned unit
development shall be submitted concurrently with the PUD application.
   E.   Processing: No condominium plat application shall be processed until
all maps and information required by this section have been filed, checked and
accepted by the Administrator, and the required fees have been paid.
   F.   Additional Requirements for Phased Condominiums:
      1.   If the condominium project will contain more than one phase, the
condominium plat for the first phase and each subsequent phase must also
include the following information:
         a.   All future buildings or structures planned for the site, showing
appropriate dimensions and locations;
         b.   Identification of the order in which subsequent buildings or
structures will be constructed;
         c.   A statement that each phase will be superseded by the subsequent
phase.
      2.   If the initial condominium plat was required to be approved through
the subdivision or planned unit development approval process, subsequent phases
may be approved under the provisions of this section so long as the plat does
not further divide land and the Administrator determines that the condominium
plat does not significantly deviate from the plat of any previous phase or any
conditions of approval for the initial phase. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-6-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Procedure for Processing of Applications:
      1.   Site Inspection and Plan Review: The applicant must provide a draft
declaration of condominium and conceptual condominium plat drawing. The
Administrator and applicant will review the approval process with the applicant
and will confer with the applicant as to the design and feasibility of the
proposal.
      2.   Existing Site Disturbances and Code Violations: If any unpermitted
site disturbance or development has previously occurred (e.g., construction of
roads, driveways, building pads), a site disturbance permit must be obtained,
and BMPs must be installed and approved before an application for approval of a
condominium plat will be accepted as complete for purposes of vesting and
processing. The Administrator may require placement or replacement of trees or
other vegetation needed for screening and buffering of the condominium as a
condition of condominium plat approval. Any other violations of this Code must
also be corrected prior to application, except to the extent that approval of
the application will remedy any such violation.
      3.   Condominium Design: The applicant and design consultant will then
lay out the design of the project and, if necessary, will revise the proposed
declaration of condominium, and the project surveyor will draw a proposed
condominium plat. The requirements for design, improvements and maintenance for
condominium plats shall be as set forth in title 9, chapter 7.
      4.   Application: The applicant must then submit a complete application
packet to the city clerk. The application, the proposed declaration and
proposed plat must meet the requirements of section
9-6-2. Incomplete applications will not be processed.
      5.   Agency Review:
         a.   If the application is complete, the Administrator shall review
the application and forward it to other agencies with relevant jurisdiction or
expertise with a request for review and comment within thirty (30) days of
receipt. After the packets have been sent, the applicant should contact each
agency to determine whether there are additional requirements which will apply
to the proposed condominium. Agency responses should explain whether the
proposal appears feasible and will meet the agency's requirements, any negative
effects that may result from the condominium and any actions which may be
needed to mitigate those effects and ensure that the development does not
compromise the quality, or increase the cost, of public services and
facilities, any additional information that may be needed, and what is required
or recommended prior to final approval.
         b.   Agencies that may be asked to comment include, but are not
limited to, the fire protection and highway districts with jurisdiction, the
Idaho Transportation Department, the school district serving the area,
Panhandle Health District, the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality,
utility providers, Kootenai County Noxious Weeds Department, Idaho Department
of Lands, and the Idaho Department of Fish and Game. In addition to providing
general comments, the department will request that the following agencies
address these specific items:
            (1)   Panhandle Health District: The requirements for the lifting
of sanitary restrictions, as required prior to recordation.
            (2)   Sewer provider (if separate from city): A will-serve letter,
and any actions required to secure sewer connections.
         c.   Requests by an agency for actions to be taken, or fees to be
paid, to mitigate impacts of a condominium should be roughly proportional, both
in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development.
      7.   Comment Period: The Administrator shall also schedule the
application for a thirty (30) day public comment period, which shall run
concurrently with the agency comment period. The department shall cause a
notice of comment period to be published in the Coeur d'Alene Press at the
applicant's expense. The Administrator shall also cause notice to be mailed to
all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property and any contiguous
lots or parcels under the same ownership, at the applicant's expense, on or
before the first day of the comment period. Information submitted prior to the
close of the comment period shall be entered into the record on the
application.
   B.   Order of Decision and Required Findings:
      1.   After the close of the comment period, the Administrator shall
review the relevant evidence in the record and the standards for approval and
shall issue an order of decision. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof
(including both the burden of going forward with evidence and the burden of
persuasion) that the application complies with the applicable requirements of
this chapter. To approve a condominium plat, the Administrator must make the
following findings:
         a.   The applicant has provided information sufficient to determine
whether the application complies with the relevant requirements of this
chapter.
         b.   The declaration of condominium meets the relevant requirements of
title 55, chapter 15, Idaho Code.
         c.   The condominium plat meets the relevant requirements of section
9-6-2 of this chapter, title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, and title 55, chapter
15, Idaho Code.
         d.   The condominium plat and the project are in compliance with other
applicable provisions of this Code without variances.
         e.   The condominium plat and the project meet the requirements of all
agencies with jurisdiction and those providing services.
         f.   The design and proposed uses are compatible with existing homes,
businesses and neighborhoods, and with the natural characteristics of the area.
The condominium creates individual units and common areas of reasonable utility
and livability, capable of being built upon without imposing an unreasonable
burden on future owners. Areas not suited for development are designated as
common areas of the condominium and as open space.
         g.   Negative environmental, social and economic impacts have been, or
will be mitigated. Driveway construction and disturbance of the terrain,
vegetation and drainageways will be minimized and will not result in soil
erosion. The design adequately addressed site constraints or hazards.
         h.   Services and facilities which will serve the condominium are
available and adequate. On- and off-site improvements, or payments in lieu of
such improvements, that are roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impact of the proposed development have been made in order to mitigate the
impacts of the condominium so that it does not compromise the quality or
increase the cost of services.
         i.   The sanitary restrictions will be lifted prior to recordation.
         j.   Appropriate documents which establish a condominium owners'
association which will bear responsibility for maintenance of commonly owned
land, infrastructure, or other improvements, have been approved by the
Administrator and are ready to be recorded with the condominium plat.
         k.   Public notice and an opportunity for interested parties to
comment on the application have been given in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Idaho Code and this chapter.
      2.   If the application and the condominium comply with all of the
requirements of subsection B1 of this section, the Administrator shall approve
the application. If the application and the condominium do not comply with one
or more of these requirements, or if insufficient information was provided to
make that determination, the Administrator shall deny the application.
      3.   The order of decision of the Administrator shall comply with section
67-6535, Idaho Code, and shall cite the applicable legal standards, state the
evidence and conclusions on which the decision was based, and explain any
relevant contested facts and its evaluation of these facts. Decisions of
approval shall include any conditions of approval. The order of decision shall
be issued within thirty five (35) days of the close of the comment period
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant.
      4.   The decision of the Administrator may be appealed in accordance with
the provisions of Section
1-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-6-4: FINAL APPROVAL AND RECORDATION OF PLAT:
Within one (1) year of approval, the applicant must meet any conditions and
submit the mylar plat and any associated documents to the city clerk in a form
ready to record. The applicant must obtain the owner's signature and the health
district signature on the plat, before submittal to the city. All signatures
and stamps must be in reproducible, quick drying, permanent, indelible, black
ink. A current title report, which may be an updated version of the title
report originally submitted with the application, must also be submitted with
the plat. The Administrator will check for compliance with any conditions of
approval and will obtain signatures on the plat from the mayor, clerk and city
engineer, before the plat and any associated documents are returned to the
applicant to seek the remaining signatures. An extension of the one-year period
for recordation may be requested prior to the expiration of the then current
period, and such requests may be granted by the Administrator for good cause
shown. If the plat is not submitted within one year, and a request for
extension is not timely made and granted by the Administrator, the approval
shall be null and void. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
CHAPTER 7
DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Purpose
9-7-2: General Design Requirements
9-7-3: Utility And Service Standards
9-7-4: Easements And Rights Of Way
9-7-5: Subdivision And Lot Design
9-7-6: Roads And Trails
9-7-7: Improvement Requirements
9-7-8: Operation And Maintenance Requirements
9-7-9: Financial Guarantees
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to delineate the minimum on site design
requirements for subdivisions and condominium plats. While off-site
improvements may also be required to mitigate the effects of the development,
these will be considered project by project. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "subdivision" shall include condominiums except where condominiums are
specifically referenced therein. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-2: GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No land shall be subdivided which the Council finds to be unsuitable
for building sites because of potential hazards, such as flooding, inadequate
drainage, severe erosion potential, site contamination, excessive slope,
rockfall, landslides, subsidence (sinking or settling), high groundwater,
inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities, high voltage power
lines, high pressure gas lines, poor air quality, vehicular traffic hazards, or
any other situation that may be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare
of residents or the public, unless the hazards are eliminated or adequately
mitigated.
   B.   Development of land shall occur in conjunction with services and
facilities that are appropriate for the size and density of the development.
Services and facilities necessary to serve the subdivision must be feasible,
available and adequate, and the proposal must include such on- and off-site
improvements as will mitigate the impacts of the development, so that the
existing quality of services is not compromised and there is no substantial
increase in the cost of services to existing residents. Mitigation of impacts
may include on- and off-site improvements, or payments in lieu of such
improvements, so long as they are authorized by law, are directly related to
the proposed subdivision, and are roughly proportional, both in nature and
extent, to the impacts of the proposed subdivision.
   C.   For lots that will not be used for habitable structures, such as open
space, and unmanned utility lots, the Council may waive any of the requirements
for services and facilities listed in this chapter so long as the public,
agencies, infrastructure, and future lot owners will not be negatively
affected. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-3: UTILITY AND SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   Domestic Water Systems:
      1.   Connection to the city's water system shall generally be required,
unless such connection is infeasible and an alternative acceptable to the
Council is proposed.
      2.   The new components of a water system and any necessary improvements
to an existing system must be designed and constructed in conformance with the
current edition of the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction" and the
"Supplemental Construction Specifications to the ISPWC and Design Standards"
adopted by the City of Athol, the requirements of DEQ, the fire protection
district with jurisdiction, and if applicable, the water district, utility or
corporation which will be providing service. Distribution lines shall be
installed to each lot.
   B.   Fire Protection Systems: Subdivisions shall comply with the applicable
requirements of the fire protection district with jurisdiction, including those
pertaining to roads, driveways, fire flows, hydrants, water storage and
defensible space. In addition, each lot shall have a building site capable of
being accessed by a driveway which complies with the standards of the fire
protection district.
   C.   Sewage Disposal Systems: If a public sewage system is available and
provides a "will serve" letter, connection shall be required. If a private,
shared sewage system is available and provides a "will serve" letter,
connection may be required, providing the cost of service is commensurate with
that charged to existing customers. If connection to a shared system is
required, collection lines shall be installed to each lot. All sewage disposal
systems shall meet the standards of the Panhandle Health District and/or DEQ,
the current edition of the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction" and
the "Supplemental Construction Specifications to the ISPWC and Design
Standards" adopted by the City of Athol. If required, shared sewage systems
shall be installed and approved, or the necessary improvements secured by a
financial guarantee, prior to final approval of the subdivision. Individual
septic systems may be installed after final subdivision approval, in
conjunction with individual site development.
   D.   Underground Utility Placement: Underground installation of utilities
shall be required unless utility providers determine that site conditions would
preclude or would render such installation impractical or cost prohibitive,
taking into consideration such factors as terrain, available easements, safety,
maintenance, repair, replacement and the like.
   E.   Stormwater Management: Lots shall be laid out to provide drainage away
from building sites. Infiltration of stormwater in small quantities is
preferred. The collection and concentration of stormwater in detention and
retention basins, wet ponds, constructed wetlands or similar facilities is
discouraged and shall only be allowed when there is no feasible alternative.
Discharge of untreated stormwater into streams, lakes, natural wetlands or
groundwater is prohibited.
   F.   Under Road Utilities: Whenever a utility is proposed to be installed
under a road, the utility's location and construction shall meet the
requirements of the City for public roads, or the road owner for private roads.
In all instances, placement of utilities shall be coordinated with proposed
road improvements and shall be installed before the road is completed. (Ord.
442, - -2023)
9-7-4: EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Utility Easements: A general utility easement of at least ten feet
(10') in width shall be provided to each lot. Any shared components of sewage,
water, stormwater or other infrastructure systems shall either be within the
general utility easement, or within an easement dedicated or conveyed to the
entity responsible for maintenance. Easements must also be provided for
individual sewage lines and drainfields that will not be located on the same
parcel as residences.
   B.   Roads: Rights of way for public and private roads shall meet the
requirements of the City as outlined in the "Supplemental Construction
Specifications to the ISPWC and Design Standards" adopted by the City of Athol.
Cut and fill slopes and stormwater systems adjacent to roads and driveways must
either be shown as easements or rights of way in favor of the maintenance
entity. When future access may be needed to adjacent parcels of land, road
easements and rights of way shall extend to the property line of the
subdivision.
   C.   Trails And Sidewalks: Public trail easements or rights of way may be
required, depending on the location of the subdivision and the need for
pedestrian trails or sidewalks. If required, they shall be dedicated or
conveyed to the City or to the maintenance entity. The width of trail easements
and rights of way shall be adequate for the intended use, and shall meet the
requirements of the city and the maintenance entity. When future access may be
needed to adjacent parcels of land, trail easements and rights of way shall
extend to the property line of the subdivision.
   D.   Other Requirements:
      1.   All required easements and rights of way shall be shown on the face
of the plat. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-5: SUBDIVISION AND LOT DESIGN:
   A.   Compatibility: Subdivisions shall be designed to be compatible with
existing homes, businesses and neighborhoods, and with the natural
characteristics of the area. Subdivisions shall minimize grading, road
construction and disturbance of the terrain, vegetation, soils, and
drainageways, and shall prevent soil erosion. To achieve this, the Council may
require building envelopes, no disturbance zones, height restrictions and
planting or retention of vegetation. The Council may also require a suitable
perimeter fence for the subdivision to buffer incompatible uses.
   B.   Lot Design: Subdivisions must result in lots of reasonable utility and
livability. Subdivision designs shall not contain irregular configurations that
result in unusable land or that may cause future land use conflicts. All
building lots must have at least one building site that can meet required
setbacks and be accessed with a driveway which complies with the fire district
access standards
   C.   Lot Access: All new lots shall have frontage and direct access onto a
public road, unless an alternative design or private roads are approved through
the PUD process. A previously existing lot with an existing residence shall not
be considered a new lot. No new accesses to individual lots are permitted from
state highways. When warranted for public safety, the City or Idaho
Transportation Department may require relocation, reconfiguration,
consolidation or elimination of existing approaches.
   D.   Continuity: No single lot shall be divided by a right of way, road,
municipal boundary line, or by another parcel of land.
   E.    Public Access, Parks and Facilities: Public access easements or the
conveyance of land for public access may be required for subdivisions that are
contiguous to public lands, or for areas designated in a city facilities
acquisition plan. If so required, the property owner shall be paid fair market
value for the easement or land. For developments which include 25 residential
lots or greater, dedication of parkland shall be required unless specifically
waived by the City. The parkland shall be at least 21,780 square feet and said
minimum size shall increase by 800 square feet for each residential lot over
25. Land for parks shall be located and configured to encourage use and serve
the intended function. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-6: ROADS AND TRAILS:
   A.   Public And Private Roads:
      1.   Roads within subdivisions shall comply with the most current edition
of the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction" and the "Supplemental
Construction Specifications to the ISPWC and Design Standards" as adopted by
resolution of the City Council ("the Standards"). Such roads shall be dedicated
as public roads to the City, unless the Council determines it to be in the
public interest to dedicate the road to another public highway agency.
      2.   When future access may be needed to adjacent parcels of land, roads
shall extend to the property line of the subdivision or condominium unless
topography or other factors make continuation of the road impossible or
impracticable.
      3.   Privately owned and maintained roads may only be allowed within
approved Planned Unit Developments, or as an emergency egress, as approved by
the Council.
   B.   Connectivity: Roads, trails and sidewalks in subdivisions shall be
designed to complement and enhance existing transportation systems so as to
create an integrated network that allows for the safe and efficient movement of
people within the subdivision, to adjacent subdivisions, and to nearby
commercial areas, schools, places of worship, and other community facilities.
Roads shall be designed with as many connections as possible, and with
relatively direct routes in and out of the subdivision, without running traffic
through previously established neighborhoods. Cul-de-sacs are discouraged but
may be approved where natural or built features preclude connection to existing
or future roads. A newly developed dead-end road shall not serve more than
twenty-five (25) parcels. Where feasible, subdivisions shall have at least two
(2) means of emergency access which comply with the standards of the fire
protection district with jurisdiction. When future access may be needed to
adjacent parcels of land, road and trail rights of way shall extend to the
property lines of the subdivision. Roads and trails shall be designed to
minimize conflict between vehicles and pedestrians.
   C.   Road Names, Signing, And Addressing: All road names, identification
signs, and addressing shall comply with City requirements.
   D.   Pedestrian And Bicycle Access:
      1.   Off road trails, lanes or walkways may be required:
         a.   If shown on a bicycle facilities plan adopted by the City or
public highway agency with jurisdiction;
         b.   Along through streets in subdivisions within one mile of a
school, park, bicycle trail, recreational area, or community facility; or
         c.   When necessary to ensure the safety of pedestrians and
bicyclists.
      2.   The trail shall be designed to serve the intended use, and except
for bicycle lanes, shall be separated from the road by a vegetation strip at
least five feet (5') wide. If there is no direct route through a subdivision,
or if cul-de-sacs are proposed, one or more trails may be required to provide
short, direct routes for pedestrians. For safety, trails should be located in
close proximity to and visible from homes and streets. If a trail or walkway is
required, an easement or right of way must be dedicated to an appropriate
entity who will be responsible for maintenance. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-7: IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Installation Of Improvements:
      1.   Before application for final approval of any plat, required
improvements shall be either:
         a.   Installed and approved by the design professional who developed
the plans and the agencies with jurisdiction or providing services; or
         b.   Secured by a financial guarantee and subdivision completion
agreement which complies with the standards set forth in sections
9-7-9 and
9-8-8 and has been approved by the Administrator.
      2.   If a portion of the work has been completed and approved by the
design professional and agencies with jurisdiction or providing services, only
the remaining work will need to be covered by the financial guarantee.
   B.   Plan Approval and Site Disturbance Permit:
      1.   Approvals Required: No site disturbance, terrain modification,
construction or clearing shall take place until preliminary subdivision
approval has been granted, construction plans have been approved by all
agencies with jurisdiction and those providing services, and a site disturbance
permit has been issued by the City.
      2.    Construction Plan Signature: All construction plans shall be
stamped and/or signed by an Idaho licensed professional engineer or other
appropriate design professional.
      3.   Dust Control Required: Dust control is required on all construction
sites, and a dust control plan must be submitted for review and approval by the
Administrator prior to the start of any site work. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-8: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Operation And Maintenance Required: All subdivision improvements,
common areas and green space shall be operated and maintained by the owner, in
accordance with applicable best management practices and approved plans. An
organization that will operate and maintain shared land and improvements must
be, or have been, established prior to or concurrent with final approval and
recordation of the plat. Organizational options include taxing districts (such
as water or sewer districts), for profit corporations, limited liability
companies or other lawfully created business entities, nonprofit corporations,
limited liability companies or other lawfully created business entities, or
cooperative corporations such as a homeowners' association. If private
maintenance by a cooperative corporation is proposed, the documents
establishing the organization must be approved by the Administrator, and must
be recorded concurrently with the plat. In addition, if land or improvements
are going to be owned and managed by a cooperative corporation, and the
corporation ceases to exist, or fails to fulfill its obligations, the
individual lot owners shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of the
land and improvements.
   B.   City Authority to Maintain Private Systems: If a private maintenance
organization fails to maintain commonly owned land, shared infrastructure or
improvements in accordance with applicable BMPs and approved maintenance plans,
the City may perform, or contract for the performance of, the necessary
maintenance, and the Administrator may bill individual property owners for the
associated costs. Any unpaid assessments may result in termination of the
service. Before any action may be taken, the City shall notify the maintenance
organization and the property owners within the subdivision of the deficiencies
and the intended action via certified mail. Any notices sent via certified mail
which are returned to the City shall be re- sent via first class mail. The City
shall give the property owners and maintenance organization at least forty five
(45) days to correct the deficiencies before taking action. A property owner or
affected person may appeal the proposed action in accordance with Section
1-1-5 of City Code. Nothing in this section shall obligate the City to provide
maintenance of private systems. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-7-9: FINANCIAL GUARANTEES:
   A.   Financial Guarantee in Lieu of Improvements: Financial guarantees may
be provided in lieu of improvements upon review and approval by the
Administrator and all affected agencies prior to application for final approval
of a subdivision. If an agency is unwilling or unable to approve a financial
guarantee, the Administrator may assume this authority. The amount of the
guarantee shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of
construction and the expiration date of the guarantee shall be at least sixty
(60) days after the expected agency approval date for the improvements. Cost
estimates shall be developed by the design professional who developed the
construction plans. If it is anticipated that improvements will be completed
over a period of time, separate financial guarantees should be provided (e.g.,
one for roads, another for the water system, etc.). Partial releases are not
permitted.
   B.   Warranty: A separate financial guarantee is required as a warranty to
ensure correction of any deficiencies identified within twelve (12) months of
final approval of improvements. The amount of this warranty shall be twenty
percent (20%) of the total cost of construction. If improvements are completed
and approved by applicable agencies and design professionals prior to
application for final subdivision approval, the warranty shall be provided with
the application. If improvements are to be completed after final approval, the
warranty shall be provided prior to release of the financial guarantee for
construction. If the applicant fails to provide this warranty, the director may
withdraw a portion of the construction guarantee to meet this requirement or
may take other enforcement action as authorized by law.
   C.   Subdivision Completion and Warranty Agreements: A subdivision
completion and warranty agreement which complies with the requirements of
section
9-8-8 shall accompany each financial guarantee, and must be approved by the
Administrator. These agreements shall be contractually binding on the City and
the property owner, and, if a party to the agreement, the contractor. Financial
guarantees shall provide for installation and agency approval of improvements
within two (2) years from the date of final subdivision approval. Upon written
request by the property owner, the Administrator may grant one extension of up
to one year for good cause shown.
   D.   Types Of Financial Guarantees:
      1.   The City will accept the following types of financial guarantees:
         a.   An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a financial institution
chartered by the federal government or a state government.
         b.   Cash deposit (cash, cashier's check, bank draft, or money order).
         c.   Certificate of deposit or other similar bank account which
provides that the board and the director have exclusive access to the account.
         d.   Surety bond.
   E.   Failure To Complete Improvements or Correct Deficiencies: Any failure
to complete improvements or correct deficiencies in accordance with a
subdivision completion or warranty agreement and approved plans shall
constitute good and sufficient cause for the Administrator to take enforcement
action as authorized by law, and/or to draw on the funds and contract for
completion of the work. In addition to direct costs to complete the work, the
Administrator may also withdraw funds to cover the City's administrative costs
associated with such actions. Before any action may be taken, the City shall
give the property owner written notice via certified mail. Any notice sent via
certified mail which is returned to the City shall be re-sent via first class
mail. The property owner shall permit the contractor and City staff to access
the property to complete the necessary improvements. If the Administrator or
City is unable to gain access to the funds, or if costs exceed the value of the
financial guarantee, the property owner will be billed for the outstanding
balance.
   F.   Release Of Financial Guarantee: No financial guarantee shall be
released until the associated improvements have been approved in writing by the
agencies with jurisdiction or providing services, the developer's design
professional and the Administrator. No partial releases are permitted. (Ord.
442, - -2023)
CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Plat, Road, Right Of Way Or Easement Vacations
9-8-2: Lot Sales And Building Location Permits
9-8-3: Condition Modification
9-8-4: Penalty For Sale Of Unplatted Lots
9-8-5: Effect Of Sale Of Property On Application
9-8-6: Unlawful Subdivision, Recordation Of Plats, And Site Work
9-8-7: Certificate Of Lawful Division
9-8-8: Standards For Subdivision Completion And Warranty Agreements
9-8-1: PLAT, ROAD, RIGHT OF WAY OR EASEMENT VACATIONS:
Applications for vacation of existing plats, roads, rights of way, easements,
or other conveyances shall be submitted to, and processed by, the City in
accordance with title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, and Idaho Code section 50-
311. The procedure for notice and hearing of such applications shall be in
accordance with section 50-1306A, Idaho Code. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-8-2: LOT SALES AND BUILDING LOCATION PERMITS:
Non-infrastructure building location permits may be issued upon recordation of
a final plat provided all infrastructure improvements are complete and approved
by all agencies with jurisdiction and providing services. Non-infrastructure
building location permits shall not be issued if the infrastructure is
incomplete regardless of whether its completion is insured by a financial
guarantee. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-8-3: CONDITION MODIFICATION:
At any time prior to expiration of preliminary subdivision approval, a
modification of a condition of approval may be requested according to the
following procedure:
   A.   Application Requirements: The following items constitute a complete
application:
      1.   A completed application form signed by the property owner, or a
notarized letter from the property owner authorizing the applicant to file the
application.
      2.   Fees, as adopted by resolution of the Council.
      3.   A narrative explaining why the requested condition modification is
necessary.
      4.   The Administrator may require additional information to determine
compliance with applicable provisions of this Code, or the requirements of
agencies with jurisdiction or those providing services.
   B.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   For subdivisions, the approval procedure and required findings shall
be the same as those for preliminary approval of the subdivision.
      2.   For condominiums, the approval procedure and required findings shall
be the same as the original approval procedure. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-8-4: PENALTY FOR SALE OF UNPLATTED LOTS:
   A.   Penalty: In accordance with section 50-1316, Idaho Code, any person who
shall dispose of or offer for sale any lots prior to recordation of a plat, as
provided in sections 50-1301 through 50-1325, Idaho Code, shall pay one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each lot and part of a lot sold or disposed of or offered
for sale.
   B.   Notice of Penalty and Appeal:
      1.   A person upon whom a penalty is imposed shall receive written notice
of intent to assess the penalty provided in this section, including the factual
basis supporting the imposition of the penalty. Before any action may be taken,
the City shall give the property owner written notice via certified mail. Any
notice sent via certified mail which is returned to the City shall be re-sent
via first class mail.
      2.   The penalty may be appealed to the Council in accordance with the
provisions of Section
1-1-5 of this Code.
      3.   If the Council finds that a violation of this section occurred, or
if the alleged violator fails to appear at the appeal hearing or fails to
request a hearing, the violation shall be deemed to have been conclusively
established, and the appropriate penalty shall be applied.
      4.   In addition, if the Council finds that a portion of property that is
the subject of a subdivision application was divided prior to recordation of
the plat, the underlying application shall be declared null and void in
accordance with section
9-8-5.
   C.   Enforcement: Enforcement of the penalty provided in this section shall
not preclude the Administrator or City from taking additional enforcement
action as authorized by law. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-8-5: EFFECT OF SALE OF PROPERTY ON APPLICATION:
   A.   If a portion of the property that is the subject of a subdivision
application is divided prior to recordation of the plat, the application shall
become null and void, and the owner will be required to submit a new
application to the City. If the property is not divided, but is sold in its
entirety, a new application shall not be required, and the new owner may
proceed through the applicable subdivision approval process with the existing
application.
   B.   If any unit or interest in the property that is the subject of a
proposed condominium plat is sold prior to recordation of the plat, the
application shall become null and void, and a new application must be filed by
the owner. If the property is sold in its entirety, a new application will not
be required, and the new owner may proceed through the condominium plat
approval process under the existing application. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-8-6: UNLAWFUL SUBDIVISION, RECORDATION OF PLATS, AND SITE WORK:
As provided for in sections 67-6518 and 67-6527, Idaho Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or their agent, to knowingly and
willfully cause a subdivision or condominium plat to be recorded, or to
knowingly and willfully participate in constructing a road, installing
utilities or otherwise developing a subdivision, except in conformance with
City Code. Any subdivision or condominium plat which is recorded in violation
of the provisions of City Code, or of title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, shall
be deemed void ab initio. In addition to actions and penalties provided in
title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code, any person, firm, or corporation, or their
agent, who knowingly and willfully commits, participates in, assists in or
maintains any violation of this chapter may be subject to civil and criminal
enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of City Code. (Ord. 442,
- -2023)
9-8-7: CERTIFICATE OF LAWFUL DIVISION:
Upon request, and payment of applicable fees, the Administrator shall issue a
certificate of lawful division to the owner of any parcel which the
Administrator confirms has been lawfully divided in accordance with the
provisions of this title or any predecessor thereto. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
9-8-8: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION COMPLETION AND WARRANTY AGREEMENTS:
The following are the minimum standards for subdivision completion and warranty
agreements whenever such agreements are required to be submitted to the City.
Although not intended to be a comprehensive list, as each agreement will be
different and will need to be tailored to the needs of the particular
subdivision to which it will apply, the following items, at a minimum, shall be
included in all subdivision completion and warranty agreements:
   A.   The effective date of the agreement.
   B.   The name, mailing address and phone number of the property owner, the
owner's representative, if applicable, and the City. If a person or entity
other than the property owner is providing the financial guarantee (such as a
developer or contractor), that person or entity must also be included as a
party to the agreement.
   C.   The subdivision name and case number.
   D.   A general description of the subdivision location, including section,
township, and range, and the parcel numbers of each lot within the subdivision.
   E.   The size of the subdivision in acres.
   F.   A statement that all subdivision improvements shall comply with the
standards set forth in this title, and shall conform to the approved plans on
file with the City (with the file number of those plans cited).
   G.   A cost estimate for required improvements, or for warranties, the
actual cost of construction of required improvements, provided by the design
professionals who developed the construction plans. This document shall be
attached and referenced as exhibit A to the agreement.
   H.   For financial guarantees in lieu of improvements, a statement that the
applicant has established a financial guarantee to ensure completion of
required improvements in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
estimated cost, with the amount listed. Any improvements that have not been
completed and approved by the applicable agencies and design professionals must
be included in the cost estimate.
   I.   For warranties, a statement that the applicant has established a
financial guarantee to ensure completion of required warranty repairs.
Warranties shall be a separate financial guarantee required for all
subdivisions and must cover twenty percent (20%) of the actual cost of all
required improvements.
   J.   The type of guarantee provided, with the original attached and
referenced as exhibit B to the agreement (or a copy of the check provided, plus
a copy of the receipt).
   K.   A completion schedule for required improvements, attached and
referenced as exhibit C to the agreement.
   L.   Anticipated agency approval date for the improvements, which must be at
least sixty (60) days before expiration of the financial guarantee.
   M.   For warranties on completed, approved infrastructure, the actual date
of agency approval, and the deadline for completion of any warranty work.
Warranties must cover a period of one year after initial agency approval of
improvements, and the deadline for completion of warranty work must be at least
sixty (60) days before the expiration of the financial guarantee.
   N.   A statement that this agreement is contractually binding on the
parties.
   O.   A statement that upon completion of the improvements and written
approval by applicable agencies, design professionals, and the Administrator,
the City shall release the guarantee.
   P.   A statement that partial releases of financial guarantees are not
permitted. If improvements are to be completed in phases, the applicant should
provide separate financial guarantees with separate agreements.
   Q.   A statement that if the required improvements are not completed and
approved by the appropriate design professionals and applicable agencies prior
to the above date, or within the time allowed by a written extension granted by
the Administrator, the Administrator may withdraw necessary funds from the
financial guarantee, hire a contractor, enter onto the property, and have the
improvements completed. In addition to contracting costs, the Administrator may
also withdraw funds to cover the City's administrative costs, including
attorney fees.
   R.   For warranties, a statement that any necessary repairs shall be
completed in a timely manner, in accordance with deadlines established by the
Administrator or other agency with jurisdiction. If repairs are not completed
and approved by applicable agencies at least sixty (60) days prior to
expiration of the warranty, the Administrator may withdraw funds adequate to
pay for the repairs, along with the City's administrative costs, including
attorney fees.
   S.   A statement that the City shall give written notice to the property
owner and other parties to the agreement, via certified mail, before any action
is taken to withdraw funds from the financial guarantee. Any funds remaining
after completion of necessary improvements shall be returned to the party that
provided the financial guarantee.
   T.   The process for renegotiation of the agreement.
   U.   The process by which the agreement may be transferred to the
applicant's successor in interest, with the approval of the Administrator. If
transferred, the agreement must be made binding on any successors in interest.
   V.   A statement that the laws of the state of Idaho shall govern the
agreement, and that jurisdiction and venue for any dispute shall be in the 1st
judicial district court, Kootenai County, Idaho.
   W.   Notarized signatures of all owners of the property and other parties to
the agreement.
   X.   If the financial guarantee is provided by someone other than the
property owner, the notarized signature of that party shall also be required.
   Y.   Signature lines for the Administrator and the Mayor, with an
attestation by the clerk for the mayor's signature. (Ord. 442, - -2023)
TITLE 10
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 1
SHORT TITLE, APPLICABILITY, BINDINGS AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Authority
10-1-3: Applicability
10-1-4: Findings
10-1-5: Purpose
10-1-6: Advisory Committee/Capital Improvements Plan
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-1-2: AUTHORITY:
This title is enacted pursuant to the City of Athol's (the "City") general
police powers, its authority to enact ordinances, and its authority as provided
by the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act codified at Chapter 82 of Title 67,
Idaho Code (the "Act") and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho to
impose, collect development impact fees pursuant to its authority to enter into
an intergovernmental agreement as provided for in Idaho Code section 67-8204A.
(Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
Except as otherwise exempted in section
10-5-1, these provisions shall apply to the development of property located
within the boundaries of the City of Athol, Idaho. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-1-4: FINDINGS:
   A.   Timberlake Fire Protection District ("the Fire District") is a taxing
District organized and existing by virtue of Chapter 14 of Title 31, Idaho
Code, and the Fire District's boundaries include all areas within the City
limits of the City and areas surrounding the City.
   B.   The Fire District's duty and responsibility is to provide protection of
property against fire and the preservation of life, and enforcement of any of
the fire codes and other rules that are adopted by the state fire marshal; and
provide for the protection and preservation of life.
   C.   Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services Systems (the "Ambulance
District") is an ambulance service district organized and existing by virtue of
Chapter 39 of Title 31 Idaho Code and the and the Ambulance District's
boundaries include all areas within the City limits of the City and the entire
area of Kootenai County.
   D.   The Ambulance District's duty and responsibility is to provide
ambulance services.
   E.   The City is experiencing considerable growth and development.
   F.   The purposes of the Act (Idaho Code section 67-8202) are as follows:
      1.   Ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new
growth and development;
      2.   Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform
standards by which local governments, such as the City and the District, may
require those who benefit from new growth and development pay (development
impact fees) their proportionate share of the costs of new public facilities
needed to serve that new growth and development; and
      3.   Establish minimum standards for adoption of development impact fee
ordinances by cities; and
      4.   Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are
required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public
facilities needed to serve that new growth and development and to prevent
duplicate and ad hoc development requirements; and
      5.   To empower cities to adopt ordinances to impose development impact
fees.
   G.   The Act does not authorize the Fire District or the Ambulance District
to enact a development impact fee ordinance.
   H.   The Act does provide, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8204A, in
circumstances where the City and a fire district and a City and an ambulance
district are both affected by the considerable growth and development as is
occurring within the City, that the City and these districts may enter into an
intergovernmental agreement for the purpose of agreeing to collect and expend
development impact fees for system improvements which provides for a new
funding mechanism for those system improvements costs incurred by these
districts to meet the demand and growth occurring within the City and which
promotes and accommodates orderly growth and development and protects the
public health, safety and general welfare of the residences within the
boundaries of the City.
   I.   New growth within the City imposes and will impose increasing and
excessive demands upon the Fire District's and upon the Ambulance District's
existing capital facilities.
   J.   New growth within the City is expected to continue, and will place
ever-increasing demands on the Fire District and the Ambulance District to each
provide and expand their capital facilities to serve that new growth.
   K.   The tax revenues generated from new development within the City often
do not generate sufficient funds to provide the necessary improvements and
expansion of existing Fire District and Ambulance District capital facilities
to accommodate for that new growth.
   L.   Idaho Code section 67-8204A authorizes the City to adopt an impact fee
system and to enter into the intergovernmental agreements with the Fire
District and with the Ambulance District to offset, recoup, or reimburse the
portion of the costs of needed improvements to each of their capital facilities
caused by new growth and development in the City.
   M.   The creation of an equitable impact fee system facilitated by the
intergovernmental agreement with each District, will promote the purposes set
forth in the Act, in that it would: (a) ensure that each District has adequate
capital facilities which are available to serve new growth and development; (b)
promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform standards by
which the City may require that those who benefit from new growth and
development pay a proportionate share of the cost of each of the District's
capital facilities needed to serve new growth and development in the City; (c)
establish minimum standards for the adoption of Fire District and Ambulance
District impact fees; (d) ensure that those who benefit from new growth and
development are required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the
cost of each District's capital facilities needed to serve new growth and
development in the City; and (e) prevent duplicate and ad hoc development
requirements in the City.
   N.   Each Capital Improvements Plan contains the capital improvements
planned by each District during the term of their Capital Improvements Plan,
and such element has been developed in conformance with the requirements
Chapter 82 of Title 67, Idaho Code.
   O.   Each Capital Improvements Plan sets forth reasonable methodologies and
analyses for determining the impacts of various types of new development on
each District's capital facilities, and determines the cost of acquiring or
constructing the improvements necessary to meet the demands for such facilities
created by new development.
   P.   In accordance with Idaho Code, each Capital Improvements Plan was based
on actual system improvements costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. In
addition, each Capital Improvements Plan uses a fee calculation methodology
that is net of credits for the present value of revenues that will be generated
by new growth and development based on historical funding patterns and that are
anticipated to be available to pay for system improvements, including taxes,
assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers.
   Q.   The Fire District impact fees established by this title are based on
the Fire District's Capital Improvements Plan, and do not exceed system
improvements costs to serve new development that will pay the Fire District
impact fees.
   R.   The Ambulance District impact fees established by this title are based
on the Ambulance District's Capital Improvements Plan, and do not exceed system
improvements costs to serve new development that will pay the Ambulance
District impact fees.
   S.   The Fire District's capital facilities and the Ambulance District's
capital facilities, include in the calculation of the fees in their Capital
Improvements Plans, will benefit all new residential development throughout the
City, and it is therefore appropriate to treat all areas of the City as a
single service area for purposes of calculating, collecting, and spending the
each district's impact fees collected from developers.
   T.   There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between
development impacts created by each type of development covered by this title,
the development impact fees assessment of such development covered by this
title, and the development impact fees that such developer will be required to
pay.
   U.   This title creates a system by which development impact fees paid by
developers will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse a portion of the costs
incurred by each of the districts to construct and/or purchase system
improvements in ways that benefit the development for which each development
impact fee was paid within a reasonable period of time after the development
impact fee is paid, and in conformance with Idaho Code section 67-8210.
   V.   This title creates a system under which development impact fees shall
not be used to correct existing deficiencies for either of the District capital
facilities, or to replace or rehabilitate either of the existing District
capital facilities, or to pay for routine operation or maintenance of those
facilities.
   W.   This title creates a system under which there shall be no double
payment of development impact fees, in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-
8204(19).
   X.   This title is consistent with all applicable provisions of the Act
concerning development impact fee ordinances. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-1-5: PURPOSE:
   A.   This title is adopted to be consistent with, and to help implement the
Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   The intent of this title is to ensure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of system improvements; to ensure that such
proportionate share does not exceed the cost of such system improvements
required to accommodate new development; and to ensure that funds collected
from new development are actually used for system improvements in accordance
with the Act.
   C.   It is the further intent of this title to be consistent with those
principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of system improvements to
new development, and for adopting development impact fee ordinances,
established by the Act.
   D.   It is not the intent of this title to collect any money from any new
development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset new demands for
system improvements created by such new development.
   E.   It is the intent of this title that any monies collected, as an imposed
Fire District and Ambulance District impact fee, are deposited in each separate
District impact fee capital projects trust fund account, are never commingled
with monies from a different impact fee account, are never used for a
development impact fee component different from that for which the fee was
paid, are never used to correct current deficiencies in the each District's
capital facilities, and are never used to replace, rehabilitate, maintain or
operate any District capital facilities of either District. (Ord. 439, 10-18-
2022)
10-1-6: ADVISORY COMMITTEE/CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN:
   A.   The City has formed an advisory committee as required by Idaho Code
section 67-8205, and the committee has performed the duties required of it
pursuant to Idaho Code sections 67-8205 and 67-8206(2). The City, the Fire
District and the Ambulance District intend that the committee will continue to
exist and perform those duties identified in Idaho Code section 67-8205 that
occur following the adoption of this Development Impact Fee Ordinance.
   B.   The Fire District has planned for the improvement of that District's
fire prevention and EMS services capital facilities in the Capital Improvements
Plan.
   C.   The Ambulance District has planned for the improvement of that
District's ambulance services capital facilities in the Capital Improvements
Plan.
   D.   The creation of an equitable impact fee system would enable the City to
accommodate new Development, and would assist each of these Districts in
implementing their capital improvements element of the Capital Improvements
Plan.
   E.   In order to implement an equitable impact fee system for the Fire
District's fire prevention and EMS facilities, the City adopted by resolution
and the Fire District Board of Commissioners adopted by resolution the
Timberlake Fire Protection District Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements
Plan (the "Fire District Capital Improvements Plan").
   F.   In order to implement an equitable impact fee system for the Ambulance
District's ambulance facilities, the City adopted by resolution and the
Ambulance District Board of Commissioners adopted by resolution the Kootenai
County Emergency Medical Services System Impact Fee Study and Capital
Improvement Plan (the "Ambulance District Capital Improvements Plan").
   G.   The methodology used in the Fire District Capital Improvements Plan and
the Ambulance District Capital Improvements Plan, as applied through this
title, complies with all applicable provisions of Idaho law, including those
set forth in Idaho Code sections 67-8204(1), (2), (16) and (23), 67-8207 and
67-8209. The incorporation of the Capital Improvements Plan by reference
satisfies the requirement in Idaho Code section 67-8204(16) for a detailed
description of the methodology by which the District impact fees were
calculated, and the requirement in Idaho Code section 67-8204(24) for a
description of acceptable levels of service for each District's system
improvements.
   H.   In determining the proportionate share of each District's system
improvements costs, each Capital Improvements Plan has considered:
      1.   The cost of the existing system improvements; and
      2.   The means by which the existing system improvements have been
financed; and
      3.   The extent to which the new development will contribute to system
improvements costs through taxation, assessment, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to system improvements costs
through developer or landowner contributions; and
      4.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to
system improvements costs in the future; and
      5.   The extent to which the new development should be credited for
providing system Improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas; and
      6.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
development; and
      7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
      8.   The availability of other sources of funding system improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation and includes a plan for
alternative sources of revenue. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Definitions
10-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings, unless another meaning is plainly intended and words and terms
appearing in the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular:
                  Any of one or more interest bearing accounts within the District Development
ACCOUNTS:         Impact Fee Capital Projects Trust Fund established in section
                  10-11-1 of this title.
ACT:              The Idaho Development Impact Fee Act as set forth in Chapter 82 of Title 67,
                  Idaho Code.
                  The administrative fee charged by the City pursuant to the Intergovernmental
ADMINISTRATIVE    Agreements between the City and the Districts, which will be subtracted from the
FEE:              impact fees for each District before the impact fees are transmitted to each
                  District.
                  The City of Athol Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee formed and staffed by
ADVISORY          the City and the District pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8205 to prepare and
COMMITTEE:        recommend the Capital Improvements Plan and any amendments, revisions or updates
                  of the same.
AMBULANCE         The Kootenai County Emergency Services System, an ambulance service district
DISTRICT:         organized and existing by virtue of Chapter 39 of Title 31, Idaho Code.
APPROPRIATE:      To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to the expenditure of funds
                  by appropriation or other official act of the board of commissioners.
BUILDING PERMIT:  The City permit required for foundations, new construction and additions.
CAPITAL           Improvements with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction or
IMPROVEMENTS:     other action, which increases the service capacity of District capital
                  facilities.
CAPITAL           A component of the Capital improvements plans identified in each District's CIP
IMPROVEMENTS      adopted by the governing board of each District and the City Council pursuant to
ELEMENT:          Chapters 65 and 82 of Title 67, Idaho Code, and as amended, which component meets
                  the requirements of the Capital Improvements Plan required by the Act.
                  Either the Timberlake Fire Protection District Impact Fee Study and Capital
CAPITAL           Improvements Plan and/or the Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services Systems
IMPROVEMENTS      Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Plan, recommended by the Advisory
PLAN:             Committee and adopted by the respective District Board of Commissioners and the
                  City Council pursuant to the Act that identifies District capital facilities for
                  which each respective District's impact fees may be used as a funding source.
CITY:             The City of Athol.
CITY COUNCIL:     The City Council of the City of Athol.
                  Any person or legal entity undertaking development including a development that
DEVELOPER:        seeks an annexation into the City and/or undertakes the subdivision of property
                  pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-1301 through 50-1334, as amended.
                  Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use
                  of a building or structure, or any change in the use, character or appearance of
DEVELOPMENT:      land, which creates additional demand and need for public facilities or the
                  annexation into the City and/or subdivision of property that would permit any
                  change in the use, character or appearance of land.
DEVELOPMENT       Any written duly authorized document from the City which authorizes the
APPROVAL:         commencement of a development.
DEVELOPMENT       Either the Timberlake Fire Protection District Development Impact Fee Capital
IMPACT FEE        Trust Fund and/or the Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services Systems
CAPITAL PROJECTS  Development Impact Fee Capital Trust Fund, depending upon the context of the
TRUST FUND (the   definition in this title which includes individual impact fee capital projects
"TRUST FUND"):    trust fund accounts as established by action of each District's board of
                  commissioners.
                  A requirement attached to a developmental approval or other City governmental
DEVELOPMENT       action approving or authorizing a particular development project including, but
REQUIREMENT:      not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or
                  contribution of goods, services, land or money as condition of approval.
DISTRICT/         Either the Fire District and/or the Ambulance District, depending upon the
DISTRICTS:        context of the definition in this title.
                  Either the impact fee administrator appointed by the Timberlake Fire Protection
DISTRICT          District Board of Commissioners and/or the impact fee administrator appointed by
ADMINISTRATOR:    the Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services Systems Board of Commissioners,
                  depending upon the context of the definition in this title.
DISTRICT BOARD OF Either the Timberlake Fire Protection District Administrator and/or the Kootenai
COMMISSIONERS:    County Emergency Medical Services Systems Administrator, depending upon the
                  context of the definition in this title.
                  District facilities, stations, apparatus, vehicles and equipment which are
DISTRICT CAPITAL  identified in the Capital Improvement Plan, and specifically including those
FACILITIES:       related costs including system improvements costs, but not including maintenance,
                  operations, or improvements that do not expand their capacity.
                  A payment of money imposed as condition of development approval to pay for a
                  proportionate share of the District's costs of system improvements needed to
                  serve the development. The term does not include the following:
                  1.   A charge or fee to pay the administrative plan review, or inspection cost
                  associated with permits required for development;
                  2.   Connection or hookup charges;
DISTRICT IMPACT   3.   Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation charges
FEES:             for services provided directly to the development; or
                  4.   Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the District
                  has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements for the development if
                  the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the
                  construction or installation of those capital improvements, unless a written
                  agreement is made, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8209(3) as amended, for
                  credit or reimbursement.
EXTRAORDINARY     Those costs incurred as result of an extraordinary impact.
COSTS:
                  An impact which is reasonably determined by the District Administrator to: (i)
                  result in the need for district system improvements, the cost of which will
EXTRAORDINARY     significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated from
IMPACT:           the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a development agreement as
                  allowed by Idaho Code section 67-8214(2), as amended; or (ii) result in the need
                  for district system improvements which are not identified in the Capital
                  Improvements Plan.
FEE PAYER:        The person who pays or is required to pay a district impact fee. A fee payer may
                  include a developer.
                  The Timberlake Fire Protection District, a fire district organized and existing
FIRE DISTRICT:    by virtue of the Fire Protection District Law, Chapter 14 of Title 31, Idaho
                  Code.
FIRE DISTRICT     The board of commissioners of the Timberlake Fire Protection District, which is
BOARD OF          its governing board.
COMMISSIONERS:
                  Either the City of Athol/Timberlake Fire Protection District Intergovernmental
                  Agreement and Joint Powers Agreement For The Collection And Expenditure of
                  Development Impact Fees For Fire District System Improvements and/or the City of
INTERGOVERNMENTAL Athol/Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services System Intergovernmental
AGREEMENT:        Agreement and Joint Powers Agreement For The Collection And Expenditure of
                  Development Impact Fees For EMS System Improvements, depending upon the context
                  of the definition in this title entered into by and between the City and each
                  respective District pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8204A for the collection
                  and expenditure of impact fees established pursuant to this title.
LAND USE          A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities,
ASSUMPTIONS:      intensities and population in the service area over at least a ten (10) year
                  period.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for
                  public facilities.
                  A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home construction and safety
                  standards, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling
                  mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in
                  length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square
                  feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
MANUFACTURED/     dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
MOBILE HOME:      utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
                  systems contained in such structure, except that such term shall include any
                  structure which meets all the requirements of this subsection except the size
                  requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
                  certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and
                  complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
                  Any building or building component other than a manufactured/mobile home, which
MODULAR BUILDING: is constructed according to the International Building Code, as adopted or any
                  amendments thereto, which is of closed construction and is either entirely or
                  substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site.
                  The total current monetary value of past, present or future payments,
PRESENT VALUE:    contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction or
                  money.
PROJECT:          A particular development on an identified parcel of land.
                  In contrast to system improvements, shall mean site improvements and facilities
PROJECT           that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development
IMPROVEMENTS:     project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or
                  users of the project.
PROPORTIONATE     That portion of system improvements costs determined pursuant to Idaho Code
SHARE:            section 67-8207 which reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the
                  project.
PUBLIC            Land, buildings and equipment used for fire protection, emergency medical and
FACILITIES:       rescue, and water supply production, storage and distribution facilities which
                  have a useful life of ten (10) years or more.
RECREATIONAL      A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational,
VEHICLE:          camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or
                  drawn by another vehicle.
                  Any defined geographic area within the City as identified by each District in
                  which specific public facilities provide service to development within the areas
SERVICE AREA:     defined, on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles or both. For
                  purposes of this title, there shall be one service area encompassing all of the
                  City of Athol.
                  A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable
                  to an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally
SERVICE UNIT:     accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of capital
                  improvements. As specifically used in this title, service units include dwelling
                  units as defined in City code and square feet of nonresidential development.
                  In contrast to project improvements, shall mean capital improvements to public
SYSTEM            facilities which are designed to provide service to a service area. For the
IMPROVEMENTS:     purpose of this title, system improvements are for Fire District's fire
                  prevention capital facilities and the Ambulance District's EMS capital
                  facilities.
                  Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of system improvements,
                  including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs, and also including,
                  without limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code section 50-1702(h),
                  as amended, to provide additional public facilities needed to service new growth
                  and development. For clarification, system improvements costs do not include:
                  1.   Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than
                  capital improvements identified in the Capital Improvements Plan;
                  2.   Improvements, repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital;
SYSTEM            3.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to
IMPROVEMENTS      serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
COSTS:            environmental or regulatory standards;
                  4.   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to
                  provide better service to existing development;
                  5.   Administrative and operating costs of each District and/or the City unless
                  such costs are attributable to development of the Capital Improvements Plan, as
                  provided in Idaho Code section 67-8208, as amended; and
                  6.   Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other
                  indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of either
                  District to finance capital improvements identified in the Capital Improvements
                  Plan. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
 
CHAPTER 3
SERVICE AREA AND IMPOSITION OF TIMBERLAKE FIRE
PROTECTION DISTRICT AND KOOTENAI COUNTY
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
10-3-1: Establishment Of The Districts’ Service Area
10-3-2: Imposition Of District Impact Fees
10-3-3: District Impact Fees Schedules
10-3-4: Developer’s Election
10-3-5: Procedures
10-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DISTRICTS’ SERVICE AREA:
There is hereby established a service area of the Timber Lake Fire Protection
District and a service area of the Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services
System each of which includes all lands within the boundaries of the City which
are also within the boundaries of each District. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-3-2: IMPOSITION OF DISTRICT IMPACT FEES:
The District Impact Fees are hereby imposed on all new development in the City
of Athol, Idaho upon the effective date of a similar fire and EMS impact fee
ordinance in all other jurisdictions that fall within the Districts' respective
boundaries. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-3-3: DISTRICT IMPACT FEES SCHEDULES:
   A.   The District Impact Fees shall be calculated in accordance with each
District fee schedule set forth in the Capital Improvements Plan providing for
standard fees based on the total number of dwelling units or square feet of
nonresidential space in the development, unless:
      1.   The fee payer requests an individual assessment pursuant to section
10-6-1 of this title; or
      2.   The City and the District find the development will have an
extraordinary impact pursuant to section
10-9-1 of this title. The methodology for determining the costs per service
unit provided for in the fee schedule is set forth in the Capital Improvements
Plan.
   B.   Fire District Fire Prevention Impact Fees:
 
Residential (per dwelling unit)   $2,842.00
Non-Residential (per square foot) $01.42
 
   C.   Ambulance District EMS Impact Fees:
 
Residential (per dwelling unit)   $132.00
Non-Residential (per square foot) $0.07
 
(Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-3-4: DEVELOPER’S ELECTION:
A developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate
share of system improvements costs by payment of District impact fees according
to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development project's
proportionate share of system improvements costs, except as provided in Idaho
Code section 67-8214(3), as amended. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-3-5: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Building Permit: Upon submittal of complete building permit plans for
the development to the City, the City shall calculate the District impact fees
for the development in accordance with the District impact fee schedule
(subsection
10-3-3B and C) unless the fee payer requests an individual assessment or is the
subject of a credit or a District Administrator determines that the development
may have extraordinary impact.
   B.   Exemption: An exemption pursuant to section
10-5-1 of this title must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a
building permit or manufactured home installation permit. Any exemption not so
claimed shall be deemed waived by the fee payer. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 4
COLLECTION OF DISTRICT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Certification
10-4-2: Payment And Receipt Of District Impact Fees
10-4-1: CERTIFICATION:
Certification: After the District impact fees due for a proposed development
have been provided by the City pursuant to the District impact fees schedules
pursuant to section
10-3-3 or by a District Administrator using the individual assessment process,
the fee payer may request from the District Administrator a certification of
the amount of District impact fees due for that development. Within thirty (30)
days after receiving such request, the District Administrator shall issue a
written certification of the amount of the District impact fees due for the
proposed development. Such certification shall establish the District impact
fees so long as there is no material change to the particular project as
identified in the individual assessment application, or the impact fees
schedule set forth in a Capital Improvements Plan. The certification shall
include an explanation of the calculation of the District impact fees including
an explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code section 67-8207 and shall
also specify the system improvement(s) for which the District impact fees are
intended to be used. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-4-2: PAYMENT AND RECEIPT OF DISTRICT IMPACT FEES:
The District impact fees shall be paid to the City at the following times:
   A.   If a building permit or manufactured/mobile home setting permit is
required, then at the time before the permit is issued;
   B.   If no building permit or manufactured/mobile home setting permit is
required, then at the time that construction commences, which includes, but is
not limited to, individual commercial recreational vehicle park or campground
sites; or
   C.   At such other time as the developer and the District have agreed upon
in writing with notice to the City.
   D.   All District impact fees paid to the City, minus the agreed upon
administration fee pursuant to the Intergovernmental Agreements between the
City and the Districts, shall then be delivered to each District Administrator
on a once-a-month basis.
   E.   In the event District impact fees are paid to the District, then the
District Administrator shall immediately notify the City of said payment. (Ord.
439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 5
EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Exemptions
10-5-2: Exemption Claim Process
10-5-1: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Rebuilding of a structure which is destroyed by fire or other
catastrophe, provided the structure is rebuilt and ready for occupancy within
two (2) years of its destruction;
   B.   Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number
of service units;
   C.   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured/mobile home,
with another residential unit on the same lot; provided that, the number of
service units does not increase;
   D.   Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
   E.   Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not
increase the number of service units;
   F.   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as
tennis court, a clubhouse or shop, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that
the use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements; or
   G.   The installation of a modular building, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle if the fee payer can demonstrate by documentation such as
utility bills and tax records that either:
      1.   A modular building, manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle
was legally in place on the lot or space prior to the effective date of this
title; or
      2.   A District impact fees has been paid previously for the modular
building, manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or
space. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-5-2: EXEMPTION CLAIM PROCESS:
An exemption from District impact fees must be claimed on the application by
the developer (fee payer) upon submitting their application for a building
permit or manufactured home setting permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall
be deemed waived by the fee payer. Applications for exemption shall be
determined by the City within ninety (90) days of receipt of the claim for
exemption. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 6
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Individual Assessment Process
10-6-1: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT PROCESS:
   A.   In lieu of calculating the amount of the District impact fees pursuant
to section
10-3-3 and the Capital Improvements Plans, a fee payer may file a request with
the City that the amount of the required District impact fees be determined by
the District Administrator through an individual assessment for the proposed
development. A request for an individual assessment process shall involve
consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant information submitted by
the fee payer to adjust the amount of the District impact fees. If a fee payer
files a request for the use of an individual assessment, the fee payer shall be
responsible for retaining a qualified professional to prepare the individual
assessment that complies with the requirements of this title, at the fee
payer's expense. The fee payer shall, at the fee payer's expense, bear the
burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the resulting
individual assessment complies with the requirements of this title. The fee
payer shall bear the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that
the resulting individual assessment is a more accurate measure of its
proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, based on the District's
adopted levels of service, than the District impact fees that would otherwise
be due pursuant to pursuant to section
10-3-3 and their Capital Improvements Plan.
   B.   Each individual assessment shall be based on the same level of service
standards and unit costs for system improvements used in the Capital
Improvements Plan, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology,
and shall document the relevant methodologies and assumptions used.
   C.   A request for an individual assessment shall be delivered and filed
with the City at any time that the number of dwelling units in the proposed
development and the types and amounts of development in each non-residential
category identified in section
10-3-3 and the Capital Improvements Plan as known. Upon filing of a request for
individual assessment, the City shall transmit the request to the District
Administrator for review. The District Administrator shall issue a written
decision within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed request for
individual assessment together with all supporting information from the fee
payer, so as not to unreasonably delay the developer's (fee payer's) subsequent
applications to the City for building permits.
   D.   Each individual assessment request delivered to the District
Administrator may then be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by
the District Administrator as the basis for calculating the District Impact
Fees. The criteria for acceptance, rejection or acceptance with modifications
shall be whether the individual assessment is a more accurate measure of demand
for system improvements element(s) created by the proposed development, or the
costs of those facilities, than the applicable fee shown in the fee schedule
attached to the Capital Improvements Plan.
   E.   The decision by the District Administrator on request for an individual
assessment shall include an explanation of the calculation of the District
Impact Fees, shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the District
Impact Fees are intended to be used, and shall include an explanation of those
factors identified in Idaho Code section 67-8207.
   F.   If an individual assessment request is accepted or accepted with
modifications by the District Administrator then the District impact fees due
under this title for such development shall be calculated according to such
individual assessment.
   G.   The District Administrator shall provide notice of final determination
of an individual assessment to the developer (fee payer) and the City. (Ord.
439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 7
CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENTS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Developer Credits And Reimbursement
10-7-2: Limitations
10-7-3: Valuation Of Credit At Present Value
10-7-4: When Credits Become Effective
10-7-5: Credit Request Procedures
10-7-1: DEVELOPER CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENT:
When a developer or their predecessor in title or interest has constructed
system improvements of the same category as a District capital improvements
element, or contributed or dedicated land or money towards the completion of
system improvements of the same category as a District capital improvements
element, and the District has accepted such construction, contribution or
dedication, the District shall issue a credit against the District impact fees
otherwise due for the same District capital improvements element in connection
with the proposed development, as set forth in this section, credit shall be
issued regardless of whether the contribution or dedication to system
improvements was required by the District as a condition of development
approval or was offered by the developer and accepted by the District in
writing, and regardless of whether the contribution or dedication was
contributed by the developer or by a local improvement District controlled by
the developer. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-7-2: LIMITATIONS:
Credits against District impact fees shall not be given for:
   A.   Project improvements; or
   B.   Any construction, contribution or dedication not agreed to in writing
by the District prior to commencement of the construction, contribution, or
dedication. Credits issued by the District for one capital improvement element
may not be used to reduce the District impact fees due for a different capital
improvement. No credits shall be issued for system improvements contributed or
dedicated prior to the effective date of this title. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-7-3: VALUATION OF CREDIT AT PRESENT VALUE:
   A.   Land: Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the fee payer's
option, be valued at the present value of:
      1.   One hundred percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value for
such land as shown in the records of the county assessor; or
      2.   That fair market value established by a private appraiser acceptable
to the District in an appraisal paid for by the fee payer.
   B.   Improvements: Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of
system improvements shall be valued by the District at the present value of
such improvements based on complete engineering drawings, specifications, and
construction cost estimates submitted by the fee payer to the District. The
District administrator shall determine the amount of credit due based on the
information submitted, or, if it determines that such information is inaccurate
or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable
to the District as a more accurate measure of the value of the offered system
improvements to the District. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-7-4: WHEN CREDITS BECOME EFFECTIVE:
   A.   Land: Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when
the land has been conveyed to the District in a form acceptable to the
District, at no cost to the District, and has been accepted by the District.
Upon request of the fee payer, the District shall issue a letter stating the
amount of credit available.
   B.   Improvements. Approved credits for acquisition or construction of
system improvements shall generally become effective when (a) all required
construction has been completed and has been accepted by the District, (b) a
suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the
District, and (c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and
acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the District and the State of Idaho. Upon request of the fee
payer, the District shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit
available. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-7-5: CREDIT REQUEST PROCEDURES:
   A.   Request: In order to obtain a credit against District impact fees
otherwise due, a fee payer shall submit to the City a written offer of request
to dedicate to the District specific parcels of qualifying land or a written
offer to contribute or construct specific System Improvements to the District
capital facilities in accordance with all applicable state or City design and
construction standards, and shall specifically request a credit against the
type of District impact fees for which the land dedication or system
improvements is offered. The City shall then deliver the written offer of
request to the District Administrator.
   B.   Review: After receipt of the written offer of request for credit, the
District Administrator shall review the request and determine whether the land
or system improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of providing
District capital facilities by an amount at least equal to the value of the
credit. If the District Administrator determines that the offered credit
satisfies the criterion and will be acceptable to the Fire District Board of
Commissioners and/or the Ambulance District's District's Board of
Commissioners, as the case may be, then the credit shall be issued. The
District shall complete its review and determination of an application within
thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for credit.
   C.   Credits exceeding fee amounts due. If the credit due to a fee payer
pursuant to sections, above, exceeds the District impact fees that would
otherwise be due from the fee payer pursuant to this title (whether calculated
through the fee schedule attached to the capital improvement plan or through an
independent assessment), the fee payer may choose to receive such credit in the
form of either:
      1.   A credit against future District impact fees due for the same system
improvements; or
      2.   A reimbursement from District impact fees paid by future development
that impacts the system improvements contributed or dedicated by the fee payer.
Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the fee payer, the District shall
be under no obligation to use any District funds - other than District impact
fees paid by other development for the same system improvements - to reimburse
the fee payer for any credit in excess of District impact fees that are due.
   D.   Written Agreement Required: If credit or reimbursement is due to the
fee payer pursuant to this section, the District shall enter into a written
agreement with the fee payer, negotiated in good faith, prior to the
contribution, dedication, or funding of the system improvements giving rise to
the credit. The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount,
time and form of reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10)
years.
   E.   The District Administrator's determination on the written offer of
request for credit shall be provided to the fee payer and the City. The
Districts shall also provide to the City an instruction of the impact fee to
collect from the fee payer, if, after the Districts' acceptance of the request
for credit, the impact fee differs from the fee schedule. (Ord. 439, 10-18-
2022)
CHAPTER 8
METHODOLOGY FOR THE CALCULATION OF FIRE PREVENTION AND EMS DISTRICT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
10-8-1: General Provisions
10-8-2: Methodology; Proportionate Methodology
10-8-3: Proportionate Share Determination
10-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Accounting Principles: The calculation of the District impact fees
shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
development impact fee shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee
may result in an incidental benefit to owners or developers within the service
area other than the fee payer.
   B.   Levels Of Service: The District impact fees shall be calculated on the
basis of levels of service for public facilities adopted in this title that are
applicable to existing development as well as new growth and development. The
construction, improvement, expansion or enlargement of new or existing public
facilities for which the District impact fees are imposed must be attributable
to the capacity demands generated by the new development. (Ord. 439, 10-18-
2022)
10-8-2: METHODOLOGY; PROPORTIONATE METHODOLOGY:
The District impact fees shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of
the system improvements determined in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-
8207, as amended. District impact fees shall be based on actual system
improvements costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. The amount of the
District impact fees shall be calculated using the methodology contained in the
Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-8-3: PROPORTIONATE SHARE DETERMINATION:
   A.   District impact fees shall be based on a reasonable and fair formula or
method under which the District impact fees imposed does not exceed a
proportionate share of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the District in
the provision of system improvements to serve the new development. The
proportionate share is the costs attributable to the new development after the
District consider the following:
      1.   Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money, dedication
of land or construction of system improvements;
      2.   Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a
new development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
      3.   That portion of general tax or other revenues allocated by the
District to system improvements; and
      4.   All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
   B.   In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system
improvements to be paid by the developer, the following factors shall be
considered by the District and accounted for in the calculation of the District
impact fees:
      1.   The costs of existing system improvements within the service area;
      2.   The means by which existing system improvements have been financed;
      3.   The extent to which the new development will contribute to system
improvements costs through taxation, assessments, or developer or landowner
contributions, or has previously contributed to system improvements costs
through developer or landowner contributions;
      4.   The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to
the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
      5.   The extent to which the new development should be credited for
providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area;
      6.   Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new
development;
      7.   The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of
fees paid at different times; and
      8.   The availability of other sources of funding system improvements
including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers and special taxation. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 9
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Extraordinary Impacts
10-9-1: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS:
Determinations of extraordinary impacts are made as follows:
   A.   In the event the City makes an initial determination that development
may impose extraordinary impact, the City shall provide the development
application to the District Administrator along with the City's initial
determination. The District Administrator shall then review and determine
whether or not the development application will impose extraordinary impact.
   B.   If the District Administrator determines that a proposed development
generates extraordinary impact that will result in extraordinary systems
improvements costs, the District Administrator will notify the fee payer and
the City of such District impact fees determination within thirty (30) days
after District Administrator's receipt from the City of the development
application and the City's initial determination. Such notice shall include a
statement that the potential impacts of such development on system improvements
are not adequately addressed by the Capital Improvements Plan, and that a
supplemental study, at the fee payer's expense will be required.
   C.   Circumstances that may lead to a determination of extraordinary impact
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   An indication the assumptions used in the Capital Improvements Plan
underestimate the level of activity or impact on District capital facilities
from the proposed development or activity.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a development with
extraordinary impact, the District Administrator shall meet with the fee payer
to discuss whether the fee payer wants to:
      1.   Pay for the supplemental study necessary to determine the system
improvements costs related to the proposed development;
      2.   Modify the proposal to avoid generating extraordinary impact; or
      3.   Withdraw the application for certification, building permit or
development approval.
   E.   If the fee payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to
document the proposed development's proportionate share of system improvements
costs, then the District and the fee payer shall jointly select an individual
or organization acceptable to both to perform such study. The fee payer shall
enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization to pay the
costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental study to be
completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless the fee
payer agrees to a longer time.
   F.   Once the study has been completed, the fee payer may choose to:
      1.   Pay the proportionate share of system improvements costs documented
by the supplemental study; or
      2.   Modify the proposed development to reduce such costs; or
      3.   Withdraw the application. If the fee payer agrees to pay the system
improvements costs documented in the supplemental study, that agreement shall
be reduced to writing between the District and the fee payer prior to review
and consideration of any application for any development approval or building
permit related to the proposed development.
   G.   Notwithstanding any agreement by the fee payer to pay the proportionate
share of system improvements costs documented by the supplemental study,
nothing in this title shall obligate the City to approve development that
results in an extraordinary impact to the District. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 10
FEE PAYER REFUNDS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Duty To Refund
10-10-1: DUTY TO REFUND:
   A.   District impact fees shall be refunded to the fee payer, or to a
successor in interest, in the following circumstances:
      1.   Service is available but never provided;
      2.   A building permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured
home, is denied by the City or abandoned;
      3.   The fee payer pays District impact fees under protest and a
subsequent review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment
determines that the fee paid exceeded the proportionate share to which the
District were entitled to receive;
      4.   A District collected District impact fees and the District failed to
appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant to section below; or
      5.   Failure of a District to commence construction or encumber the fund
in the development impact fee capital projects trust fund.
   B.   Any District impact fees paid shall be refunded if the District has
failed to commence construction of system improvements in accordance with this
title, or to appropriate funds for such construction, within eight (8) years
after the date on which such fee was collected by the District. Any refund due
shall be paid to the owner of record of the parcel for which the District
impact fees were paid. The District may hold District impact fees for longer
than eight (8) years if the District identifies in writing and in written
notice to the owner of record of the parcel:
      1.   A reasonable cause why the fees should be held longer than eight (8)
years; and (b) an anticipated date by which the fees will be expended, but in
no event greater than eleven (11) years from the date they were collected. If
the District complies with the previous sentence, then any District impact fees
so identified shall be refunded to the fee payer if the District fails to
commence construction of system improvements in accordance with the written
notice, or to appropriate funds for such construction on or before the date
identified in such writing.
   C.   No refund due for subsequent reduction in size of development or
service units. After District impact fees have been paid pursuant to this title
and after a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City, no refund of
any part of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid is
later demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so
as to reduce the size of the project or the number of units in the project.
   D.   Interest: Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half
the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on
which the fee was originally paid.
   E.   Timing: Requests for refunds must be submitted to the appropriate
District. The District shall make a determination of whether a refund is due
within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written request for a refund from
the owner of record of the property for which the fee was paid. When the right
to a refund exists, the District shall send the refund to the owner of record
within ninety (90) days after the District determines that a refund is due. The
determination and issuance of refunds, along with required interest, shall be
the sole responsibility of the Districts and not the City. (Ord. 439, 10-18-
2022)
CHAPTER 11
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CAPITAL PROJECTS TRUST FUND
SECTION:
10-11-1: Established By District
10-11-2: Deposits
10-11-1: ESTABLISHED BY DISTRICT:
The trust fund established by each District will be maintained by each District
for the purpose of ensuring that all District impact fees collected, pursuant
to this title, are used to address impacts reasonably attributable to new
development for which the District impact fees are paid. Each trust fund shall
be divided into the accounts. All funds in all accounts in each trust fund
shall be maintained in an interest-bearing account. The interest earned on each
account pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8210(1) shall not be governed by
Idaho Code section 57-127, as amended, but shall be considered funds of the
account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds as the
District impact fees on which the interest is generated. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-11-2: DEPOSITS:
Deposit Of District Impact Fees: All monies paid by a fee payer, pursuant to
this title, minus the administrative fee collected by the City, shall be
identified as District impact fees and shall be promptly deposited by the
District Administrator in the appropriate account of the trust fund.
   A.   First-In/First-Out: Monies in each account shall be spent in the order
collected, on a first-in/first-out basis.
   B.   Maintenance Of Records: The District shall maintain and keep accurate
financial records for each account that shall show the source and disbursement
of all revenues, that shall account for all monies received, that shall ensure
that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and
exclusively for the provisions of projects specified in the Capital
Improvements Plan, and that shall provide an annual accounting for each
District impact fee account showing the source and amount of all funds
collected and the projects that were funded. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 12
EXPENDITURE AND SURCHARGE REIMBURSEMENT
SECTION:
10-12-1: Expenditure Eligibility
10-12-2: Surcharge Reimbursement
10-12-1: EXPENDITURE ELIGIBILITY:
Expenditures of District impact fees collected and deposited in the trust fund
shall be made only for system improvements within the service area for which
the impact fee was collected in accordance with the Capital Improvements Plan.
The expenditure of the funds by the Districts, in compliance with Idaho Code,
is the sole responsibility of the Districts. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-12-2: SURCHARGE REIMBURSEMENT:
Capital Improvements Plan Reimbursement; Surcharge: A portion of each impact
fee collected shall be designated as a surcharge for reimbursement for the cost
of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan in accordance with Idaho Code
section 67-8208. The surcharge shall not exceed the development's proportionate
share of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Plan. (Ord. 439, 10-18-
2022)
CHAPTER 13
APPEALS, PROTEST AND MEDIATION
SECTION:
10-13-1: Appeals To The District Board Of Commissioners
10-13-2: Appeals To The City Council
10-13-3: Payment Under Protest
10-13-4: Mediation
10-13-1: APPEALS TO THE DISTRICT BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS:
Any fee payer that is or may be obligated to pay a District impact fees, or
that claims a right to receive a refund, reimbursement, exemption or credit
under this title, and who is dissatisfied with a decision made by the District
Administrator in applying this title, may appeal such decision to the District
Board of Commissioners.
   A.   The fee payer shall have the burden on appeal of demonstrating that the
decision was in error.
   B.   In order to pursue the appeal described in this subsection, the fee
payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the District Administrator
within thirty (30) days after the date of the District Administrator's
decision, or the date on which the fee payer submitted a payment of the
District impact fees under protest, whichever is later. Such written notice of
appeal shall include a statement describing why the fee payer believes that the
appealed decision was in error, together with copies of any documents that the
fee payer believes support the claim.
   C.   The District Board of Commissioners shall hear the appeal within sixty
(60) days after receipt of a written notice of appeal. The fee payer shall have
a right to be present and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The
District Administrator shall likewise have the right to be present and to
present evidence in support of the decision. The criteria to be used by the
District Board of Commissioners in considering the appeal shall be whether:
      1.   The decision or interpretation made by the District Administrator;
or
      2.   The alternative decision or interpretation offered by the fee payer,
more accurately reflects the intent of this title that new development in the
City pay its proportionate share of the costs of system improvements to
District facilities necessary to serve new development and whether the
provisions of this title have been correctly applied. The Board of
Commissioners shall issue a decision upholding, reversing, or modifying the
decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal. (Ord.
439, 10-18-2022)
10-13-2: APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
Any fee payer that is or may be obligated to pay a District impact fees, or
that claims a right to receive a refund, reimbursement, exemption or credit
under this title, and who is dissatisfied with a decision made on appeal by the
District Board of Commissioners in applying this title, may appeal such
decision to the City Council.
   A.   The fee payer shall have the burden on appeal of demonstrating that the
District Board of Commissioners decision on appeal was in error.
   B.   In order to pursue the appeal described in this subsection, the fee
payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the Fire District
Administrator within thirty (30) days after the date of the District's Board of
Commissioners' decision. Such written notice of appeal shall include a
statement describing why the fee payer believes that the appealed decision of
the District's Board of Commissioners was in error, together with copies of any
documents that the fee payer believes support the claim. The District
Administrator shall within three (3) business days deliver the notice of appeal
together with copies of any documents filed with it to the City Clerk.
   C.   The City Council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days after
receipt by the City Clerk of a written notice of appeal. The fee payer shall
have a right to be present and to present evidence in support of the appeal.
The District Administrator shall likewise have the right to be present and to
present evidence in support of the decision. The criteria to be used by the
City Council in considering the appeal shall be whether:
      1.   The decision or interpretation made by the District Administrator
and the decision on appeal by the District's Board of Commissioners; or
      2.   The alternative decision or interpretation offered by the fee payer,
more accurately reflects the intent of this title that new development in the
City pay its proportionate share of the costs of system improvements to
District facilities necessary to serve new development and whether the
provisions of this title has been correctly applied. The City Council shall
issue a decision upholding, reversing, or modifying the decision being appealed
within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-13-3: PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST:
A fee payer may pay District impact fees under protest in order not to delay in
the issuance of a building permit by the City and/or to avoid penalty under
sections
10-17-1 et seq. A fee payer making a payment under protest shall not be
estopped from exercising the right to appeal provided herein, nor shall such
fee payer be estopped from receiving a refund from the District of any amount
deemed to have been illegally collected. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-13-4: MEDIATION:
   A.   Any fee payer that has a disagreement with the City or the District
Administrator regarding a District impact fees determination that is or may be
due for a proposed development pursuant to this title, may enter into a
voluntary agreement with the City or the District, as the case may be, to
subject the disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent party
acceptable to both the fee payer and the District.
   B.   Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a timely
appeal pursuant to sections
10-13-1 and
10-13-2, or as an alternative to such appeal, provided that the request for
mediation is filed no later than the last date on which a timely appeal could
be filed pursuant to sections
10-13-1 and
10-13-2.
   C.   Participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from
pursuing other remedies provided for in this section.
   D.   If mediation is requested and agreed to, any related mediation costs
shall be shared equally by the fee payer and the City or the District, as the
case may be, and a written agreement regarding the payment of such costs shall
be executed prior to the commencement of mediation.
   E.   In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues submitted, the
fee payer retains all rights to seek administrative and judicial relief. (Ord.
439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 14
PERIODIC REVIEWS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Review And Modification Of Capital Improvements Plan
10-14-2: Annual Capital Budget
10-14-1: REVIEW AND MODIFICATION OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN:
Unless the City and the District Board of Commissioners deems some other period
is appropriate, the City and the District Board of Commissioners shall, at
least once every five (5) years, commencing from the date of the original
adoption of the Capital Improvements Plan, review the development potential and
update the Capital Improvements Plan in cooperation and in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Idaho Code section 67-8206, as amended. Each update
shall be prepared by the District Administrator in consultation with the
advisory committee. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-14-2: ANNUAL CAPITAL BUDGET:
Each District shall annually adopt a capital budget. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 15
AUDIT
SECTION:
10-15-1: Annual Report
10-15-1: ANNUAL REPORT:
   A.   As part of their annual audit process, each District shall prepare an
annual report:
      1.   Describing the amount of all District impact fees collected,
appropriated or spent during the preceding year by category of public facility;
and
      2.   Describing the percentage of taxes and revenues from sources other
than the District impact fees collected, appropriated or spent for system
improvements during the preceding year by systems improvements category of
District capital facilities. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 16
JOINT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY STANDING COMMITTEE
SECTION:
10-16-1: Joint Development Impact Fee Advisory Standing Committee
10-16-1: JOINT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADVISORY STANDING COMMITTEE:
   A.   Committee Created: A joint standing committee of the City Council and
the Board of Commissioners of the Fire District and of the Ambulance District
is established.
   B.   Committee Name: The joint standing committee is known and shall
continue to be known and designated as the "City of Athol/Timberlake Fire
Protection District/Kootenai County Emergency Medical Services System Joint
Development Impact Fee Advisory Standing Committee" (hereinafter in this
chapter referred also as "joint advisory committee" or "committee").
   C.   Membership: The members on the committee shall be appointed by the City
Council and confirmed by the Board of Commissioners of the Fire District and of
the Ambulance District for a term of three (3) years or until someone is
appointed in his/her place, and there shall not be fewer than five (5) members
of which two (2) or more members shall be active in the business of
development, building or real estate and at least two (2) or more members shall
not be active in the business of development, building or real estate. At least
one (1) member shall reside in the City of Athol. All members must reside
within the Districts' boundaries. No members shall be employees or officials of
the City of Athol or the Districts.
      1.   Any vacancy occurring on the committee during the year shall be
filled during the year, by appointment of the city council and confirmed by the
Board of Commissioners of the respective Districts.
   D.   Charge: The joint advisory committee shall serve as an advisory
committee to the City Council and the Board of Commissioners of the Fire
District and of the Ambulance District and is charged with the following
responsibilities:
      1.   Assist the City and the Fire District and the Ambulance District in
adopting land use assumptions; and
      2.   Review the capital improvements plan; and
      3.   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements
plan;
      4.   File with the Districts, District Administrators and the city clerk,
at least annually, with respect to the capital improvements plan a report of
any perceived inequities in implementing the capital improvements plan or
imposing the development impact fees;
      5.   Advise the City Council and the board of commissioners of the Fire
District and of the Ambulance District of the perceived need to update or
revise land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and development impact
fees; and
      6.   The Fire District and the Ambulance District shall make available to
the joint advisory committee, upon request, all financial and accounting
information, professional reports in relation to other development and
implementation of land use assumptions, the capital improvements plan and
periodic updates of the capital improvements plan.
   E.   Joint Advisory Committee Organization: The District Administrators
shall staff the joint advisory committee in order to provide the committee with
needed information for the committee's review and to provide for its compliance
with the Open Meeting Law (Chapter 2 of Title 74 Idaho Code).
      1.   The joint advisory committee shall select its officers, which
include a chairman, vice chairman and a secretary of the committee.
      2.   The chairman shall conduct the meetings of the committee. The duties
of the chairman shall be performed by the vice chairman in the absence of the
chairman or as delegated by the chairman. The chairman and the vice chairman
shall be members of the committee.
      3.   The District administrator shall serve as the secretary of the
committee and shall take minutes and post agenda notices required by the Open
Meeting Law. The secretary is not a member of the committee.
      4.   The committee shall establish a regular meeting schedule.
      5.   The agenda of each meeting shall include the approval of the minutes
of the last meeting and the secretary shall provide a copy of the approved
minutes to the city council and the board of commissioners.
      6.   Fifty percent (50%) of the membership of the committee shall
constitute a quorum. Once a quorum is established for a meeting, the subsequent
absence of a member present for creating the quorum shall not dismiss the
quorum.
      7.   A majority vote of those present at any meeting is sufficient to
carry motions.
   F.   Reporting: The joint advisory committee reports directly to the Fire
District and Ambulance District board of commissioners and to the City Council.
   G.   City Council, Fire District, And Ambulance District Board Review Of
Committee Reports And Recommendations: The City Council and the Fire District
and Ambulance District board of commissioners shall each consider the joint
advisory committee's recommended revision(s) at least once every twelve (12)
months. The Joint Advisory Committee's recommendations and the City Council's
and board of commissioners' actions are intended to ensure that the benefits to
a development paying fire and EMS impact fees are equitable, so that the fire
and EMS impact fee charged to the development shall not exceed a proportionate
share of system improvements costs, and that the procedures for administering
fire and EMS impact fees remain efficient. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 17
ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION
SECTION:
10-17-1: City And District Administrator Powers To Require Payment Of Impact
Fees
10-17-1: CITY AND DISTRICT ADMINISTRATOR POWERS TO REQUIRE PAYMENT OF IMPACT
FEES:
When any District impact fees are due pursuant to this title, or pursuant to
the terms of any written agreement between a fee payer and the District, and or
otherwise such District impact fees have not been paid in a timely manner, the
City, or District Administrator on behalf of the District, may exercise any or
all of the following powers as applicable to their authority, in any
combination, to enforce the collection of the District impact fees:
   A.   Withhold building permits, manufactured home installation permits, or
other City development approval related to the development for which the
District impact fees are due until all District impact fees due have been paid,
and issue stop work orders, and revoke or suspend a building permit.
   B.   Withhold utility services from the development for which the District
impact fees are due until all District impact fees due have been paid; and
   C.   Add interest to the District impact fees not paid in full at the legal
rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104, as amended, plus five
percent (5%) per annum beginning on the date at which the payment of the
District impact fees was due until paid in full. All interest charged by the
City for nonpayment of impact fees shall be paid to the city and shall be
transmitted to the City's general fund as the sole property of the City. The
Districts shall have no right or claim over any interest collected by the City
and said collected interest cannot be requested by the Districts from the City
in the case of a refund of the impact fee to the fee payer.
   D.   Impose a penalty of five percent (5%) of the total District impact fees
(not merely the portion dishonored, late or not paid in full) per month
beginning on the date at which the payment of the District impact fees was due
until paid in full. All penalties charged by the City for nonpayment of impact
fees shall be paid to the City and shall be transmitted to the City's general
fund as the sole property of the City. The Districts shall have no right or
claim over any penalties collected by the City and said collected penalties
cannot be requested by the Districts from the City in the case of a refund of
the impact fee to the fee payer.
   E.   Impose a lien pursuant to the authority of Idaho Code section 67-8213
(4) for failure to timely pay a District impact fees following the procedures
contained in Idaho Code Title 45, Chapter 5. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 18
CITY/DISTRICT INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT
SECTION:
10-18-1: Authority To Enter Into Intergovernmental Agreements
10-18-2: City And District Intergovernmental Agreement
10-18-3: District Governed By This Title
10-18-4: Amendments To Intergovernmental Agreement
10-18-1: AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The City is a governmental entity that is empowered by the Act to adopt
development impact fee ordinances and as such is authorized, by Idaho Code
section 67-8204A, to enter into the intergovernmental agreement with each
District for the purpose of agreement to collect and expend District impact
fees for system improvements as provided in this title. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-18-2: CITY AND DISTRICT INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
The City and the Districts have each entered into an Intergovernmental
Agreement which are in full force and effect upon the effective date of this
title. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-18-3: DISTRICT GOVERNED BY THIS TITLE:
These Intergovernmental Agreements comply with this title and require each
District to be governed by and to fully abide by the provisions of this title
and Idaho Code. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-18-4: AMENDMENTS TO INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT:
Any amendments of either Intergovernmental Agreement shall be implemented by
corresponding relevant amendments of this title, if needed, which amendments
shall not apply to any District impact fees then not expended and currently
held in the trust fund. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 19
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-19-1: Fire Codes And Other Rules Applicable To Project Improvements
10-19-2: Agreements Between Property Owners And ITD And Other Governmental
Entities For Construction Or Installation Of System Improvements
10-19-3: No Requirement Of The City To Approve Extraordinary Impact Development
10-19-4: District Not Obligated To Approve Development That Reduces Levels Of
Service
10-19-5: No Additional Right To Develop Created By This Title
10-19-6: No Limit On City’s Eminent Domain Authority
10-19-7: No Limit On City’s Power To Annex Property
10-19-8: District Plan Of Alternative Sources Of Revenue
10-19-9: Development Approved By The City Prior To The Effective Date Of This
Title Not Subject To Impact Fees
10-19-10: Monies In Trust Fund Not Expended Carried Over From Fiscal Year To
Fiscal Year
10-19-11: Capital Improvements Plan Error Discovery
10-19-12: Impact Fee Payment Mistake Or Misrepresentation
10-19-13: Continued Existence Of Joint Advisory Committee
10-19-1: FIRE CODES AND OTHER RULES APPLICABLE TO PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS:
Nothing in this title shall prevent either District from requiring a developer
to construct reasonable project improvements, as are required by the fire codes
and other rules that are adopted by the state fire marshal, in conjunction with
a development. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-2: AGREEMENTS BETWEEN PROPERTY OWNERS AND ITD AND OTHER GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION OF SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private
agreements between property owners or developers, the Idaho Transportation
Department and governmental entities in regard to the construction or
installation of system improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements
for system improvements costs incurred by a developer including inter-project
transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvements
which are used or shared by more than one (1) development project. Any credit
or reimbursement determinations shall be the responsibility of the Districts.
The City shall recognize credits, to be subtracted from the impact fee due,
only upon receipt of the Districts' written determination and calculation of
the credit due to fee payer. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-3: NO REQUIREMENT OF THE CITY TO APPROVE EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT
DEVELOPMENT:
Nothing in this title shall obligate the City to approve development that
results in an extraordinary impact. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-4: DISTRICT NOT OBLIGATED TO APPROVE DEVELOPMENT THAT REDUCES LEVELS OF
SERVICE:
Nothing in this title shall obligate either District to approve any development
request which may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below
minimum acceptable levels established in this title. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-5: NO ADDITIONAL RIGHT TO DEVELOP CREATED BY THIS TITLE:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to create any additional right to
develop real property or diminish the City in regulating the orderly
development of real property within its boundaries. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-6: NO LIMIT ON CITY’S EMINENT DOMAIN AUTHORITY:
Nothing in this title shall work to limit the use by the City of the power of
eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or procedures
authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement District or general
obligation bond issues. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-7: NO LIMIT ON CITY’S POWER TO ANNEX PROPERTY:
Nothing herein shall restrict or diminish the power of the City to annex
property into its territorial boundaries or exclude property from its
territorial boundaries upon request of a developer or owner, or to impose
reasonable conditions thereon, including the recovery of project or system
improvements costs required as a result of such voluntary annexation. (Ord.
439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-8: DISTRICT PLAN OF ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF REVENUE:
Each District shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue, which
shall include but not necessarily be limited to plans generated during each
District's annual budget process, lobbying efforts, tax increment financing,
and implementation of user fees, administrative and regulatory fees and other
forms of revenue. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-9: DEVELOPMENT APPROVED BY THE CITY PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS
TITLE NOT SUBJECT TO IMPACT FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, that portion of a project
for which a complete application for a building permit has been received by the
City, prior to the effective date of this title, shall not be subject to the
District impact fees imposed by this title. If the resulting building permit is
later revised or replaced after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this title, and the new building permit(s) reflects a development density,
intensity, development size or number of units more than ten percent (10%)
higher than that reflected in the original building permit, then the District
impact fees may be charged on the difference in density, intensity, development
size or number of units between the original and the revised or replacement
building permit. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-10: MONIES IN TRUST FUND NOT EXPENDED CARRIED OVER FROM FISCAL YEAR TO
FISCAL YEAR:
Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific system
improvements within such Capital Improvements Plan and not expended pursuant to
chapter 12 of title 10 or refunded pursuant to section
10-10-1 shall be retained in the same account until the next District fiscal
year. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-11: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN ERROR DISCOVERY:
   A.   If the District discovers an error in the Capital Improvements Plan
which results in assessment or payment of more than a proportionate share of
system improvements costs on any proposed development, the District
Administrator shall:
      1.   Adjust the District impact fees to collect no more than a
proportionate share; or
      2.   Discontinue the collection of any District impact fees until the
error is corrected by ordinance. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-12: IMPACT FEE PAYMENT MISTAKE OR MISREPRESENTATION:
If District impact fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake or
misrepresentation, they shall be recalculated by the District or fee payer. Any
amounts overpaid by a fee payer shall be refunded by the District within thirty
(30) days after the District acceptance of the recalculated amount, with
interest at the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from
the date on which the fee was paid. Any amounts underpaid by the fee payer
shall be paid to the District from the fee payer within thirty (30) days after
the District Administrator's acceptance of the recalculated amount, as
recalculated by the District or the fee payer, with interest at the legal rate
provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
paid. All issuing of refunds shall be the responsibility of the District. In
the case of an underpayment to the District, the District Administrator may
request the City, in writing, and the City may withhold issuance of the
building permits or development approval for the project for which the District
impact fees were paid until such underpayment is corrected, and if amounts owed
to the District are not paid within such thirty (30) day period, the District
Administrator may also ask the City, in writing, to and the City may revoke any
building permits or development approval issued in reliance on the previous
payment of such District impact fees and the District may refund such fees to
the fee payer. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
10-19-13: CONTINUED EXISTENCE OF JOINT ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
The joint advisory committee that was established during the preparation of the
capital improvements plan shall continue in existence, and shall by operation
of the ordinance from which this subsection derived, become the joint advisory
committee created herein. (Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 20
PUNISHMENT
SECTION:
10-20-1: Punishment
10-20-1: PUNISHMENT:
Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to one hundred eighty (180) days in the county
jail, and/or a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine, or both. Knowingly
furnishing false information to any official of the City or the District
charged with the administration of this title, including without limitation,
the furnishing of false information regarding the expected size, use or impacts
from a proposed development, shall be a violation of this title. (Ord. 439, 10-
18-2022)
CHAPTER 21
CONSTRUCTION OF INTENT
SECTION:
10-21-1: Construction Of Intent
10-21-1: CONSTRUCTION OF INTENT:
All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this title shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Act and
the City Council and each Board of Commissioners may be fully carried out.
(Ord. 439, 10-18-2022)
