CITY CODE
OF
BANCROFT
IDAHO
Code current through:
Ord. 310, passed August 11, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Bancroft, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 310, passed August 11, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 278
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE BANCROFT, IDAHO CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Bancroft, Idaho, as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Bancroft, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, containing
the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the city,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED this 14th day of November, 2011.
APPROVED this 14th day of November, 2011.
 
 
/s/            
   Mayor
ATTEST:
 
 
/s/            
   City Clerk
 
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: 3
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: Raquel Reed (CM)
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
BANCROFT CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Bancroft. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the BANCROFT CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2011 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE 1 :
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. Codification of ordinances authorized per IC §§ 50-903 through 50-906.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2011 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code books,
while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be
and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the
city clerk-treasurer when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2011
Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances.
   B.   Appropriation ordinances.
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations.
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants.
   F.   Salary ordinances.
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places.
   H.   Improvement ordinances.
   I.   Bond ordinances.
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections.
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city.
   L.   All special ordinances.
(2011 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(2011 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code.
(2011 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code,
or any part hereof, or any portion adopted by reference or any codes or
portions of codes adopted herein is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part hereof, or any portion adopted by reference or any codes
or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding shall be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Bancroft".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(2011 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Bancroft, county of Caribou, state of Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Bancroft.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Bancroft.
COUNTY: The county of Caribou, state of Idaho.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the city shall commence on October 1 of each
year 1 .
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
incarceration may be imposed 2 .
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under state law
3 .
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability
partnership, trust, association, limited liability company, organization,
government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Shall include highways or roads, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark.
(2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-1001.
2 2. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113A.
3 3. IC §§ 18-111, 18-113.
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2011
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY 1 :
   A.   Misdemeanor: Except in cases where a different punishment is hereafter
prescribed by city ordinance, every offense declared to be a misdemeanor is
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both. These
punishments shall comply with Idaho Code section 18-113, as amended.
   B.   Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any
section or provision of this code or by state law, it is punishable only by a
penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no incarceration may be
imposed.
   C.   Federally Mandated Programs: When the city is participating in a
federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are
required by the terms of participation in the program, the city may enforce
such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal
offenses not to exceed six (6) months, or to include both a fine and
imprisonment for criminal offenses.
(2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-302.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions:
      1.   The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every
section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed or where any action
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this code.
      2.   Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of
this chapter shall apply.
   B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is
made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
(2011 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
(2011 Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election Of Council Members
1-5-2: Council President
1-5-3: Duties Generally; Attendance At Meetings
1-5-4: Filling Vacancy
1-5-5: Council Meetings
1-5-6: Salaries
1-5-7: Ordinances
1-5-1: ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
There shall be four (4) Council members elected at large to represent the City.
At each general City election hereafter, two (2) Council members shall be
elected from the City at large to serve for a term of four (4) years or until
their successors are elected and qualified.
(Ord. 173, 1-8-1973; amd. 2011 Code)
1-5-2: COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
At the time of taking office, the Council shall elect one of its members
President of the Council who shall preside at all meetings of the Council and
perform all other duties of the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor; and, in the
absence of the President, the Council shall elect one of their members to
occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled "Acting President" of the
Council; and the President and Acting President, when occupying the place of
Mayor, shall have the same privileges as other members of the Council. All
actions of the President and Acting President, while so acting, shall be
binding upon the Council and upon the City as if performed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 173, 1-8-1973)
1-5-3: DUTIES GENERALLY; ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
   A.   Duties, Generally:
      1.   Members of the Council, the legislative and policy making branch of
the City, shall devote so much of their time to the duties of their office as
efficient and faithful discharge thereof may require.
      2.   Members shall attend all meetings of the Council unless lawfully
excused therefrom by the Mayor, or by a majority of the remaining members.
      3.   Such members shall perform such duties as the passing of ordinances
and resolutions, and perform investigations and study of work done for the City
according to the committees upon which they may severally be appointed by the
Mayor.
   B.   Meeting Attendance: Should it be determined by the Mayor or by a
majority of the remaining members of the Council that an absence at the last
proceeding regular meeting was, in effect, unexcused, it will be the policy
that the involved absent Council member will not receive pay for that period.
For three (3) or more consecutive unexcused absences, the Mayor may declare a
Council member expelled, the position vacant, and proceed to fill the vacancy
as provided by law.
(Ord. 173, 1-8-1973)
1-5-4: FILLING VACANCY:
In the event any office of Council member shall become vacant, through death,
change of residence, or for any other cause, the Mayor shall appoint, with the
approval of the Council, a resident of the City to fill the unexpired portion
of the term to serve until the next general election, at which time the
unexpired term shall be filled by regular election 1 .
(Ord. 173, 1-8-1973)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-704.
1-5-5: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular monthly Council meeting for the City
shall be held at City Hall on the second Monday of each month at eight o’clock
(8:00) P.M. If the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall
take place on the next business day at the same hour.
   B.   Special Meetings: The Mayor, as provided in Idaho Code section 50-604,
or three (3) members of the Council, as provided in Idaho Code section 50-706,
may call special meetings of the Council, the object of which must be submitted
to the Council in writing.
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings shall be open to the public pursuant to
Idaho Code section 67-2341 et seq. (Ord. 276, 3-1-2010; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
294, 4-9-2018; Ord. 302, - - )
1-5-6: SALARIES:
Commencing on January 1, 2020, the salaries of the mayor and of the members of
the city council shall be as follows:
   A.   The mayor shall receive a monthly salary in the sum of four hundred ten
dollars and eighty-five cents ($410.85).
   B.   Each member of the city council shall receive a monthly salary in the
sum of one hundred seventeen dollars and thirty-eight cents ($117.38). (Ord.
239, 8-18-1997; amd. 296, 6-10-2019)
1-5-7: ORDINANCES:
Ordinances, including amendments to this code, shall be prepared, adopted and
printed in accordance with Idaho Code sections 50-901, 50-901A, and 50-902.
(2011 Code)
CHAPTER 6
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Clerk-Treasurer, Salary
1-6-2: Code Enforcement Officer
1-6-1: CLERK-TREASURER, SALARY:
The city clerk-treasurer shall have and receive as full compensation for
services as such officer such sum as determined by the city council.
(Ord. 67, 6-21-1932; amd. 2011 Code)
1-6-2: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
   A.   Position Created: There is hereby created the position of code
enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall be appointed by the
mayor with the approval of the city council. This shall be a function or an
assignment of duty of an existing city employee. In this section the code
enforcement officer shall be called the officer.
   B.   Duties: The code enforcement officer shall have the following authority
and duties:
      1.   Investigate and enforce the code and all ordinances and regulations
of the city.
      2.   Make reports to the city council of violations of this code and
ordinances and regulations of the city.
      3.   Issue warnings or written directions to correct violations to
persons or entities violating any provision of this code, or ordinance and
regulations of the city.
      4.   Sign and issue uniform citations and affidavits in support thereof
for violations of this code and ordinances and regulations of the city.
      5.   File charges for ordinance violations; or filing, with the
assistance of the city attorney, other court actions to enforce the code.
      6.   Testify in court as to any act or omission and violation of this
code and ordinances and regulations of the city.
      7.   Perform all other duties as prescribed by the mayor.
No person or entity shall interfere with or obstruct the code enforcement
officer in the performance of his duties. Any person who obstructs or
interferes with the performance of the duties by the code enforcement officer
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Supervision: The officer shall serve under the direct supervision of
the mayor.
(Ord. 285, 8-29-2014)
CHAPTER 7
AREA OF CITY IMPACT AGREEMENT
SECTION:
1-7-1: Effective Date
1-7-2: Renegotiation Date
1-7-3: Legal Description Of City Impact Area
1-7-4: Map Of City Impact Area
1-7-1: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This agreement/ordinance shall be effective with respect to Caribou County and
the city of Bancroft referenced herein upon the latter day of the date of
publication of this ordinance after passage, or the date of publication of a
companion ordinance enacted by each cooperating entity. This ordinance
establishing area of city impact boundaries for the city of Bancroft shall not
become effective until said city passes and publishes an area of city impact
ordinance consistent with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord., 9-10-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7-2: RENEGOTIATION DATE:
The term of this ordinance shall end upon the date negotiations between the
entities render it noneffective. Renegotiations will commence upon any petition
or request by either entity. Either entity that elects to terminate
participation before mutual agreement upon a superseding cooperative agreement,
shall be entitled to fifteen (15) days' prior notice to the other entity.
(Ord., 9-10-2007)
1-7-3: LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF CITY IMPACT AREA:
The legal description of the area of city impact shall be as follows:
A parcel of land comprising the following Sections: 9-12 13-16 21-24 and 25-28
Township 8 South Range 39 East, Boise Meridian, Caribou County, Idaho, more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the West one-quarter corner of Section 28 Township 8 South Range
39 East, Boise Meridian;
Thence East along the latitudinal centerline of said Section 28 for a distance
of 1,500 feet to the True Point of Beginning;
Thence North parallel with and 1,500 feet perpendicular distant from the west
boundary lines of Sections 9, 16, 21, and 28, for a distance of 15,340 feet to
a point 500 feet south of the latitudinal centerline of said Section 9;
Thence East, parallel with and 500 feet perpendicular distant from the
latitudinal centerlines of Sections 9, 10, 11, and 12, for a distance of 15,640
feet to a point 1,500 feet east of the west boundary line of said Section 12;
Thence South, parallel with the 1,500 feet perpendicular distant from the west
boundary line of Sections 12, 13, 24, and 25 for a distance of 15,340 feet to a
point of the latitudinal centerline of said Section 25;
Thence West along the latitudinal centerlines of Sections 25, 26, 27, and 28
for a distance of 15,640 feet to the True Point of Beginning.
(Ord., 9-10-2007)
1-7-4: MAP OF CITY IMPACT AREA:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16590dc27f0814be6b18f06121d9e9e6ec9e1b5e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-571.png]
 
(Ord., 9-10-2007)
CHAPTER 8
FINANCE AND REVENUE
SECTION:
1-8-1: Nonsufficient Funds
1-8-1: NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS:
Any payments made to the city of Bancroft for fees, charges, penalties,
reimbursements or other reasons, for which nonsufficient funds are otherwise
failed to honor, shall result in a service charge as established by the city,
to the person or entity making the payment.
(Ord. 281, 2-13-2012)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Established (Repl. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
2-1-2: Membership (Repl. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
2-1-3: Ex Officio Members; Terms; Duties (Repl. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
2-1-4: Appointment; Terms; Vacancies
2-1-5: Officers Of Commission
2-1-6: Meetings; Quorum
2-1-7: Rules; Records; General Powers
2-1-8: Jurisdiction And Authority
2-1-9: Prepare Comprehensive Plan
2-1-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
(Repl. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP:
(Repl. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
2-1-3: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS; TERMS; DUTIES:
(Repl. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
2-1-4: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Appointment And Terms:
      1.   Regular members shall serve on the board for three (3) years and
shall be selected by appointment of the mayor.
      2.   The first commission shall be appointed and serve as follows: two
(2) members for three (3) years, two (2) members for four (4) years, and one
member for five (5) years. Thereafter, the term shall be three (3) years.
   B.   Vacancies: Any vacancy for a regular member may be filled by
appointment by the mayor.
(Ord. 190, 7-12-1982)
2-1-5: OFFICERS OF COMMISSION:
The planning and zoning commission shall select one of its regular members as
chairperson, and one of its members, either regular or ex officio, as its
secretary. The term of the chairperson shall be one year. Should the
chairperson be unable to attend a meeting, the members shall select an interim
chairperson. Only regular members shall be entitled to vote when selecting a
full time or interim chairperson but all members shall be entitled to vote when
selecting a secretary.
(Ord. 190, 7-12-1982)
2-1-6: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
   A.   Time And Place Of Meetings: The planning and zoning commission shall
meet on the first Tuesday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. in the
city hall, and conduct at least one regular meeting each month for not less
than nine (9) months of each year.
   B.   Quorum: A majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum.
   C.   Meetings Public; Exceptions: All meetings of the planning and zoning
commission shall be public, except when they involve the employment or
dismissal of a public officer or employee, or when they involve hearing
complaints or charges brought against such an officer or employee. The
requirement of a closed hearing may be waived by a writing, signed by the
subject public officer or employee, or any person being considered for such
position, demanding a public hearing.
(Ord. 190, 7-12-1982)
2-1-7: RULES; RECORDS; GENERAL POWERS:
   A.   Rules And Records: The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules
for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public
record in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6504(c).
   B.   General Powers: The commission shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as are required of it by state law or by direction of the city
council.
(Ord. 190, 7-12-1982)
2-1-8: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The planning and zoning commission shall, in addition to its other duties, have
the following jurisdiction and authority:
   A.   To prepare and recommend a comprehensive general plan for the future
development of the city, and to review the provisions of such plan and make a
report of its findings and recommendations to the city council.
   B.   To receive and act on applications for actions authorized and specified
herein or in the comprehensive plan.
   C.   To hold public hearings on applications for conditional use permits and
for proposed amendments to this chapter in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
   D.   Following such public hearings as are deemed necessary and as are
required by provisions of Idaho Code section 67-6509, to submit to the city
council as required herein, a report and recommendation on each such amendment.
   E.   To act on applications for a conditional use permit in a manner
prescribed and within the limitations established herein or in the
comprehensive plan.
   F.   To authorize, on application as provided herein, a variance from the
terms of this chapter in the manner prescribed and within the limitations
established herein or in the comprehensive plan.
   G.   To hear and decide appeals in the manner prescribed herein where it is
alleged that there is an error in an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by any city official in any interpretation or enforcement of
this chapter. Provided, however, that any actions of the planning and zoning
commission described in this section are subject to review and modification by
the city council.
(Ord. 190, 7-12-1982)
2-1-9: PREPARE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to conduct a
comprehensive planning process designed to prepare, implement, review and
update a comprehensive plan. The plan shall include all land within the
jurisdiction of the city and areas reasonably expected to be impacted by the
growth thereof. The plan shall consider previous and existing conditions,
trends, desirable goals and objectives, or desirable future situations for each
planning component. The plan shall be in conformance with and shall include the
components specified by Idaho Code section 67-6508. (Ord. 190, 7-12-1982)
CHAPTER 2
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose
2-2-2: Definitions
2-2-3: Commission Created; Terms; Compensation
2-2-4: Organization; Officers; Rules; Meetings
2-2-5: Powers, Duties And Responsibilities
2-2-6: Special Restrictions
2-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public of the city through identification,
evaluation, designation, and protection of those buildings, sites, areas,
structures, and objects that reflect significant elements of the city's, the
state's, and the nation's historic, architectural, archaeological, and cultural
heritage. (Ord. 238, 4-14-1997)
2-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Bancroft.
COMMISSION: The historic preservation commission of the city of Bancroft.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state,
its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state,
or the nation.
(Ord. 238, 4-14-1997)
2-2-3: COMMISSION CREATED; TERMS; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby created a historic preservation commission
which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the council.
   B.   Qualifications: All members of the commission shall have a demonstrated
interest, competence, or knowledge in history or historic preservation. The
council shall endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional
training or experience in the disciplines of architecture, history,
architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law, or other
historic preservation related disciplines.
   C.   Terms; Vacancies:
      1.   Initial appointments to the commission shall be made as follows: one
1-year term, two (2) 2-year terms, and two (2) 3-year terms. All subsequent
appointments shall be made for three (3) year terms. Commission members may be
reappointed to serve additional terms.
      2.   Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments and the appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
   D.   Compensation: The members of the commission may be reimbursed by the
city for expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
(Ord. 238, 4-14-1997)
2-2-4: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; RULES; MEETINGS:
   A.   Rules Of Procedure And Bylaws: The commission shall have the power to
make whatever rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth
in this chapter. Rules of procedure and bylaws adopted by the commission shall
be available for public inspection.
   B.   Officers: The commission shall elect officers from among the commission
members. The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the commission. The vice
chairperson shall, lacking the chairperson, perform the duties of the
chairperson.
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public, and follow the requirements of the Idaho open meetings law 1 . The
commission shall keep minutes and other appropriate written records of its
resolutions, proceedings, and actions.
   D.   Employees Or Technical Experts: The commission may recommend to the
council, within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the contracting
with other parties for the services of technical experts or other persons as it
deems necessary to carry on the functions of the commission.
(Ord. 238, 4-14-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 67-2341 et seq.
2-2-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall be advisory to the council and shall be authorized to:
   A.   Conduct a survey of local historic properties.
   B.   Recommend the acquisition of fee and lesser interests in historic
properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest, or
donation.
   C.   Recommend methods and procedures necessary to preserve, restore,
maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the
city.
   D.   Recommend the lease, sale, other transfer or disposition of historic
properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a
manner that will preserve the property.
   E.   Contract, with the approval of the council, with the state or federal
government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
   F.   Cooperate with the federal, state, and local governments in the
pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
   G.   Make recommendations in the planning processes undertaken by the
county, the city, the state, or the federal government and the agencies of
these entities.
   H.   Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes
of historic preservation in the city.
   I.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic
preservation and historic properties in the city.
   J.   Commission members, employees or agents of the commission may enter
private property, buildings, or structures in the performance of its official
duties only with the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
   K.   Review nominations of properties to the national register of historic
places for properties within the city jurisdiction.
(Ord. 238, 4-14-1997)
2-2-6: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
Under the provisions of Idaho Code section 67-4612, the city may provide by
ordinances, special conditions or restrictions for the protection, enhancement
and preservation of historic properties.
(Ord. 238, 4-14-1997)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Applications
3-1-2: Persons Subject To License Or Permit
3-1-3: Forms
3-1-4: Signatures
3-1-5: Inspections Or Investigations
3-1-6: Term Of License
3-1-7: Building And Premises
3-1-8: Change Of Location
3-1-9: Nuisances
3-1-10: Posting Of License
3-1-11: Revocation Of License Or Permit
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made
in writing to the city clerk-treasurer or designee, unless otherwise
specifically provided by law. Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the
time covered and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such
additional information as may be required by the issuing official. (2011 Code)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to this
requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the city. (2011 Code)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the clerk-treasurer or designee. (2011 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the clerk-treasurer
or designee in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (2011 Code)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where laws of the
city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the clerk- treasurer or designee shall refer such
application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty
eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty
of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon,
favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or
a copy thereof. (2011 Code)
3-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31, where no provision to the
contrary is made. (2011 Code)
3-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the city. (2011 Code)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the clerk-treasurer or designee; and
further provided, that such new location is in compliance with the building
requirements of this code. (2011 Code)
3-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2011 Code)
3-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business. (2011 Code)
3-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Any license or permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the city council for a violation of any ordinance or regulation of
the city governing the manner and method of the conduct of the particular
business to which the license or permit relates, such revocation to be by
resolution of the council, after hearing upon reasonable notice to the licensee
or permittee, or agent thereof in immediate charge of the business mentioned in
such license or permit, of any charge of misconduct or violation of any
ordinance of the city charged against such licensee or permittee.
(Ord. 49, 2-17-1925; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: License Required
3-2-2: Application For License; Investigation
3-2-3: Conditions Of License
3-2-4: Record Of Proceedings
3-2-5: Compliance With State Law; Right Of Entry
3-2-6: License Revocation, Suspension Or Denial
3-2-7: Penalty
3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell liquor by the drink, beer or wine
for consumption on or off the licensed premises within the corporate limit of
the city without first having procured a license therefor. (2011 Code)
3-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Forms; Time Of Granting: Each applicant shall make application to the
city clerk-treasurer on an application form provided therefor. The city council
shall grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time it is
filed and accepted as complete by the clerk-treasurer.
   B.   Council Consideration: Upon due consideration, the council shall either
issue the license or deny issuance. Upon denial of such license, the council
shall state in writing the following:
      1.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      2.   The reason for the denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (2011 Code)
3-2-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   State License Required: No license shall be granted to any person who
has not received a license therefor approved by the state of Idaho.
   B.   Term: All licenses granted by the mayor and city council shall be
granted for a period of one year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
each year.
   C.   License Fee: The annual license fee imposed and collected shall be as
set by the city council.
   D.   License Transfers And Renewals: Licenses granted under the provisions
of this chapter may be renewed or transferred once the license holder has
filled out an application provided by the clerk-treasurer, and the renewal or
transfer has been approved by the city council. The procedure for granting or
denying an application for renewal or transfer of a license shall be the same
as for issuing or denying a license. (2011 Code)
3-2-4: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
In all cases where the city council is considering applications for licenses,
transfers or renewals thereof, a transcribable verbatim record of the
proceedings shall be made. If the application for a license, transfer or
renewal is denied, a transcribable verbatim record of the proceedings shall be
kept for a period of not less than six (6) months after the final decision on
the matter. Upon written request and within the time period provided for
retention of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his
expense. The city council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of
the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise
provided by law. (2011 Code)
3-2-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
   A.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to
sell liquor by the drink, beer or wine to fail to comply with the laws of the
state regarding such sales 1 . (2011 Code)
   B.   Right Of Entry Of Peace Officers: All peace officers appointed by the
state of Idaho, the city of Bancroft or the county of Caribou shall have free
access at all times to the licensed premises, and any information touching the
manner and method of the operation of said premises or the sale of said liquor,
beer or wine may be submitted to the city council upon an investigation made of
said licensee.
(Ord. 221; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 23-901 et seq., 23-1001 et seq., 23-1301 et seq.
3-2-6: LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL:
Prior to any revocation or suspension of a license granted hereunder, the
licensee shall be afforded a hearing before the city council. Any person denied
a license shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council by
submitting in writing to the clerk-treasurer a request to have the denial of a
license reheard on appeal by the city council. Such written request must be
received by the clerk-treasurer no later than thirty (30) days after the date
of the decision of the city council to deny the license. The hearing date shall
be set by the city council and written notice of the date and time set for the
hearing shall be sent to the applicant no less than ten (10) days before the
hearing. At the hearing, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to
present evidence and testimony in support of the issuance of the license.
Whenever the mayor and city council revoke or suspend a license granted
hereunder or deny an application, they shall specify in writing the following:
   A.   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
   B.   The reason for the denial; and
   C.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal thereof. (2011 Code)
3-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
BILLIARD HALLS, POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Sunday Sales Prohibited; Hours
3-3-2: Underage Persons
3-3-3: Penalty
3-3-1: SUNDAY SALES PROHIBITED; HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, proprietor or manager of any public
billiard hall or room, or any pool hall or room, bowling alley, or card room
within the corporate limits of the city, where same is conducted for pleasure
or profit, to conduct or allow to be conducted any such pool, billiard or card
games, or allow or permit such rooms or halls to be kept open for the conduct
therein of any such businesses, or be kept open for the purpose of public
gatherings therein, or for loitering therein, or for any of such proposes, on
the first day of the week commonly known as Sunday, or any other day between
the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(Ord. 90, 8-7-1939; amd. 2011 Code)
3-3-2: UNDERAGE PERSONS:
   A.   Proprietors Allowing To Frequent Or Loiter: It shall be unlawful for
the owner, keeper, proprietor or manager of any public billiard hall or room,
or any pool hall or room, bowling alley, or card room within the corporate
limits of the city to allow any minor under the age of twenty one (21) years to
frequent or loiter in or about such room.
   B.   Frequenting Or Loitering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor
under the age of twenty one (21) years to frequent or loiter in or about public
billiard rooms, pool halls, bowling alleys, or card rooms conducted for profit
within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 90, 8-7-1939; amd. 2011 Code)
3-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 90, 8-7-1939; amd. 2011 Code)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Maintaining Prohibited
4-1-3: Certain Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-4: Uninvited Peddling
4-1-5: Abatement Procedure
4-1-6: Penalty
4-1-7: Reservation Of Other Remedies
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
BLIGHT: A condition characterized by physical deterioration or disrepair
resulting in unsightly, malodorous, rotting, unhealthy, dilapidated, or unsafe
structures, personal property, or vegetation. This includes, but is not limited
to, the presence of debris; dead or damaged landscaping; broken, rotted,
crumbling, peeling, or rusted material, structures, or surfaces; rotting or
decaying animal carcasses; or rotting accumulations or piles of garbage or
vegetation.
DETERIORATION: A lowering in quality of the condition or appearance of
vegetation or of any manmade structure or parts thereof. A state of
deterioration may be characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay, disease, neglect,
lack of maintenance, or any other evidence of insufficient or inadequate upkeep
or maintenance.
NUISANCE: Any condition or use of a property which is detrimental to the
property interests of another, or which causes or tends to cause material
diminution in the value of other properties in the surrounding area, or any
condition or use of a property that tends to promote blight or deterioration.
This includes, but is not limited to, anything which is injurious to the
health, safety or welfare of individuals, or is offensive to the senses of
individuals, or is an obstruction of the free use of property so as to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
VEGETATION: All plants, or plant life, taken as a whole, to include cultivars,
trees, bushes, and weeds.
WEEDS: Undesirable plant growth that is unkempt, unsightly, deleterious and/or
injurious to the public. Weeds include noxious weeds as defined by state code,
grasses, unkempt bushes, and any other plant meeting this description. (Ord.
308, 7-14-2025)
4-1-2: MAINTAINING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner, lessee, or manager of
property located within the corporate limits of the city, to create, maintain,
or cause to exist any "nuisance" as defined in this chapter or permit the same
to exist on the property or premises owned, leased or otherwise under their
control. (Ord. 308, 7-14-2025)
4-1-3: CERTAIN NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
The following are hereby specifically declared to be nuisances when created,
maintained, or caused to exist within the corporate limits of the city:
   A.   Unwholesome Or Injurious Substances: The depositing of any filth or any
foul, offensive, unwholesome, nauseous, or injurious materials or substances
upon any public thoroughfare or other public place or upon any private
property.
   B.   Depositing Debris Into Gutters, Public Ways: Sweeping or depositing of
any paper, trash, ashes, rubbish or debris into any drain or gutter, or onto
any public thoroughfare.
   C.   Burning Substances Causing Odor, Smoke: The burning of any hair,
leather, rags or other substances of any kind which may cause or produce an
offensive smell, smoke, or odor which annoys or is offensive to persons living
in the vicinity or to persons passing by on any public thoroughfare.
   D.   Chemicals For Spraying Trees, Other Vegetation: The mixing of or using
of chemicals or mixtures of substances used in the spraying of trees and other
vegetation on property where the spray of the mixtures or the odors therefrom
are offensive to the senses and are permitted to drift out over adjoining
property or other property and come in contact with trees, vegetation, or
people thereon to the injury thereof, or so as to become offensive to the
senses or an obstruction to the free use of such property, or so as to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property so affected.
   E.   Defecating Or Urinating Upon Public Ways: Defecating or urinating upon
the streets, alleys, or public places or any other place that may be seen from
private residences or by any person passing along the public thoroughfares.
   F.   Defacing Public Toilets: Public toilets whereon appear filthy or
indecent writings or depictions; provided, that public toilets shall be all
toilets resorted to or used not only by the owners or proprietors of the
building in which the same are located, but also by renters, lessors or other
persons or by the public.
   G.   Open Cellar Or Trap Doors: Keeping or leaving open or unprotected after
the necessity for the opening has ceased, of any cellar or trap door or the
grating of any vault in or upon any sidewalk.
   H.   Offensive Pools, Cesspools, Privies: All cellars, vaults, drains,
pools, cesspools, privies, sewers, yards, grounds or premises which for any
cause have become foul, nauseous or injurious to health or a menace to health,
or which give forth odors which are offensive to adjacent residents or to
persons passing by.
   I.   Carcasses, Other Unwholesome Substances: All carcasses, decaying flesh,
fish, fowl, or vegetables, and all deposits of manure other than for legitimate
gardening or farming purposes, or other unwholesome substances and all filthy
or offensive water or slops in any private yard or premises or when thrown or
conducted into or upon any street, alley, public ground or any enclosure so as
to be unwholesome or offensive or liable to become unwholesome or offensive.
   J.   Conditions or Accumulations of Offensive Materials On Land/Outdoor
Areas: All litter, garbage, debris, waste material, accumulations of broken
and/or junked appliances and/or furniture, broken glass, piles of mixed
material, rags, empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses,
bedding, or disused or decaying lumber or building materials.
   K.   Conditions or Accumulations of Unkept Vegetation and/or Weeds: All
noxious weeds of any height, and weeds, grasses, or plants, other than trees,
bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, exceeding twelve (12) inches in
height located in the front lawn or any tract of land abutting public property.
(Ord. 308, 7-14-2025)
4-1-4: UNINVITED PEDDLING:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by itinerant
merchants, transient vendors, solicitors, peddlers, and hawkers of merchandise,
not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of said
private residences for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods,
wares and merchandise, and/ or for the purpose of and/or peddling or hawking
the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance
as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 133, 6-20-1949; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 308, 7-14-2025)
4-1-5: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Property Owner Responsibility: It shall be the duty of the owner of any
lot, building, or premises whereon any nuisance exists, or the lessee, manager,
or person in charge thereof, to remove, abate, or destroy any existing nuisance
without delay.
   B.   Abatement By City; Cost A Lien and Special Assessment:
      1.   In the event the owner of any lot, building, or premises, or the
lessee, manager, or person in charge thereof, fails to remove, abate or destroy
the nuisance without delay, the city may take immediate steps to abate said
nuisance, remove the same, or destroy such nuisance, and charge the property
owner, lessee, manager, or person in charge thereof with the reasonable charges
incurred in the removal, abatement or destruction of the said nuisance.
      2.   The cost of such removal or abatement shall become a lien upon the
property on which the nuisance existed.
      3.   The City shall reserve the option to assess and levy against the
property owner any billed and unpaid costs of abatement as a special assessment
with property taxes. If the owner or occupant should fail to pay the amount
owing the city within thirty (30) days of mailing of notice by the city, said
sum shall be declared delinquent and shall be certified to the tax collector of
the county by the city clerk not later than the first day of August, and the
tax collector shall place the same upon the tax roll and collect it in the same
manner and subject to the same penalties as other city taxes. All money
received by the city shall be held by the city clerk to reimburse the city for
money expended for such abatement.
   C.   Notice To Owner; Exception: The said property owner, lessee, manager or
person in charge thereof shall be given reasonable notice to abate the nuisance
unless the same constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the citizens of, or the property within, the city. Reasonable notice
shall be deemed to be ten (10) days. (Ord. 206, 9-10-1984; amd. Ord. 308, 7-14-
2025)
4-1-6: PENALTY:
   A.   First Offense: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon a first offense, be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to
a fine of three hundred dollars ($300). Each day that the nuisance is allowed
to continue after notice has been given shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Second and Subsequent Offenses: Any second or subsequent violation of
this chapter by the same person, involving the same or a substantially similar
nuisance condition within a twelve (12) month period, shall constitute a
misdemeanor offense. A person convicted of a misdemeanor under this section
shall be punishable by:
      1.   A fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000);
      2.   Imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6)
months; or
      3.   Both such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Continuing Violations: Each and every day during which a violation
continues after the issuance of a citation, notice of violation, or other legal
notice shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 308, 7-14-2025)
4-1-7: RESERVATION OF OTHER REMEDIES:
The City shall not be limited to a single remedy for enforcing nuisance
violations and all other lawful remedies are preserved and reserved for use by
the City, including issuance of an infraction or misdemeanor, assigning unpaid
violation fees to a collection agency for collection, filing a civil complaint
for collection of unpaid violation fees, and filing a civil complaint for
nuisance. (Ord. 308, 7-14-2025)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Firearms; Weapons Discharge
5-1-1: FIREARMS; WEAPONS DISCHARGE:
   A.   Firearms Defined: Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this section,
it means any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or
other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the
action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs, and including
what are commonly known as air rifles, BB guns, slings, flippers, pellet guns,
or bow and arrows.
   B.   Projectile Or Explosive Weapons:
      1.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor
for any person to discharge any instrument that propels shot, bullets, shells,
or other projectiles or harmful substances, by the action of gunpowder,
compressed air, springs, elastic materials, or explosive matter, within the
corporate boundaries of the city.
      2.   Exception: Law enforcement officers in the proper performance of
their duty, or citizens in the lawful defense of person or property are
excluded.
(Ord. 231-A, 1995)
CHAPTER 2
MINORS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Curfew
5-2-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Curfew Hours: It shall be unlawful for any minor to go or to remain
upon any pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare, public place or other premises
open to the public, or to operate or to ride in a vehicle at any such location
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
on weeknights, Sunday through Thursday, with the exception of Friday and
Saturday with the curfew hours being one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. (Ord. 241, 10-13-1997; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Exceptions: This prohibition shall not apply to:
      1.   A minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having care and custody of said minor.
      2.   A minor upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or
authorized by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care and custody of said minor.
      3.   A minor participating in a lawful youth group activity of which the
local law enforcement department has been notified.
      4.   A minor who is lawfully married.
      5.   A minor who is a member of the armed forces of the United States on
active duty or on authorized leave from active duty.
      6.   A minor having a written note, dated and signed by a parent or
guardian permitting otherwise.
   C.   Violation; Responsibility Of Enforcement Official:
      1.   Any law enforcement officer finding a minor in any violation of this
curfew restriction shall ascertain the name and address of the minor, warn the
minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and direct the minor to proceed
at once to his or her house or usual place of abode.
      2.   The officer shall also cause such action to be reported to the
minor's parent, guardian, or person having custody or control.
      3.   If the minor refuses to heed such direction by the officer, or
refuses to disclose his or her correct name and address, or if the minor has
been advised on any previous occasion that he or she is in violation of curfew,
the minor may be taken to the office of the department of law enforcement, and
the parent, guardian, or other adult person having care and custody of the
minor shall be requested to come and take charge of the minor.
      4.   If the parent, guardian, or the adult person cannot be located or
fails to come and take charge of said minor, or if such parent, guardian, or
adult person has been requested to come and take charge on one or more previous
occasions, a petition may be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction under
the juvenile corrections act of the state 1 , as appropriate to the
circumstances.
(Ord. 241, 10-13-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 20-501 et seq.
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Chickens
5-3-1: CHICKENS:
   A.   Permitted: Chickens are permitted on any detached single- family lot in
the city. Each property is permitted a maximum of fifteen (15) hens. Roosters
are prohibited within the city limits. Coops and feed shall be secured to
prevent problems with mice and other pests. Coops, hutches, or similar
containment structures must be kept at least thirty feet (30') from the front
property line, five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines where the
chickens are being kept, at least fifteen feet (15') from the on site residence
and at least twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring residences.
Additionally, the coop shall not be attached to a shared fence.
   B.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Any violation of a provision of this section
shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. Each day that such violation
continues, with respect to any provision of this section, may be deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 283, 4-8-2013)
ARTICLE A. DOGS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Definitions
5-3A-2: Animal Control Authority
5-3A-3: Licensing Requirements; Fees
5-3A-4: Kennel Licensing Requirements; Fees
5-3A-5: Prohibited Acts
5-3A-6: Vicious Dogs
5-3A-7: Impoundment Of Dogs
5-3A-8: Dogs Showing Symptoms Of Rabies Or Biting A Person
5-3A-9: Penalties
5-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: The person designated to enforce this article, his
designee, or an elected city official, in the absence of a designated animal
control officer.
AT LARGE: Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the public or is on
private property not owned, rented or leased by the owner of the dog unless
permission for such presence has been obtained. No dog shall be deemed to be
"at large" if it is:
   A.   Accompanied by and under the immediate supervision and control of the
owner or other responsible person who has the dog attached to a leash.
   B.   A law enforcement/search and rescue working dog in the use of law
enforcement/search and rescue work or training.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any place wherein the owner or keeper of dog(s) shall derive
monies or any form of compensation for boarding, breeding, training, treating
or handling dogs. The exception shall be law enforcement officers who board,
harbor, train or handle a dog owned by a governmental agency for the purposes
of law enforcement 1 .
DOG: Any animal of the canine family, both male and female.
HARBOR: Providing food, sanctuary or shelter to any dog.
HOUSEHOLD: All areas inside any structure, yard or property owned, rented or
leased by the owner.
LEASH: Any portable device that, when attached to the collar, harness, or any
other type of restraining device, is attached to a dog, which can include, but
is not limited to, ropes, chains, cables, or webbing material. Such leash shall
be of sufficient strength to prevent the breaking or failure of such leash by
the dog. No leash shall be of a length over ten feet (10').
NUISANCE: A dog that damages, defiles, soils, or defecates on private property
other than that of the owner, or on public walks, streets and recreational
areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the
owner; causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions, or molests,
attacks or interferes with domestic animals or pets on public property or
private property not owned, rented or leased by the owner.
OWNER: Any person, firm, association, corporation, or organization harboring,
keeping, having interest in or having control or custody of any dog or dogs. If
any dog found in violation of this article shall be owned by a person under the
age of eighteen (18), the owner shall be deemed to be the parent or guardian of
such person (or the head of household in which said person resides).
PROPER ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, or any part thereof, and which is suitable to confine a vicious dog.
The enclosure shall be designed to prevent the dog from escaping and preventing
an adult or child from coming in contact with the dog. The structure shall
comply with all building requirements of the city of Bancroft. (A chain where a
person can walk within the length of the chain, or an electric collar or
invisible fence is not a sufficient restraint or enclosure.)
PROVOKING: To provoke, harangue, tease, torment or in any way disturb any dog
with the intent to cause it to bark or attack any person.
UNLICENSED DOG: Any dog not bearing a license issued by the city of Bancroft
for the current year.
VICIOUS DOG: Any dog which, when not physically provoked, physically attacks,
wounds, bites or otherwise injures any person who is not trespassing or is not
engaged in criminal activity on the property owned, rented or leased by the
owner, or is protecting the owner from criminal activity on public property.
Any dog which, while on the premises of and/or under the control of the owner,
attacks or otherwise causes physical harm to mail carriers, utility workers,
city of Bancroft employees or agents, delivery persons, or any law enforcement
or emergency person while in the performance of work related duties, shall be
deemed "vicious". Such dog shall be considered under the control of the owner
if the dog is not sufficiently restrained so as to not attack or otherwise
cause harm and the owner has knowledge the dog may have a demeanor to attack or
cause harm to any person visiting the property in a legal and lawful manner.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See also definition of "kennel, commercial" in section 10-1-4 of this
  code.
5-3A-2: ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY:
   A.   Appointment: The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint an animal control officer to enforce and carry out the duties and
obligations as provided in this article. (Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
   B.   Enforcement: The county sheriff's office shall have the authority to
enforce this article, but shall not be responsible for carrying out the duties
of the animal control authority, unless a written contract is entered into by
the city of Bancroft and the county sheriff's office to conduct law enforcement
duties.
   C.   Interference With Authority, Other Prohibited Acts: It shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with the animal control authority or other
city or county official in the performance of their duties as provided by this
article, to evade or attempt to evade paying the fee for claiming an impounded
dog, or free or attempt to free any dog impounded under this article.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
5-3A-3: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required: No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog over the
age of four (4) months within the city without paying a license fee for said
dog as provided in this article.
   B.   Application For License:
      1.   Application for license shall be made by the owner before January 31
each year, or within thirty (30) days of obtaining an unlicensed dog over the
age of four (4) months. Owners of dogs that are licensed by another
governmental entity and are brought into the city for more than thirty (30)
days shall obtain a city dog license.
      2.   Written application for a dog license shall be made to the city
clerk-treasurer and shall include the name, address and telephone number of the
owner, and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog, and any other
information pertaining to the dog (such as health, disposition or viciousness)
as required by this article.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any one to make a false statement in said
application for said license.
   C.   License Term: A license issued shall be effective until December 31 of
the year in which issued. (Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
   D.   Issuance; Payment Of Fees:
      1.   A license shall be issued by the city after payment by the owner of
such fee as set by the city council. Owners who fail to obtain a license by the
time set forth herein shall be subject to a late fee as set by the city
council, and a fine. License fees will be half price through the month of
January.
      2.   License fees shall be waived for medical service dogs (blind, deaf,
seizure, etc.) and service dogs utilized by governmental agencies for the
purpose of law enforcement or search and rescue. All other licensing
requirements must still be met for dogs qualifying for waived fees.
      3.   For dog owners who have reached the age of sixty five (65) or over,
license fees shall be one-half (1/2) the normal fees, except for the late fee
which shall remain such amount as set by the city council.
   E.   Tags And Collars:
      1.   Upon payment of the license fee, the clerk-treasurer shall issue to
the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed.
The tag shall be changed every year, and shall be stamped thereon the year for
which it is issued and the number corresponding to the number on the
certificate.
      2.   Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to
which the license must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are
constantly worn.
      3.   In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued
by the clerk-treasurer upon payment of a fee as set by the city council for
such duplicate.
      4.   Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no
refund shall be made after a tag has been issued.
   F.   Record Of Licenses Issued: The clerk-treasurer shall keep a record of
all licenses issued under the terms of this article.
   G.   Temporary License: When any dog already licensed by another
governmental entity shall be temporarily in the city for a period of time less
than thirty (30) days, the owner or person having charge of the dog may obtain
a temporary license for a fee as set by the city council. The provisions of
subsection E of this section shall apply. (Ord. 255, 7-11-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
   H.   Discount Sales: The city council may, after formulating a resolution,
designate once a year a period of time for licensing discount sales as a means
to encourage licensing of dogs. The council, by resolution, may set any fee as
they deem necessary during such discount sales time.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
5-3A-4: KENNEL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor, or
possess upon the premises of any one household more than two (2) dogs over the
age of four (4) months unless the owner or person in charge thereof shall
obtain a kennel license.
   B.   Application For License; Requirements; Deposit:
      1.   Application for a noncommercial kennel license shall be made to the
city clerk-treasurer and must be accompanied by the written consent to such
noncommercial kennel by at least seventy five percent (75%) of all the persons
in possession of premises within one hundred feet (100') of the boundary lines
of the premises upon which said noncommercial kennel is to be maintained.
      2.   Each person signing the written consent shall be individually
contacted and consent shall be verified by the animal control authority prior
to providing the consent form and application to the city council for approval.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
      3.   Said application shall be accompanied by a deposit of a license fee
as set by the city council for the first three (3) dogs and another fee as set
by the city council for each dog over that number, which deposit shall be
returned to the applicant if the license is not finally issued.
   C.   License Term; Fee: The license shall be in force until December 31 of
the year in which issued. The licensing fee shall be as set by the city council
per year regardless of the time of year the license is issued. The process must
be repeated each year prior to a noncommercial license being issued. (Ord. 255,
7-11-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
   D.   Individual Dog Licenses: The issuance of a noncommercial kennel license
shall not obviate the necessity of obtaining an individual dog license for each
dog.
   E.   License Nontransferable: Noncommercial kennel licenses shall not be
transferable.
   F.   Additional Dogs: Whenever additions are made to the number of dogs for
which a kennel license has been issued, the licensee shall, within three (3)
working days, report to the clerk-treasurer and pay the required license fee.
Whenever puppies are born, such puppies shall not be counted as additions until
four (4) months old.
   G.   Limitation On Number Of Dogs Allowed: At no time shall the number of
dogs in a noncommercial kennel exceed six (6).
   H.   License Revocation: In addition to any penalties that are affixed for
violation of this section, the city council may revoke said license upon the
third conviction of any provision of this article.
   I.   Commercial Kennels Prohibited: No commercial kennel shall be allowed
within the city limits. (Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
5-3A-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Chasing Vehicles Or Bicycles; Attacking Persons: No owner shall allow
his dog to chase vehicles or bicycles or to allow his dog to molest, attack or
interfere with any persons or other domestic animals which are on public
property.
   B.   Dog At Large: It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow or permit any
dog, whether licensed or not, to be at large upon any street of the city or in
any public place in the city, or upon the premises of another without the
consent of the person in possession of such other premises, unless:
      1.   Such dog be in the charge of a person and controlled by a leash not
exceeding ten feet (10') in length.
      2.   Such dog be humanely confined in a motor vehicle or cage with
adequate ventilation.
      3.   The dog is a law enforcement or search and rescue dog under the
control of a law enforcement officer or designee in the performance of official
duties.
   C.   Noise: No owner shall keep, harbor or have in his control any dog that
by loud and prolonged barking, howling, whining or any other type of
noisemaking disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, or occupant of
adjacent houses or properties.
   D.   Nuisance: No dog shall damage, defile, soil, or defecate on any private
property other than the owner's, or on public property, walks, streets or
recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed
of by the owner. No owner shall allow any unsanitary, dangerous or offensive to
the senses condition on his property relating to the ownership of any dog.
   E.   Person Provoking Dog: No person shall provoke any dog with the intent
to cause the dog to make any noises, bark, menace or attack any person other
than in the legal and lawful defense of the owner's property or person. Law
enforcement dog handlers shall be exempt from this section while in the
performance of official duties with a law enforcement dog assigned to such
handler.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
5-3A-6: VICIOUS DOGS:
No person shall keep, harbor, or possess a "vicious dog" as defined in section
5-3A-1 of this article, licensed or not, within the city, unless the following
has been met and verified by the animal control authority:
   A.   Notify City Of Ownership Of Vicious Dog:
      1.   Any owner who has actual knowledge that their dog, which is harbored
or kept within the city, has committed any act as described in the definition
of "vicious dog" in section
5-3A-1 of this article, whether such acts occurred inside or outside the city,
shall immediately notify the city clerk-treasurer or animal control authority
or an appropriate law enforcement officer and provide said individuals any
information in regard to such acts as is requested.
      2.   If any dog which lives outside the city has committed any act as
described in the definition of "vicious dog" in section
5-3A-1 of this article outside the city, or the dog has been declared vicious
or falls under the definition of vicious in any other outside state or local
governmental entity, and said dog is brought into the city for any length of
time, said owner shall notify the clerk-treasurer or other city official on the
next business day of said dog's entrance into the city. The owner shall provide
the clerk-treasurer any information pertaining to the dog as required by the
clerk-treasurer and shall license the dog as provided in subsection
5-3A-3G of this article.
   B.   Confinement; Enclosure: Any dog that is a "vicious dog" as defined in
section
5-3A-1 of this article shall be confined in a "proper enclosure" as defined in
section
5-3A-1 of this article.
   C.   Control And Supervision; Muzzling:
      1.   If a vicious dog is removed from any proper enclosure, it shall be
attached to a leash of sufficient strength as described in the definition of
"leash" in section 5-3A-1 of this article and supervised by a person of
sufficient strength as to physically control all actions of the vicious dog.
      2.   Whenever outside a proper enclosure, a vicious dog shall also have a
humane muzzle attached as to prevent any biting. The owner shall prevent a
vicious dog from coming into physical contact with any person who has not first
been advised the dog is vicious and verbal consent has been given to let the
dog approach and come within physical contact.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
5-3A-7: IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS:
   A.   Seizure Authorized: When a dog is found running at large, creating a
nuisance or is in violation of section
5-3A-6 of this article, the animal control authority shall notify the owner of
the dog of such violation, or if the owner is not known or cannot be notified,
shall seize and impound the dog.
   B.   Disposal; Notice; Requirements:
      1.   The animal control authority may dispose of any impounded dog after
five (5) business days have elapsed following notice of impoundment.
      2.   After a period of five (5) business days, the animal control
authority may dispose of the dog by:
         a.   Delivering it to the owner who shall pay the impoundment fee
together with licensing costs, if any; or (Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
         b.   Delivering the dog for adoption to a person other than the owner
or owner's family member after payment of an adoption fee and licensing costs
as set by the city council; or (Ord. 255, 7-11-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
         c.   Destroying the dog in a humane fashion.
   C.   Notice Of Impoundment:
      1.   Notice of impoundment shall be given to the owner by certified mail
or personal service by the animal control authority. Notice shall be effective
upon the mailing of same by the clerk-treasurer or the time/date of any
personal service. In case of an unlicensed dog, notice of impoundment shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the front door of city hall and the entrance
to the impounding facility.
      2.   Failure to give notice as set forth in subsection C1 of this section
shall not prevent disposition of any impounded dog if the animal control
authority is unable, after following a good faith inquiry, to ascertain the
name or location of the owner or person(s) having charge of the dog.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
5-3A-8: DOGS SHOWING SYMPTOMS OF RABIES OR BITING A PERSON:
   A.   Authority To Quarantine Or Dispose:
      1.   The animal control authority or any local law enforcement officer
shall have the authority to order the owner of any dog showing symptoms of
rabies, or any dog not having rabies shots as attested by a current vaccination
certificate, or any dog which has bitten any person so as to cause an abrasion
of the skin, to subject such dog to the city pound for quarantine for a period
of fifteen (15) days; and if such dog shall be determined free of rabies, the
same shall be returned to the owner upon payment of one-fourth (1/4) of the
regular fee for keeping dogs impounded. If such fee is not paid, the dog will
be subject to disposal as heretofore provided.
      2.   However, in lieu of submitting such dog to the city pound, the owner
may, at his expense, immediately admit such dog to a veterinarian for
examination, and said dog shall be quarantined with the veterinarian until
found not to have rabies. After the dog is placed with a veterinarian, the
name, location and phone number of the veterinarian will immediately be given
to the clerk-treasurer for verification.
   B.   Disposal Of Rabid Dog: Any dog afflicted with rabies shall be disposed
of immediately, either by the owner or the animal control authority. Any and
all state laws pertaining to rabid animals and their disposal shall be
followed.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
5-3A-9: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable, in addition to any civil liability, as listed in this section,
unless the animal control authority must exercise subsection A5 or B4 of this
section, of which the penalty shall then be a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or
confinement up to six (6) months in the Caribou County Jail.
   A.   Violations Of Sections
5-3A-3 And
5-3A-4:
      1.   First offense of sections
5-3A-3 and
5-3A-4 of this article shall be a warning.
      2.   Second offense within any continuous twelve (12) months shall have a
fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) assessed.
      3.   The third offense and any subsequent offense within any continuous
twelve (12) months shall have a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) assessed.
      4.   Such fines shall be in addition to license fees, if unlicensed, and
a daily care and impound fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day if the dog has
been impounded by or for the city.
      5.   All license fees, fines and impound fees shall be paid to the clerk-
treasurer. Failure to pay the same within ten (10) days shall result in an
Idaho uniform citation being issued to the owner for the violation, and the
same shall be heard in the magistrate's court of Caribou County.
   B.   Violations Of Sections
5-3A-2,
5-3A-5,
5-3A-7 And
5-3A-8:
      1.   First offense of section
5-3A-5 of this article shall be a warning.
      2.   Second offense and any subsequent violation within any twelve (12)
continuous months of section 5-3A-5 of this article shall be assessed a fine of
fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   All offenses of sections
5-3A-2,
5-3A-7, and
5-3A-8 of this article shall be assessed a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      4.   All license fees, fines and impound fees shall be paid to the clerk-
treasurer. Failure to pay the same within ten (10) days shall result in an
Idaho uniform citation being issued to the owner for the violation, and the
same shall be heard in the magistrate's court of Caribou County.
   C.   Violations Of Section
5-3A-6:
      1.   Any violations of section
5-3A-6, "Vicious Dogs", of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more than three hundred dollars
($300.00) and up to six (6) months' confinement in the Caribou County Jail.
      2.   The owner of a vicious dog shall be liable for any and all actions
of said dog that cause damages to any person or the property of any person
other than the owner.
      3.   For the second and/or subsequent violations of this subsection, the
court may, in the interest of public safety, order the owner to have the
vicious dog destroyed or may direct the appropriate authorities to destroy the
dog.
(Ord. 255, 7-11-2005)
ARTICLE B. LIVESTOCK
SECTION:
5-3B-1: Livestock Defined
5-3B-2: Keeping Livestock
5-3B-3: Permit Requirements
5-3B-4: Existing Uses
5-3B-5: Swine Prohibited
5-3B-6: Running At Large Prohibited
5-3B-7: Penalty
5-3B-1: LIVESTOCK DEFINED:
For the purpose of this article, "livestock" shall be defined as cows, sheep,
horses, goats, poultry, rabbits, pigs, hogs, ducks, and geese. (2011 Code)
5-3B-2: KEEPING LIVESTOCK:
Unless otherwise stated in this title, it is hereby deemed unlawful to keep
livestock within the city limits, except as hereinafter provided. (2011 Code)
5-3B-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise stated in this title, a permit for the keeping of livestock is
required and shall be issued to residents of the city if they comply with the
following regulations and conditions:
   A.   Permission Of Adjoining Property Owners: That permission of seventy
five percent (75%) of neighbors within a three hundred foot (300') radius of
the place where the animals are to be kept is obtained and written confirmation
of the permission is presented to the city council.
   B.   Council Approval: That the city council reviews each livestock permit
to keep livestock within the city limits, and either approves or rejects on
each application's merits.
   C.   Annual Council Review: The city council shall conduct an annual review
of the livestock permits to monitor the number and kinds of livestock that are
kept within the city limits and according to the permit application. (2011
Code)
5-3B-4: EXISTING USES:
Any person who heretofore has kept livestock within the city limits shall have
the right to continue to do so; provided, however, that should any such
landowner or city resident fail to exercise his right to keep such animals for
a period of sixty (60) days or more, such grandfathered right shall be deemed
forfeited and future harboring of livestock shall require the permit as set
forth herein. Provided further, however, that for those types of livestock
which traditionally are seasonally pastured at places other than within the
city limits, such sixty (60) day time limitation shall not run and apply during
the period when said livestock are being pastured seasonally elsewhere. (2011
Code)
5-3B-5: SWINE PROHIBITED:
No person may keep swine within the limits of the city. (2011 Code)
5-3B-6: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any livestock to allow the same to run at
large. Any livestock shall be kept on the owner's property by means of an
adequate fence to hold said livestock on said owner's premises or by means of a
cord, chain, or rope of such length to restrict the animal to the owner's
property. The provisions as to fencing contained herein shall apply to fowl
which traditionally are not and cannot be collared and leashed. (2011 Code)
5-3B-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Fireworks Prohibited
5-4-2: Penalty
5-4-1: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, fire, use, or have in his
possession; or to store, sell or offer for sale, at wholesale or retail, within
the city, any "fireworks" as defined in Idaho Code section 39-2602. (2011 Code)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Permit Required; Application; Fee
5-5-3: Exceptions To Permit Requirements
5-5-4: Standards For Issuance
5-5-5: Notice Of Determination Of Application
5-5-6: Conditional Approval
5-5-7: Contents Of Permit Application
5-5-8: Duties Of Permittee
5-5-9: Time, Place And Manner Restrictions
5-5-10: Appeal Procedure
5-5-11: Emergency Cancellation Or Termination
5-5-12: Violations; Penalties
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings set out in this section:
APPLICANT: Any person applying for a "permit", as defined in this section. The
true applicant for any such permit shall be the sponsoring entity whether such
sponsoring entity is an individual person, a corporation, a partnership or
other legal entity of any type.
PARADE: Any dash, demonstration, march, marathon, parade, procession, race,
rally, or like activity consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a
combination thereof, within the city with an intent of attracting public
attention which has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation
of traffic upon the streets.
PERMIT: Permits are required by this chapter for a "parade" or "public
assembly", as defined in this section. An approved application will serve as
the permit.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind granted a permit for any activity regulated by this
chapter.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: Any demonstration or rally of more than twenty five (25)
persons for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with
or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or occupies any street or other public property managed by
the city of Bancroft.
SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for the
purpose of pedestrian or nonmotorized traffic, whether or not it is paved.
STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for the
primary purpose of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder, parkway,
right of way, or median strip thereof. (2011 Code)
5-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall engage in, participate in, or conduct
any "parade" or "public assembly" as defined by this chapter unless a permit
has been issued by the city clerk- treasurer for the date and location
involved.
   B.   Application Date And Fee: A complete application must be made thirty
(30) days in advance of the event. Fees to cover the expenses incidental to the
event will be set by the city council. Fees are refundable if the application
is withdrawn the same day it is submitted. (2011 Code)
5-5-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Community block watch events.
   B.   Funeral processions.
   C.   Government agencies acting within the scope of their function.
   D.   Park activities otherwise regulated by ordinance.
   E.   Students going to and from classes or participating in educational
activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities.
   F.   Churches.
   G.   Other activities sponsored by the city in its municipal capacity. (2011
Code)
5-5-4: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
   A.   Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the
standards of issuance for a parade or public assembly permit. It is further the
purpose of this chapter to:
      1.   Assure that emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance
services are available for a parade or public assembly taking place within the
corporate limits of the city.
      2.   Assure that emergency services such as police, fire, and ambulance
services are not unreasonably inhibited in their ability to travel on and to
cross public streets or property used by parades or public assemblies.
      3.   Assure that private business activities in Bancroft are not
unreasonably impacted by parades or public assemblies.
      4.   Assure that traffic on public streets is not unreasonably disturbed
or disrupted by parades or public assemblies.
      5.   Assure that public safety can be maintained.
      6.   Assure that public and private properties can be protected from
harm.
   B.   Permit Issuance: Only one parade or public assembly permit will be
granted for the same time and/or location. The clerk- treasurer shall issue the
permit on a first come, first served basis.
   C.   Application Form; Approval: Affected city departments may request such
information from the applicant as necessary to demonstrate compliance with
applicable provisions of law. Information may be requested on the permit
application form, through written instructions or through oral or written
inquiries communicated from the city clerk-treasurer, addressed to the
applicant. The time for considering the permit may be extended by the time
taken by the applicant in responding satisfactorily to any inquiry, not to
exceed five (5) business days.
   D.   Discrimination Prohibited: There shall be no discrimination in
granting, denying, or conditionally granting permits under this chapter based
upon statutorily protected or constitutionally guaranteed rights.
   E.   Permit Denial: The clerk-treasurer may deny a permit if the applicant
or the person on whose behalf the application is made has on prior occasions
made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of a parade or
public assembly previously permitted, or has violated the terms of prior
permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant; or if the applicant or the
person on whose behalf the application was made has on prior occasions damaged
city property and not paid in full for such damage.
   F.   Additional Reasons For Denial; Halting Of Assembly: A permit may be
denied where the clerk-treasurer determines that the parade would unreasonably
disrupt traffic or public services, or where there is clear and convincing
evidence that the applicant, not opponents of the applicant, intends to engage
in violence, and that the time, place, and manner of the event cannot be
adjusted such that the city will be able to control such potential violence
without injury to bystanders or participants. A parade or public assembly may
be halted by the county sheriff if at any time participants fail to conform to
the permit or if an imminent risk of violence arises in the course of the
parade or public assembly. No permit shall be issued if the applicant fails to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of law, including the
requirements of this chapter and any requirement of the state of Idaho, or
Idaho department of transportation, if applicable. (2011 Code)
5-5-5: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION:
The city clerk-treasurer shall act upon the application for a permit within
seven (7) business days after the filing thereof accompanied by the applicant's
submission of complete information. The clerk-treasurer shall make a reasonable
effort to notify the applicant, by facsimile, personal service, or certified
mail, of any notice of denial or conditional approval and the reason(s) for
denial or conditions as soon as practical upon the clerk-treasurer's decision.
Such decision shall be made with a promptness adequate to allow an opportunity
for appeal pursuant to provisions of this chapter. (2011 Code)
5-5-6: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
Upon reasonable grounds, the city clerk-treasurer may authorize the conduct of
the parade or public assembly requiring a permit at a date, time, place or in a
manner different from that named by the applicant and may tender a conditional
permit setting forth proposed modified terms which differ from those set forth
in the application. An applicant desiring to accept a conditional permit shall,
within five (5) days after notice of the action of the clerk-treasurer, file a
written notice of acceptance with the clerk-treasurer. If the applicant fails
to provide written notice of acceptance of the conditional permit within the
time prescribed, the parade or public assembly shall not be held. (2011 Code)
5-5-7: CONTENTS OF PERMIT APPLICATION:
Each permit application shall state at least the following, and the applicant
shall adhere to and be bound by the commitments made in an application
submittal:
   A.   The full name, street address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
facsimile number, if any, of the person or organization sponsoring the parade
or public assembly.
   B.   The name, street address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
facsimile number, if any, of the person in charge of the parade or public
assembly.
   C.   The date when the parade or public assembly is to be conducted.
   D.   The name of the parade or public assembly, if any.
   E.   The time the parade or public assembly will begin to form, and the time
the parade or public assembly will begin movement.
   F.   The place the parade or public assembly will form.
   G.   The route of the parade or public assembly selected.
   H.   The place the parade or public assembly will disband.
   I.   The approximate number of participants, not including spectators, who
will participate in the parade or public assembly and the maximum number who
will be allowed to participate.
   J.   The number of marchers, animals, floats, automobiles, or other vehicles
in the parade or public assembly.
   K.   The prior parade or public assembly history of the applicant within
Bancroft, or the state of Idaho history if no Bancroft history exists,
including the number of permits applied for previously.
   L.   A thoroughly documented plan for controlling disorderly or violent
conduct, if such might reasonably be expected, a plan for maintaining traffic
flow to commercial and other establishments, a plan for sanitary and medical
facilities, and for cleanup.
   M.   Attach the required certificate of insurance as set forth in this
chapter.
   N.   Identify any requested exception from any requirement established by
this chapter premised upon the unique circumstances associated with the parade/
public assembly for which application has been made.
   O.   Any other reasonable information required by the clerk- treasurer to
enable them to understand the impacts of the proposed parade or public assembly
and to allow the clerk- treasurer to perform duties described herein.
   P.   When approval is given by the city for the parade or assembly, the
permittee will be required to obtain written permission from the Idaho
transportation district and/or county highway district as submitted to the
city. (2011 Code)
5-5-8: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
   A.   Compliance Required: A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit
conditions and with all federal, state and local laws.
   B.   Requirements And Rights Of Applicant: The following shall apply to the
parade or public assembly application:
      1.   Insurance:
         a.   Proof of general liability insurance from an insurance company
authorized to do business in Idaho. The city shall be named as an additional
insured. Comprehensive general liability shall be a minimum combined single
limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily or
personal injury, death or property damage or loss as the result of any one
occurrence or accident, regardless of the number of persons injured or the
number of claimants.
         b.   If sponsor operated motor vehicles are involved, proof of
comprehensive automobile liability insurance from an insurance company
authorized to do business in Idaho. This coverage shall be a combined single
limit for bodily injury and property damage of not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily or personal injury, death, or
property damage or loss as the result of any one occurrence or accident,
regardless of the number of persons injured or the number of claimants.
      2.   First Amendment Rights: The terms and conditions of a permit
(including providing insurance) shall not infringe upon rights of petition,
assembly, or free expression protected by the first amendment of the United
States constitution and/or the Idaho constitution. If an applicant asserts in
writing that a term or condition proposed by the clerk-treasurer infringes upon
a constitutional right, the clerk-treasurer shall have the burden of showing
that the proposed term or condition is a reasonable time, place and manner
restriction. (2011 Code)
5-5-9: TIME, PLACE AND MANNER RESTRICTIONS:
The following prohibitions and regulations shall apply to activities requiring
a permit:
   A.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of,
or responsible for the conduct of, a duly permitted activity requiring a permit
to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit.
   B.   Time Limit; Duration: No permit shall be issued for a parade or public
assembly to commence before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. All parades and/or public
assemblies shall terminate prior to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. No parade
requiring a permit shall exceed two (2) hours in length. City street setup and
dispersal, including barricade removal, shall not be included in the activity
time limit.
   C.   Place And Time Of Assemblage: All parade participants shall assemble
for the parade at the time and location designated in the parade permit and
shall disperse from public property after the conclusion of the parade in order
that regular traffic patterns might be restored.
   D.   Peaceful Activities: Parade or assembly organizers shall assure that
participants: 1) are not in possession of firearms or other weapons, unless
specifically approved by the county sheriff; 2) do not intend to engage in
violence or other unlawful conduct; and 3) do not intend to incite others to do
so.
   E.   City Authority To Impose Conditions: The permit may limit or condition
the number of participants, the length of the event, the time and location of
the event, or the manner of the event where necessary: 1) to prevent violence;
2) to avoid serious inconvenience to those needing access to commercial or
public services; 3) to avoid interference with movement of police or fire
vehicles or ambulances; and 4) where such limitations or conditions provide
ample opportunity for exercise of constitutionally protected rights. (2011
Code)
5-5-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the clerk- treasurer's denial of a
permit or imposition of conditions to the city council. The denied applicant
must make any appeal within forty eight (48) hours after receipt of the denial
or conditional approval from the clerk-treasurer by filing a written notice of
appeal with the clerk-treasurer setting out the reasons therefor in writing.
The city council will hear the appeal at a regular or special meeting (48 hour
scheduling) and reach a determination prior to the planned date and time of the
parade/public assembly; and in each instance, no more than seven (7) business
days after the date the notice of appeal is filed with the clerk-treasurer.
(2011 Code)
5-5-11: EMERGENCY CANCELLATION OR TERMINATION:
Notwithstanding issuance of a permit pursuant to provisions of this chapter,
the city official in charge is authorized to revoke a parade/public assembly
permit if it is determined, based upon competent evidence, that the conduct of
the parade or public assembly would bring about violence which would, with
reasonable certainty, result in injury to the public or to public safety
personnel, or which would result in damage to public or private property. Any
such cancellation shall be communicated to the sponsor/applicant as soon as
possible after such determination has been made. (2011 Code)
5-5-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or who, having obtained a permit hereunder, fails to comply with the
conditions set forth in the approved permit is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 6
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
5-6-1: Adoption By Reference
5-6-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The City does hereby adopt and incorporate by reference the provisions of Ord.
299, passed September 14, 2020, pertaining to flood damage prevention, as if
the same were laid out here in full. (Ord. 299, 9-14-2020)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
STATE TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Idaho Vehicle Laws Adopted
6-1-2: Through And Stop Streets
6-1-3: Parking Restrictions
6-1-4: Penalty
6-1-1: IDAHO VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED:
Title 49, the Idaho motor vehicle laws, rules of the road, chapters 5, 6 and 7,
together with all subsequent additions and revisions to said title 49, Idaho
motor vehicle laws, rules of the road, chapters 5, 6 and 7, are hereby adopted
by reference to govern the city.
(Ord. 179, 9-6-1977; amd. 2011 Code)
6-1-2: THROUGH AND STOP STREETS:
Main Street in the city extending from the south side of the state highway
south to the city limits is hereby designated as a through street. A sign with
the word "stop" thereon shall be erected by the city on each side of any street
intersecting said Main Street, now designated as a through street. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter with a vehicle upon said through street
without first stopping, and when entering said street, shall enter the same
with due caution as to traffic already on said through street.
(Ord. 124, 9-16-1947; amd. 2011 Code)
6-1-3: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Main Street, Angle Parking: All cars or vehicles parked along Main
Street in the city shall be parked on the right hand side of the street at an
angle of forty five degrees (45°).
   B.   Twenty Four Hour Limitation: No automobile, truck, tractor, or any
other vehicle or farm machinery may be parked along any street or avenue in the
city for a longer period than twenty four (24) hours at any one time.
(Ord. 124, 9-16-1947)
6-1-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or the Idaho motor vehicle
laws adopted by reference in section
6-1-1 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: Vehicle License Required
6-2-4: Use And Operation Restrictions
6-2-5: Penalty
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
In order to assist users of vehicles commonly described as snowmobiles and all-
terrain vehicles to transport snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles from places
of storage to locations for recreation or other purposes not located upon
public streets, alleyways or other public thoroughfares located within the city
limits, the restrictions, regulations and penalties set forth in this chapter
will be enforced by the law enforcement agencies of the city and the county.
(Ord. 172, 10-18-1972, eff. 10-24-1972)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
PUBLIC STREET: A street, alleyway or other public thoroughfare which is
maintained for winter use.
SIDEWALK: Sidewalks used for public use which are maintained for use in the
wintertime. This term will not include sidewalks not cleaned and maintained for
winter use during the periods of time when snow is on the ground.
(Ord. 172, 10-18-1972, eff. 10-24-1972)
6-2-3: VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall be allowed to operate a snowmobile or other terrain vehicle
along a maintained public street, alley or thoroughfare located within the city
unless he has been issued a valid Idaho state operator's license in accordance
with the Idaho statutes for the purpose of operating a motor vehicle upon a
public highway, and said operator will be required to have his driver's license
in his possession while operating said snowmobile on the public thoroughfare.
(Ord. 172, 10-18-1972, eff. 10-24-1972)
6-2-4: USE AND OPERATION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Speed: No snowmobile or snow machine may be operated upon any city
street or thoroughfare within the city limits at a rate of speed in excess of
twenty (20) miles per hour.
   B.   Stopping At Intersections: Operators of snowmobiles or other terrain
vehicles on public streets in the city shall bring said snowmobile or other
terrain vehicle to a full and complete stop at every intersection where two (2)
or more streets or alleys cross, regardless of the type of traffic control
displayed at the various intersections or in the absence of said traffic
control sign or symbol.
   C.   Operation On Right, Single File: Any operation of a snowmobile or other
terrain vehicle on the public streets or thoroughfares of the city shall be
restricted exclusively to the extreme right hand side of said roadway while
operating said snowmobile or other terrain vehicle as closely to the right hand
side of the street as possible, and the operation of a snow machine directly in
the lane of traffic as utilized by wheeled vehicles is prohibited. It is
further prohibited to operate snowmobiles or other terrain vehicles on public
streets in any manner other than single file along the extreme right hand side
of the road.
   D.   Headlights And Taillights: It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile
or other terrain vehicle on the streets of Bancroft regardless of the time of
day or night or prevailing weather conditions unless the rear illuminary or
taillight and the headlight or lamp are lit.
   E.   Hours Of Operation: It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile or
other terrain vehicle within the city limits between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the public streets, and the use of a snowmobile
or other terrain vehicle shall further be prohibited during any of these hours
when the operation of said snowmobile or other terrain vehicle would cause a
public nuisance.
   F.   Private Property, Permission Required: It shall be unlawful to operate
any snowmobile or other terrain vehicle upon any privately owned real estate in
the city limits without the express and specific consent of the legal occupant
of said property.
   G.   Use On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
snowmobile or other terrain vehicle on any public sidewalk or walkway
maintained for winter use for pedestrian traffic.
   H.   Crossing Street In Most Direct Route: It shall be unlawful for any
snowmobile or other terrain vehicle to cross any public street except when in
the most direct route across the street, this being direct and straight across
the street.
   I.   Obey State Traffic Laws: In addition to the regulations contained
herein, the operators of all snowmobiles will be required to obey all laws of
the Idaho motor vehicle statute.
   J.   Transporting Only One Person: Operators of any snowmobile or other
terrain vehicle shall not carry or otherwise transport more than one person on
said machine while said vehicle is being operated on the public streets of
Bancroft, irrespective of the size or age of the passenger.
   K.   Towing Other Devices: No sled, toboggan, trailer or any other device
shall be towed by a snowmobile except by means of a rigid tow bar connecting
the same to such device.
   L.   Main Street: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any snowmobile,
snow machine, or other terrain vehicle to operate said machine or vehicle for
any purpose on Main Street, except when crossing said street in accordance with
the Idaho state statute at defined intersections.
(Ord. 172, 10-18-1972, eff. 10-24-1972)
6-2-5: PENALTY:
All violators of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 172, 10-18-1972, eff. 10-24-1972; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED, JUNKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Nuisance On Public Or Private Property
6-3-3: Notice And Hearing
6-3-4: Responsibility For Removal
6-3-5: Removal And Impoundment By City
6-3-6: Disposition
6-3-7: Proceeds Of Sale
6-3-8: Redemption
6-3-9: Immunity From Damages
6-3-10: Penalties
6-3-11: Reservation Of Other Remedies
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have meanings ascribed herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense shall include the past, and singular
words shall include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
ABANDON: Any "person" as defined in this section, who deserts or surrenders his
claim or rights to any "motor vehicle" or other vehicle as defined in this
section.
CITY: The city of Bancroft, Caribou County, Idaho.
DIRECTOR OF TRAFFIC: Any city employee or other person designated by the mayor
or city council to serve in this capacity.
JUNKED: Any "motor vehicle" or other vehicle as defined in this section, which
is: A) wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or
discarded; or B) which is not capable of being licensed and which does not have
lawfully affixed thereto both unexpired license plate or plates.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and/or designed to travel
along the ground, on water, or through the air, including, but not limited to:
aircraft, watercraft, automobiles, buses, motor bikes, motor homes,
motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go- carts, snowmobiles, or other
self-propelled conveyances.
OTHER VEHICLES: Any vehicle which is not self-propelled and/or is designed to
travel along the ground, on water, or through the air, including, but not
limited to: camp trailers, mobile homes, boats, boat trailers, campers, farm
equipment, and other not self-propelled conveyances or appurtenances which are
not inhabited or affixed to a foundation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway, including the entire width between the
boundary lines of every road or way publicly maintained for the purpose of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other real property or facility owned
or operated by any government agency.
(Ord. 177, 11-7-1977; amd. Ord. 309, 7-22-2025)
6-3-2: NUISANCE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Public Property:
      1.   No person shall park, store, leave, abandon, junk, or permit the
parking, storing, junking, or abandoning of any motor vehicle or other vehicle
of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the city
for a period of time exceeding a forty eight (48) hour period.
      2.   The presence of an abandoned or junked vehicle, or parts thereof, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance in that it represents a serious hazard to the
public health, safety, convenience, and welfare of the residents of the city.
Its removal by a towing or other appropriate service may be authorized by the
director of traffic, and the responsibility for removal as described in section
6-3-4 of this chapter will apply.
   B.   Private Property:
      1.   No person shall park, store, leave, abandon, junk or permit the
parking, storing, junking, or abandoning of any motor vehicle or other vehicle
of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city
for a period of time exceeding ten (10) days.
      2.   The presence of an abandoned or junked vehicle or parts thereof on
private property for more than ten (10) days may be declared to be a nuisance
by the director of traffic, in that it represents a serious hazard to the
public safety, health, convenience, and welfare of the residents of the city.
Such nuisance may be abated as provided in this chapter. This subsection shall
not apply to any motor vehicle or other vehicle completely enclosed within a
building on private property, or to any motor vehicle or other vehicle held in
connection with a business enterprise, such as a repair shop, which is lawfully
licensed by the city and located in an area where such a business is permitted
by the zoning laws of the city.
   C.   Complaint: Before the City takes steps to abate a nuisance as defined
in this section
6-3-2(B) a written complaint must be filed with the director of traffic, mayor
and/or the city council. (Ord. 177, 11-7-1977; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3-3: NOTICE AND HEARING:
   A.   Notice: Whenever it comes to the attention of the director of traffic
that any nuisance exists, as described in section
6-3-2 of this chapter, within the city, a notice in writing shall be served
upon the registered and/or legal owner of the motor vehicle or other vehicle,
notifying the owner of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its
removal, within forty eight (48) hours.The notice shall further advise that,
upon failure to comply with its terms, the director of traffic or his designee
shall undertake such removal with the costs incurred thereby to be levied
against the registered and/or legal owner of the motor vehicle or other
vehicle. If the registered and/or legal owner cannot be located personally, it
shall constitute sufficient notice if a copy of the same is posted in a
conspicuous place upon the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle and duplicate
copies of the notice are sent by certified mail to the owner of the motor
vehicle and/or other vehicle to the last known address.
   B.   Hearing: Persons to whom removal notices are directed, or their duly
authorized agents, may submit a request for hearing before the city council
within fifteen (15) days of service of a notice, for the purpose of showing
just cause why they should not be required to comply with the terms of this
chapter. Such hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the city council at least ten (10) days after the filing of the request for
hearing, and the persons to whom the notice is directed shall be advised of the
time and place of said hearing at least three (3) days in advance thereof. If a
hearing before the City Council is timely requested, the City will not take
further steps to abate the nuisance until such time as the City Council renders
its decision. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom notices
have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party
deems necessary. (Ord. 177, 11-7-1977; amd. Ord. 309, 7-22-2025)
6-3-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard as specified in section
6-3-3 of this chapter, the registered and/or legal owner of an abandoned and/or
junked motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be responsible for its prompt
removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the registered
and/or legal owner shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
(Ord. 177, 11-7-1977)
6-3-5: REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT BY CITY:
If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the
compliance period, or if a hearing has been conducted and the compliance period
has expired following affirmance of the violation by the city council, the
director of traffic or his designee is authorized to take possession of the
motor vehicle and/or other vehicle in question and remove it from the premises
where it is located. Within forty eight (48) hours after the removal of such
motor vehicle and/or other vehicle, the director of traffic or his designee
shall give notice to the registered and/or legal owner that the motor vehicle
and/or other vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this
chapter. The notice shall specify the location where the motor vehicle and/or
other vehicle is stored and the costs incurred by the city for its removal and
storage.
(Ord. 177, 11-7-1977)
6-3-6: DISPOSITION:
   A.   If thirty (30) days have elapsed after impounding a motor vehicle and/
or other vehicle, and giving notice as authorized in this chapter, during which
the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle has not been claimed and the city's cost
paid, the city shall use reasonable efforts to establish the fair market value
of the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle. The City may use online appraisal
websites to obtain the market value.
   B.   If the vehicle value is seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or less,
the director of traffic shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing
the vehicle, including the numbers of license plates, if any, and stating the
location and approximate value of the vehicle. The director of traffic may then
summarily dispose of the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle, and execute an
appropriate certificate of sale or destruction. One copy of such certificate
shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer and another copy shall be
forwarded to the Idaho transportation department, division of motor vehicles.
   C.   If the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle is appraised in excess of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), the director of traffic shall give
notice of public sale not less than ten (10) days before the date of the
proposed sale. Such notice of sale shall include: 1) a statement that the sale
is of impounded property in the possession of the city; 2) a description of the
motor vehicle and/or other vehicle; 3) a statement of the terms of sale; 4) a
recitation of the date, time, and place of sale. The motor vehicle and/or other
vehicle shall be sold to the highest bidder. At the time of payment of the
purchase price, the director of traffic shall execute an appropriate
certificate of sale, the original to be given to the purchaser, one copy to be
filed with the city clerk-treasurer and another copy to be forwarded to the
Idaho transportation department division of motor vehicles. (Ord. 177, 11-7-
1977; amd. Ord. 309, 7-22-2025)
6-3-7: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to
be disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or
disposition after the deduction of expenses incurred shall be deposited in the
municipal treasury.
(Ord. 177, 11-7-1977)
6-3-8: REDEMPTION:
The owner of, or person asserting a lien or secured interest in, any motor
vehicle and/or other vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter may
redeem such motor vehicle and/or other vehicle at any time after its removal
but prior to its sale or destruction upon proof of ownership, lien, or secured
interest and payment to the city clerk-treasurer for any expenses incurred for
removal, storage, and prior sale expenses. Expenses incurred reflecting the
city's actual costs shall be posted in the office of the clerk-treasurer and
shall be made available for public inspection.
(Ord. 177, 11-7-1977)
6-3-9: IMMUNITY FROM DAMAGES:
Any member of the county sheriff's department, city employee, towing service
owner, operator, or employee shall not be held liable for damages in any action
brought by the registered and/or legal owner, former registered owner, or his
legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of
a motor vehicle and/or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or
disposed of as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 177, 11-7-1977; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3-10: PENALTIES:
   A.   Civil Action; Lien: Upon failure of compliance with this chapter by the
registered and/or legal owner of the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle removed
by the city, the city may file a civil action against the registered and/or
legal owner to recover the unpaid expenses incurred by such removal, including
litigation costs and reasonable attorney fees. In addition, as part or
separately from the civil action, the city may cause a lien or special
assessment to be placed directly upon the property of the registered and/or
legal owner of the motor vehicle and/or other vehicle, for the amount of such
expenses.
   B.   Criminal Action
      1.   First Offense: Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon a first offense, be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to
a fine of three hundred dollars ($300). Each day that the nuisance is allowed
to continue after notice has been given and the period for compliance has
expired shall constitute a separate offense. A separate offense shall exist for
each individual motor vehicle or other vehicle that is deemed to be nuisance
under this chapter.
      2.   Second and Subsequent Offenses: Any second or subsequent violation
of this chapter by the same person, involving the same or a substantially
similar nuisance condition within a twelve (12) month period, shall constitute
a misdemeanor offense. A person convicted of a misdemeanor under this section
shall be punishable by:
         a.   A fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000);
         b.   Imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six
(6) months; or
         c.   Both such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Continuing Violations: Each and every day during which a violation
continues after the issuance of a citation, notice of violation, or other legal
notice, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 177, 11-7-1977;
amd. Ord. 309, 7-22-2025)
6-3-11: RESERVATION OF OTHER REMEDIES:
The City shall not be limited to a single remedy for enforcing nuisance,
junked, or abandoned vehicle violations and all other lawful remedies are
preserved and reserved for use by the City, including issuance of an infraction
or misdemeanor, assigning unpaid violation fees to a collection agency for
collection, filing a civil complaint for collection of unpaid violation fees,
and filing a civil complaint. (Ord. 309, 7-22-2025)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Reserved
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water Shutoff Authorized; Timing
8-1-2: Rates And Charges; Contestation Procedure
8-1-1: WATER SHUTOFF AUTHORIZED; TIMING:
The city may at any time, without notice to the water user, shut off the water
from any main or from any part or all of the water system for the purpose of
making repairs or extensions, or for other purposes, and it shall not be liable
for any interference with work or operation of business or other damage that
may result from shutting off of water for the purpose of making repairs or for
the purpose of laying or relaying mains, hydrants, or other connections.
(Ord. 248, 5-7-2001)
8-1-2: RATES AND CHARGES; CONTESTATION PROCEDURE 1 :
   A.   Discontinuance For Nonpayment: All rates and charges for utility
service shall be due by the recipient thereof, or the owner of the property, to
which the same is supplied within ten (10) days after the first day of each
month, and if not paid within twenty (20) days after the first day of each
month, utility (water and garbage) services to the premises shall be
discontinued.
   B.   Enforcement Official: The city council shall cause to be appointed a
person to fill the position of a city designee and prescribe the duties
thereof.
   C.   Complaint; Right To Request Hearing: Any person who shall contest any
charge as being excessive, or complain of being charged for services not
rendered, or seek to protest a proposed termination of utility services as
being unjustified, shall have the right to request, in writing, an informal
hearing before the city designee any time within fifteen (15) days after the
first day of the month when the billing becomes due. The written request shall
be rendered to the city clerk- treasurer who in turn will forward a copy to the
city designee, and upon the receipt of the request for hearing, immediately
schedule an informal hearing to be held at the city hall. The complainant shall
be given the opportunity to present evidence in support of his position to the
city designee. The city designee shall take evidence from the city clerk-
treasurer as to the reasonableness, fairness, and validity of the charges and
shall render his decision within twenty four (24) hours after closing the
hearing. The city designee shall notify the complainant, in writing, of the
decision.
   D.   Appeal Decision: If the complainant feels aggrieved by the decision of
the city designee, he may appeal that decision to the city council. Such an
appeal can be filed, in writing, with the city clerk-treasurer within fifteen
(15) days after the decision is rendered by the city designee. After an appeal
has been filed, the city council shall notify the complainant of the time and
place that it shall consider the appeal. The complainant shall have the right
to be present at the appeal. The council shall review the decision of the city
designee and give full consideration to the evidence presented by the
complainant. After discussion, the council shall render its decision. The
council shall instruct the clerk-treasurer to notify the complainant, in
writing, of its decision and the amount that is due, if any.
   E.   Decision Adverse To Complainant: If the decision rendered by the city
designee, or by the city council, if an appeal has been taken to that body, is
adverse to the complainant, he shall pay the charges owing within five (5) days
after the decision has been rendered or city utility services to his premises
shall be terminated. No utility services shall be terminated during the course
of the hearing or appeal procedure described in subsections A through D of this
section. (Ord. 248, 5-7-2001)
   F.   Discontinued Services; Restart Fee: Once utility services are
discontinued, and before services shall be resumed, the person desiring
resumption of these services shall pay a restart fee as prescribed by the city
council, together with all arrearages due and owing the city.
(Ord. 248, 5-7-2001; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 8-2-22 of this title.
CHAPTER 2
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Department Established
8-2-2: Application For Connection And Use
8-2-3: Rules And Regulations
8-2-4: City Not Responsible For Damage
8-2-5: Emergency Shutoff Of Water
8-2-6: Access For Inspection
8-2-7: Service Pipes And Fixtures
8-2-8: Restrictions Of Water Use
8-2-9: Unlawfully Accessing City Water
8-2-10: Leaky Faucets
8-2-11: Tapping Or Contamination Unlawful
8-2-12: Failure Of Water Supply
8-2-13: Meters
8-2-14: Sprinkling
8-2-15: Waste Of Water
8-2-16: Tampering Or Obstructing
8-2-17: Extent Of Service
8-2-18: Water Or Sewer Connections Outside City
8-2-19: Extension Of Water Mains
8-2-20: Sewer Connection Permit And Specifications
8-2-21: Hookup Fee Required
8-2-22: Billing; Rates, Charges And Deposit
8-2-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a sewer and water department which shall consist of
such personnel as may be provided by the mayor and city council.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-2: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION AND USE:
Application for the use of water and sewer services must be made at the office
of the city clerk-treasurer. Every such application must be made by the owner
or tenant of the property to be benefited, and the applicant must agree to
conform to the rules and regulations established from time to time as condition
for water and sewer service.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Council Authority: The mayor and city council may make or prescribe
such rules and regulations as they shall deem advisable, such rules to be
enforced after approval by the mayor and council by resolution.
   B.   Scope: Said rules and regulations may cover water bill adjustments,
charges for water service for periods of less than one month, disconnection and
reconnecting of water service and charges for unmetered water service.
   C.   Adoption Of Regulations For Public Drinking Water: The current edition
of the Idaho regulations for public drinking water systems (IDAPA section
58.01.08 et seq.) as promulgated by the Idaho department of environmental
quality as promulgated by the Idaho department of health and welfare, and as
now or hereafter amended, is adopted as law by the city together with all
subsequent amendments. The most current version of these regulations shall
prevail.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-4: CITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR DAMAGE:
The water may at any time be shut off from the mains without notice for the
purpose of making repairs, extension or other necessary purposes. Persons
having boilers supplied by direct pressure from the mains are cautioned against
danger of explosion or collapse, and the city shall not be responsible for the
safety of boilers on the premises of any water consumer.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-5: EMERGENCY SHUTOFF OF WATER:
The mayor, or any officer appointed by him, is hereby authorized to order the
use of water curtailed, at his discretion, during any emergency occurring in
the city.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-6: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
Officers and employees of the city sewer and water department shall have free
access at proper hours of the day to all parts of buildings to which water may
be delivered from the city mains, for the purpose of inspecting the condition
of the pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the water is used. Should
access under these terms and for these reasons be denied by the tenant or
owner, water service may be discontinued by the city sewer and water
department.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
8-2-7: SERVICE PIPES AND FIXTURES:
All service pipes and fixtures on private property are the responsibility of
the owner and shall be kept in good repair and protected from freezing at the
property owner's expense. The property owner shall be responsible for all
damages resulting from leaks or breaks in service pipes and fixtures. Water
will not be furnished to a water service where there is a leak in the service
piping or in a fixture; and when a leak is discovered, the water service may be
discontinued immediately. If a water service has been discontinued and there is
a leak, it shall not be turned on until all leaks have been repaired.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-8: RESTRICTIONS OF WATER USE:
No person supplied with water from the city mains will be entitled to use water
for any other purpose than specified in his application, nor shall a person
supply water to other families, nor allow them to take water off his premises.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-9: UNLAWFULLY ACCESSING CITY WATER:
No water service connection or cross connection from the public water supply to
any premises shall be installed or continued in use unless the water supply is
protected with a backflow device as required by the Idaho regulations for
public drinking water, latest edition, specifically; but, without limitation,
IDAPA section 58.01.08.543 (2010) or any subsequent amendments pertaining to
cross connections shall be followed 1 . Should the owner or occupant of the
premises turn on the water, or suffer or cause water to be turned on, after it
has been shut off at the curb cock, it will be turned off at the main, and a
charge as set by the city council must be paid before the same shall be turned
on again.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also article A of this chapter.
8-2-10: LEAKY FAUCETS:
Water will not be furnished where there are defective or leaking faucets,
closets or other fixtures, and when such may be discovered, the supply will be
withdrawn until the proper repairs are made by the property owner.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-11: TAPPING OR CONTAMINATION UNLAWFUL:
   A.   Supervision; Inspection: All tapping of mains must be done by the
superintendent of waterworks, or under his direct supervision. All connections
to the water system and all service lines will be inspected prior to being
buried.
   B.   Prohibitions: No water service shall be provided through any lines or
connections buried prior to inspection. No person shall knowingly inject or
otherwise place hazardous or harmful substances into the water system.
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the maximum
fine for a misdemeanor allowable under Idaho law.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-12: FAILURE OF WATER SUPPLY:
The city shall not be liable under any circumstances for a deficiency or a
failure in the supply of water, whether by the shutting off of the water to
make repairs or connections, or for any cause whatsoever.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-13: METERS:
   A.   Property Of City: All meters shall be and remain the property of the
city.
   B.   Reading Meters: Except when weather conditions or other circumstances
make reading of the meters impractical, the meters will be read monthly.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-14: SPRINKLING:
   A.   Authority To Suspend; Notice: The city reserves the right, in case of
shortage of water or for any other cause, to make an order forbidding or
suspending the use of water for sprinkling, and the mayor and council may, in
their discretion at any time, make such order by giving notice in one issue of
a legal newspaper of the city or a newspaper of general circulation within the
city, or by printed notices delivered in person by someone designated by the
mayor and council, to the applicants for the use of said water. Any person
violating such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
fine, and the water shall be turned off and the same shall not be turned on
again until such charge is paid in full. (Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010; amd. 2011
Code)
   B.   Unlawful Use Of Water:
      1.   No person shall use any water for sprinkling during the progress of
any fire in the city, and sprinkling shall immediately be stopped when an alarm
of fire is sounded in any part of the city, and shall not be begun until the
fire has been extinguished.
      2.   For any violation of the provisions of this subsection, said person
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-15: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit water to run or be
wasted. All outlets must be kept closed except during the time which water is
being drawn for necessary use.
   B.   Letting the water run to prevent freezing in cold weather or to keep
water cool in warm weather is prohibited.
   C.   The owner of any premises shall keep his faucets, closets and other
fixtures and his pipes to curb line in good repair and free from leaks.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-16: TAMPERING OR OBSTRUCTING:
   A.   No person except a firefighter in the performance of his duty shall
open or in any way tamper with any fire hydrant connected with the water system
unless permission first be obtained from the superintendent.
   B.   No person shall place upon or about any water gate connected with the
water system any material substance whatsoever which will prevent access at all
times to such hydrant or gate, and no vehicle shall be allowed to stand within
eight feet (8') of such hydrant.
   C.   The use of a private hose at the time of or during an alarm of fire is
strictly prohibited unless for protection of property.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-17: EXTENT OF SERVICE:
The service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or
premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock placed within or near the
curb. Where water is already supplied through one service to several houses or
families, the mayor and council may, at their discretion, either decline to
furnish water until separate services are provided or continue the supply on
condition that one person shall pay for all on the same service.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-18: WATER OR SEWER CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Water: There shall be no water lines outside the city limits connected
to the city water lines except by special permit granted by the city council.
   B.   Sewer: There shall be no sewer lines outside the city limits connected
to the city sewer lines except by special permission of the council.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-19: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS:
   A.   Extending Mains To City Limits: The city shall extend its waterworks
and sewer mains no farther than the city limits, as the said city limits shall
or may be extended from time to time.
   B.   Manner Of Connecting Water Mains:
      1.   For each and every service connection to the city waterworks system,
the city will extend its water mains in order that such service connections may
be made in the following manner: Each person, corporation, partnership, etc.,
desiring service connection may lay all necessary water mains at their own
expense under the approval of the mayor and council from the former city
limits, which existed just prior to the time the territory in which the service
connection desired is located was brought into the corporate limits, to the
point where service connection is to be made, and the city shall extend its
nearest water main to such former city limits at city expense.
      2.   All extensions of water mains made in the territory in which the
service connection is desired to be made shall be and become the property of
the city as soon as such extensions are connected to the waterworks system of
the city.
      3.   The person applying for such service connection must furnish all
necessary pipe, and must lay such pipe in each place or places as directed by
the mayor and council, and the size of all such pipe shall be sufficient to
furnish adequate fire protection for the area to be serviced and as directed by
the mayor and council.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-20: SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required; Conditions: No person shall make any connection with
any public sewer until a permit has been obtained from the city clerk-treasurer
and signed by the mayor. The permit shall indemnify and hold harmless the city
from all suits, accidents and damages consequent thereto, or by reason of any
opening in the street, alley or highway made by such person or by any person
employed by a licensed person or for any other purpose whatever, and that the
permittee will replace and restore the street, alley or highway to as good a
state and condition as was at the time of commencement of said work, and that
the permittee shall conform in all respects to the rules and regulations of the
city relating to streets, alleys and highways.
   B.   Construction And Connection Specifications: The same permit obtained
for sewer connection will also require that the person making connection will
conform with materials specifications adopted by the council. Specifications
may be changed from time to time at the discretion of the council. All sanitary
sewer interceptors, mains, or laterals shall conform in all respects to these
specifications.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-21: HOOKUP FEE REQUIRED:
In order for the approval of a permit or application for connection to the city
water and sewer systems, such permit or application must be accompanied by a
hookup fee. The amount of hookup fees shall be established by resolution duly
adopted by the council. These fees may be adjusted from time to time in the
same manner and procedure as the amount of the fee is established. Water hookup
fees and sewer hookup fees will be treated as two (2) separate charges.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
8-2-22: BILLING; RATES, CHARGES AND DEPOSIT 1 :
   A.   Sewer And Water Service Billing:
      1.   All bills for sewer and water charges shall be due monthly at the
established rates. When water is supplied by the city, the portion of the bill
for domestic water service cannot be paid separately from the portion for sewer
service.
      2.   In the event where domestic water is supplied, and any part thereof
is not paid in full within fifteen (15) days after date when due, water service
shall be discontinued immediately and shut off. Before the domestic water shall
be turned on again, all delinquent domestic water and sewer charges shall be
paid up to the end of the term as assessed.
      3.   In the event water is turned off for the nonpayment of domestic
water and sewer charges as herein provided, there shall be assessed in addition
to all delinquent amounts a charge, the amount to be established by resolution
duly adopted by the council. This charge is assessed for expense for shutting
off the service, which shall be restored again.
      4.   In the event a deposit has been made for securing the payment for
domestic water used, this deposit will be forfeited to the amount due the city
for the domestic water and sewer services rendered.
   B.   Charges Payable To Clerk-Treasurer: All charges will be due and payable
at the office of the clerk-treasurer on the first day of each month, and when
any charges or rates are not paid within fifteen (15) days from the due date,
water shall be shut off from the premises. Water shall not be turned on again
until all requirements of subsection A of this section are met.
   C.   Sewer And Water Service Charge Rates:
      1.   There is hereby levied and imposed on all users of the city sewer
and water system for the use, maintenance, operation, extension and
reconstruction of the city sewer and water system a monthly charge.
      2.   The city council will review these rates at least every two (2)
years and adjust them if necessary.
      3.   The city will assure that funds will be made available by
appropriate means to adequately maintain the system, including provision of
power, chemicals, testing, debt service and equipment replacement.
      4.   The city will notify water users each year about distribution of
charges and costs.
   D.   Special Rates:
      1.   The monthly water and sewer charges for commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments may be adjusted to the quality of the particular
sewage, also quantity, and said adjustments may be accomplished by a resolution
duly adopted by the council.
      2.   For all structures not coming within any of the above
classifications, including such structures to which water is supplied from
sources other than the municipally owned water system, sewer and water charges
shall be fixed in such amounts as may be recommended and approved by the city
council.
   E.   Utility Fund Deposit Required:
      1.   From each tenant or lessee of property, the clerk-treasurer shall,
before city water, sewer, refuse collections and other such monthly services
are furnished, collect and receive a utility account deposit equal to two (2)
months' charges for all utility services rendered to the premises occupied or
owned by that individual.
      2.   All such deposits shall be placed in the sewer and water department
checking account.
      3.   Upon termination of service for any cause, should there be a balance
due and returnable to the patron, the same shall be refunded by check made to
the patron personally.
      4.   The clerk-treasurer will be required to keep a record of deposits
held and deposits returned, and also the disposition of each deposit. This
record shall be kept in conjunction with sewer and water department records
which show status of each water service patron.
(Amd. Ord. 175, 7-12-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 8-1-2 of this title.
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Definitions
8-2A-2: Installation Permit Application
8-2A-3: Cross Connection Restrictions
8-2A-4: Use Of Backflow Prevention Devices
8-2A-5: Cross Connection Inspection
8-2A-6: Additional Remedies
8-2A-7: Violation; Penalty
8-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BACKFLOW: The flow, other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign
liquids, gases, or substances into the distribution system of a public water
supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent
back siphonage.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any
substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer,
drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device
which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, or other waste or
liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of introducing
contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow.
HEALTH OFFICER: Authorized agent.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: Any system or water supply intended or used for human
consumption or other domestic uses, including source, treatment, storage,
transmission and distribution facilities, where water is furnished to any
collection or number of individuals, or is made available to the public for
human consumption or domestic use.
PURVEYOR: The city of Bancroft or its authorized agent.
SUPERVISOR: The public works supervisor of the city of Bancroft or his
authorized agent.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980)
8-2A-2: INSTALLATION PERMIT APPLICATION:
If cross connection control devices are found to be necessary, the owner of the
property served must apply to the purveyor for a specific installation permit.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980)
8-2A-3: CROSS CONNECTION RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Protection Of Water Supply: No water service connection to any premises
shall be installed or continued in use by the purveyor unless the water supply
is protected by backflow prevention devices as may be required by this article.
The installation or maintenance of a cross connection which will endanger the
water quality of the potable water supply of the city shall be unlawful and is
prohibited. Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The
control or elimination of cross connections shall be in accordance with this
article, together with the latest edition of the appropriate manual of standard
practices pertaining to the cross connection control approved by the state of
Idaho.
   B.   City Requirements: The supervisor shall have the authority to establish
requirements more stringent than state regulations if he deems that the
conditions so dictate. The purveyor shall adopt rules and regulations as
necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980)
8-2A-4: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Installation: Backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the
ties on the premises or the materials used in connection with service
connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of the purveyor, the
nature and extent of the activities, or the materials stored on the premises,
would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health and/or be deleterious
to the quality of the water should a cross connection occur; even though such
cross connection does not exist at the time the backflow prevention devices
shall be installed under circumstances including, but not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply.
      2.   Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable,
or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain
whether or not cross connection exists.
      3.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist.
      4.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
      5.   Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to
permit entry into the public water supply, or where a cross connection could
reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process
waters and cooling waters.
      6.   Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled
in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard
might result.
      7.   The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above
categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the public
water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these
facilities:
         a.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics.
         b.   Laboratories.
         c.   Metal plating industries.
         d.   Sewage treatment plants.
         e.   Food or beverage processing plants.
         f.   Chemical plants using a water process.
         g.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         h.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
         i.   Others specified by the state of Idaho.
      8.   Other premises, as specified by the supervisor, where backflow
prevention devices are required to protect the public water supply.
   B.   Type Of Device; Degree Of Hazard:
      1.   The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of
hazard which exists.
      2.   An air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply may be
contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other
contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.
      3.   In case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous
to health, a double check valve assembly, air gap separation, or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed.
   C.   Installation At Meter: Backflow prevention devices required by this
article shall be installed at the meter, at the property line of the premises
where meters are not used, or at a location designated by the purveyor. The
device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and
testing, and furthermore, where no part of the device will be submerged.
   D.   Supervision: Backflow prevention devices required by this article shall
be installed under the supervision of and with the approval of the purveyor.
   E.   Approved Model: Any protective device required by this article shall be
a model approved by the supervisor. A double check valve assembly or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device will be approved if it has
successfully passed performance tests of the state of Idaho or other testing
laboratories satisfactory to the state of Idaho and the supervisor. These
devices shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.
   F.   Inspection And Testing: Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant
to this article, except atmospheric vacuum breakers, shall be inspected and
tested annually, or more often if necessary. Inspections, tests and maintenance
shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever the devices are found to be
defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the customer's
expense. Inspections, tests, repairs and records thereof shall be accomplished
under the purveyor's supervision by certified testers.
   G.   Underground Sprinkling Devices: No underground sprinkling device will
be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from
which the water for irrigation is taken from the public water supply.
   H.   Failure To Cooperate; Termination Of Service: Failure of the customer
to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of
backflow prevention devices required by this article shall be grounds for
terminating water service to the premises, or, in the alternative, the
installation of an air gap separation at the customer's expense.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980)
8-2A-5: CROSS CONNECTION INSPECTION:
   A.   Inspection And Approval: No water shall be delivered to any structure
hereafter built within the city or within areas served by city water until the
same shall have been inspected by the purveyor for possible cross connections
and been approved as being free from same.
   B.   Industrial Construction: Any construction for industrial or other
purpose which is classified as hazardous facilities pursuant to subsection
8-2A-4A7 of this article, where it is reasonable to anticipate intermittent
cross connections, or as determined by the supervisor, shall be protected by
the installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the point of
service from the public water supply or any other location designated by the
purveyor.
   C.   Periodic Inspections: Inspections shall be made periodically of all
buildings, structures, or improvements of any nature now receiving water
through the city system, for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross
connections exist. Such inspections shall be made by the purveyor.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980)
8-2A-6: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected within the time
limit set by the supervisor, or, in the event the purveyor is refused access to
any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections
exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is
corrected to the purveyor's satisfaction. In addition, the purveyor may effect
the necessary repairs or modifications at the expense of the property owner and
refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been
paid.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980)
8-2A-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or
resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article or the rules
and regulations as adopted by the purveyor shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall, for each offense, be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 185, 8-4-1980; amd. 2011 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: System Operation
8-3-3: Garbage Collection; Fees
8-3-4: Collection Billing; Delinquency
8-3-5: Collection Refusal Prohibited
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given in this section, as follows:
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
CITY: The city of Bancroft, Idaho.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
REFUSE: Any putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage or rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste (including ashes), consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
(Ord. 201, 4-9-1984)
8-3-2: SYSTEM OPERATION:
The sanitary service system of the city shall, by such means as the city
council deems appropriate, collect and dispose of all garbage, rubbish, refuse,
paper, glass, tin cans, crockery, ashes and other debris, and shall operate
this service; and the rates and charges and regulations provided by this
chapter shall be and remain applicable thereto until duly amended as provided
by law.
(Ord. 201, 4-9-1984)
8-3-3: GARBAGE COLLECTION; FEES:
   A.   Collection; Payment Of Fees: All garbage in the city shall be collected
by the city or its duly authorized agent or contractor as often as is necessary
to maintain and preserve sanitation of the community. Temporary failure to make
such collections due to circumstances beyond the control of the city shall not
relieve the occupant or owner of the premises from the payment of sanitary
service fees provided in this chapter.
   B.   Collection Fees: Fees for sanitary service shall be as may be set from
time to time by the city council.
(Ord. 201, 4-9-1984; amd. 2011 Code)
8-3-4: COLLECTION BILLING; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Billing With Utility Charges: The city is authorized to add the
sanitary service charges provided in this chapter to the charges for utility
service and shall submit the same as a separate item in a statement in
connection with sewer and water service bills. (Ord. 201, 4-9-1984; amd. 2011
Code)
   B.   Delinquency
      1.   The city is authorized to discontinue service to any premises if the
entire utility bill is not paid, including the charge provided in this chapter
for sanitary service. Said charges shall become delinquent as provided for
utility charges and shall be subject to the same penalties.
      2.   If the service charges established in this chapter are not paid when
due, such sums as may be delinquent may be recovered by the city in an action
at law against the owner or occupant, or both. Penalties provided under this
section shall be in addition to those provided in subsection B1 of this
section.
(Ord. 201, 4-9-1984)
8-3-5: COLLECTION REFUSAL PROHIBITED:
No person shall be permitted to refuse to accept the sanitary service provided
in this chapter, and the failure of any person to receive such service shall
not exempt such person from the payment of charges provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 201, 4-9-1984)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: International Codes Adopted
9-1-2: Other Codes Adopted
9-1-3: Building Code Board Of Appeals
9-1-4: Copies Of Codes On File
9-1-5: Penalty
9-1-1: INTERNATIONAL CODES ADOPTED 1 :
   A.   Codes Adopted: The following uniform or model codes, standards,
appendices, pamphlets and supplements are hereby adopted by the city as though
fully set forth herein for the purpose of regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion,
demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of
buildings, structures and signs in the city:
      1.   International building code, including all rules promulgated by the
Idaho building code board to provide equivalency with the provisions of the
Americans with disabilities act accessibility guidelines and the federal fair
housing act accessibility guidelines.
      2.   International residential code, parts I through IV and IX.
      3.   International energy conservation code.
   B.   Enforcement: The city shall enforce its building codes, including the
aforementioned adopted codes in subsection A of this section, under a building
code enforcement program in compliance with the provisions of Idaho Code
section 39-4116, and may further contract with a public or private entity to
administer such building code enforcement program.
(Ord. 256, 4-4-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 39-4116.
9-1-2: OTHER CODES ADOPTED:
   A.   Plumbing Code: There is adopted for the purpose of providing certain
minimum standards and requirements for the use, installation and design of
plumbing and plumbing systems in the city the national plumbing code of the
American Standards Association and as the national plumbing code shall be
amended, revised, compiled and published from time to time, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though
set forth at length herein.
   B.   Electrical Code: There is adopted for purpose of providing certain
minimum standards and requirements for the use, installation and design of all
installations in the city of wires and equipment to convey electrical current
and installations of apparatus to be operated by such current, the national
electrical code as approved by the American Standards Association and as the
national electrical code shall be amended, revised, compiled and published from
time to time, and the same is adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the
city as fully as though set forth at length herein.
   C.   Life Safety Code: There is adopted for the purpose of regulating and
controlling life safety, the life safety code, prepared by National Fire
Protection Association, published by the National Fire Protection Agency,
current edition thereof, and as the same may hereafter be revised or amended,
and the same is adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully
as though set forth at length herein.
(Ord. 193, 10-11-1982)
9-1-3: BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS:
Any provision of the international building code notwithstanding, in the event
the mayor and city council should not choose to appoint a board of appeals,
then and in that event, the city council shall act as a board of appeals in all
matters pertaining to said code.
(Ord. 193, 10-11-1982; amd. 2011 Code)
9-1-4: COPIES OF CODES ON FILE:
One copy of each of the codes adopted in sections
9-1-1 and
9-1-2 of this chapter, together with all amendments thereto, duly certified by
the city clerk-treasurer, shall be kept on file in his office for use and
examination by the public.
(Ord. 193, 10-11-1982; amd. 2011 Code)
9-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or the codes
adopted in sections
9-1-1 and
9-1-2 of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2011 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING PERMIT PROCEDURE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Short Title
9-2-2: Interpretation
9-2-3: Permit Procedure; Fee
9-2-4: Review Items
9-2-5: Violation; Penalty
9-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the BUILDING PERMIT ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 176, 1975)
9-2-2: INTERPRETATION:
The provision of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate their
purposes.
(Ord. 176, 1975)
9-2-3: PERMIT PROCEDURE; FEE:
   A.   Permit Required: No building or other structure shall be erected,
moved, demolished, added to or structurally altered, including modification of
electrical, plumbing, or heating systems, moving walls, and enlarging
footprints, nor shall any building, structure or land be established or changed
in use within the jurisdiction of the city without having first obtained a
separate building permit for each structure from the Mayor or his authorized
representative.
   B.   Application Forms: Building permit applications may be obtained from
the Clerk-Treasurer.
   C.   Information Required: The completed building permit application form
shall be returned to the Mayor or his authorized representative for review.
Accompanying the application shall be a sketch of the location of the proposed
building or structure and a narrative explanation of the activity proposed.
   D.   Permit Approval Or Denial: Approval or denial of a building permit
shall be made by a majority vote of the City Council at a regularly scheduled
meeting of that Council. The action taken shall be entered into the minutes of
the meeting and thereby constitutes official notification of approval or denial
without the necessity of additional forms or letters.
   E.   Fee:
      1.   With each building permit application, a fee as set by resolution of
the City Council will be paid at the time of submittance for review. Should a
building project be commenced without first obtaining the necessary building
permit, an additional fee as set by the City Council will be imposed.
      2.   Said application fee is nonrefundable even in the event of denial of
a building permit.
(Ord. 176, 1975; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 306, 12-11-2023)
9-2-4: REVIEW ITEMS:
   A.   Flooding:
      1.   The mayor or his authorized representative shall review all building
permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
      2.   If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood
hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvements (including
prefabricated and mobile homes) must be designed (or modified) and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure, use
construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage
and use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
      3.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage, and adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   B.   Compliance With Ordinances And Resolutions: All building permit
applications shall be reviewed for verification of compliance with ordinances
and resolution of the city in effect at the time of permit application.
(Ord. 176, 1975)
9-2-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or organization violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist may
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 176, 1975; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Compliance Required: The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not
exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 176, 1975)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Intent And Purpose
10-1-3: Declaration
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as and shall be entitled the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF BANCROFT, IDAHO, and may be so cited and pleaded.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the city council to promote the health, safety,
morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the city by guiding development within the city in
accordance with a comprehensive plan, that has been designed:
   A.   To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development in the area.
   B.   To promote safety from fire, traffic hazards, and other dangers.
   C.   To promote sanitation and health of the inhabitants.
   D.   To discourage undue scattering of population and unnecessary
expenditures of the monies for excessive street, water and sewer lines.
   E.   To stabilize and improve property values.
   F.   To protect the residents from objectionable noise, odor, dust, fumes,
and other deleterious substances or conditions.
   G.   To promote a more attractive and wholesome environment. It is also the
intent and purpose of the city council that the regulations and restrictions as
set forth in this title shall be interpreted and construed as to further the
purpose of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-1-3: DECLARATION:
In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof, and regulations and
restrictions applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration
was given, among other things, to the suitability of the land for particular
uses, and to the character of the zone, with a view to conserving the value of
the buildings, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city and its impact area.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, certain terms are defined as set forth. All
words in the present tense include the future tense; the plural includes the
singular, and all words in the singular include the plural, unless the natural
construction of the sentence indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is
mandatory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building which is subordinate to, and incidental to the
principal building on the same lot, but does not include any building
containing a "dwelling unit" as hereinafter defined.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
premises.
AGRICULTURE: The growing of soil crops in the customary manner in the open.
"Agriculture" shall not include livestock raising activities, nor shall it
include retailing of products on the premises.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water which is used or intended for use by
aircraft and including the necessary appurtenant structures or facilities
located thereon.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care
or treatment of cats, dogs, or other animals.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has complete
kitchen and sanitary facilities permanently installed.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles,
trailers, mobile homes or trucks in operating condition are displayed in the
open for sale or trade, and where no repair or service work is done.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Premises used primarily for the retail sale and
delivery to the vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and of lubricating oils, tires
and incidental vehicular accessories, and providing vehicular lubrication and
related services, including minor motor vehicle repairs.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed
buildings, on which two (2) or more motor vehicles not in operating condition
are standing more than thirty (30) days, or on which used motor vehicles, or
parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
BLOCK: The space along one side of a street between the two (2) nearest
intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and a right of way,
waterway or other similar barrier, whichever is lesser.
BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE: A building containing not more than one kitchen
where, for compensation, meals are provided pursuant to previous arrangements
on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis as distinguished from a motel, cafe, or
rooming house.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings, which
is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING, GOVERNMENT: A building owned or used by the federal, state, county or
city government, or any political subdivision, agency or instrumentality
thereof.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building which does not conform to the
requirements of this title.
BUSINESS OR COMMERCE: The purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction
involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity
for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings,
offices, recreation or amusement enterprises or the maintenance and use of
offices for professions and trades rendering services.
CARPORT: A structure not completely enclosed by walls for the shelter of
automobiles.
CITY: The city of Bancroft, Idaho.
CITY CLERK-TREASURER: The clerk-treasurer of the city.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the city. The planning
commission is declared to also be the zoning commission of the city 1 .
COMPREHENSIVE GENERAL PLAN: The comprehensive general plan for the city
officially adopted by the council as such.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use or occupancy of a structure, or use of land, permitted
only upon issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to the limitations
and conditions specified therein.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, other than an automobile service
station, which is designed to accommodate the motor vehicles of patrons in such
manner as to permit the occupants of such vehicles, while remaining therein, to
make purchases or to receive services.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, containing one or more dwelling
units. The term "dwelling" does not include any trailer, motel, hotel,
guesthouse or "boarding house" as defined herein.
DWELLING, BACHELOR'S: A dwelling unit which is occupied by four (4) or more
nonrelated adults.
DWELLING, CARETAKER'S: A dwelling which is occupied by a person whose function
is to watch or take care of a business or industry which is located on the same
premises as the dwelling.
DWELLING, HIGH RISE MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A multiple-family building, or portion
thereof, containing five (5) or more stories and which may include off street
parking facilities, and having at least one passenger elevator to serve the
dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A multiple-family building, or portion thereof,
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for use and occupancy by no more
than one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building designed for and occupied exclusively
by two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for, or used as a residence for, not
more than one family, including all necessary household employees of such
family, and constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, with a
single kitchen permanently installed. The term does not imply or include such
types of occupancy as a lodging or boarding house, club, sorority, fraternity
or hotel.
FAMILY: An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, living together in a single dwelling unit and maintaining a common
household. A family may include two (2), but not more than two (2), nonrelated
persons living as guests with the residing family. The term "family" shall not
be construed to mean a group of unrelated individuals, a fraternity, club or
institutional group.
FEEDLOT: The operation or maintenance of a commercial stockyard or feedlot
where large numbers of livestock are fed concentrated feeds particularly for
the purpose of fattening for slaughter markets, excepting livestock feeding
which is limited in the number of animals and is for personal consumption or as
a home occupation; provided, that waste odor and insects are controlled; also
excepting customary winter feeding or grazing in agricultural areas.
FENCE, SIGHT OBSCURING: A fence having a height of at least six feet (6') above
grade which permits vision through not more than ten percent (10%) of each
square foot more than eight inches (8") aboveground.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors,
including the exterior walls of a building or portion thereof.
FLOOR AREA, NET: That portion of the gross floor area of the building occupied
by the listed use or uses and shall include hallways, storage and packaging
space, dressing rooms or restrooms and laboratory or workrooms; provided,
however, that floor space within the building reserved for parking or loading
vehicles, and basement space used only for building maintenance and utilities
shall be excluded.
FOSTER CARE HOME: A home where one to three (3) unrelated individuals are given
foster care. A foster care home shall not be construed to mean a group care
home.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of
a coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or the average
height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling
unit, including handicrafts, dressmaking, millinery, laundering, preserving,
office of a clergyman, teaching of music, dancing and other instruction when
limited to attendance of one pupil at a time and other like occupancies which
meet all of the following conditions:
   A.   The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes.
   B.   The use is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is carried on by
the inhabitants thereof.
   C.   No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except
such as is produced by the occupants, on the premises, and no mechanical or
electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as is
customarily incidental to domestic use.
   D.   The use does not change the character of the dwelling or adversely
affect the uses permitted in the residential district.
   E.   The use creates no additional traffic and requires no additional
parking space.
   F.   No persons are employed other than those necessary for domestic
purposes.
   G.   Not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the gross area of one floor of said
dwelling is used for such use.
   H.   The entrance to the space devoted to such use is from within the
building and no internal or external alterations or construction features not
customary in dwellings are involved.
JUNKYARD: An outdoor space where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are stored or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, and yards for used
building materials and places or yards for storage of salvaged building and
structural steel materials and equipment; excluding yards or establishments for
the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or machinery in operable condition,
and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of a
permitted manufacturing operation on the same premises.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises, or portion thereof, on which three (3)
or more dogs, cats and other household domestic animals are maintained,
harbored, possessed, boarded, bred or cared for in return for compensation or
kept for sale 2 .
LIVESTOCK CORRAL: A place or pen where livestock are kept on a seasonal basis
as part of an agricultural enterprise or operation as distinguished from a
livestock feed yard.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open off street area of land other
than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the standing,
loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue
interference with public streets and alleys.
LOT: A unit of land described by metes and bounds or a part of a recorded
subdivision so recorded for transfer of ownership.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by street lines,
where the angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings
and accessory buildings.
LOT LINE: The boundary property line encompassing a lot. The front lot line is
the boundary line which abuts a public street. For a corner lot, the owner may
select either street line as the front lot line. The rear lot line is the lot
line most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front property line. All
other lot lines are side lot lines. An interior lot line is a side line in
common with another lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at right
angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling unit which meets the building code for permanent
structures designed to be transported after fabrication and which is ready for
occupancy as an independent unit, except for connection to utilities and
location on a foundation.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit with all the following
characteristics:
   A.   Designed for long term occupancy and containing sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities
with plumbing and electrical connections for attachments to outside systems.
   B.   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or
detachable wheels.
   C.   Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete,
including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy, except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location of foundation
supports, connection to facilities and the like.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot, or site of land, whereupon two (2) or
more mobile homes are placed, located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a
permanent or semipermanent basis and for which a fee, rental or contract for
payment for such use is collected by or collectible to the person holding the
land.
MOTEL: A building, or group of buildings on the same premises, whether detached
or in connected rows, containing sleeping or dwelling units independently
accessible from the outside, with garage space or parking space located on the
premises and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. The term includes, but is
not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as auto courts,
motor lodges, tourist courts or by any other title or sign intended to identify
them as providing lodging to motorists.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use lawfully occupying a building, structure or land on
the effective date of this title, or of subsequent amendments to this title,
which do not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An institution providing daycare, with or without instruction,
for more than five (5) children of preschool age.
NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME: A building housing any facility, however
named, whether operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide
skilled nursing care and related medical services for two (2) or more
individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or requiring
care because of old age.
PARKING LOT: An open, graded and surfaced area, other than a street or public
way, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and available to the public,
whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: Usable space within a public or private parking area or
building, not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (9 feet by 20
feet), exclusive of access drives, aisles or ramps for the storage of one
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle with or without self-power or maintained
primarily as a temporary dwelling for travel, vacation, or recreation purposes
and having a width of eight feet (8') or less. This includes, but is not
limited to, a travel trailer, truck camper, camping trailer, and motor home.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COURT: An area or tract of land used to accommodate two
(2) or more recreational vehicles.
REST HOME, ELDERLY HOUSING: This term shall be defined the same as "nursing
home, convalescent home", but where medical care is not administered.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses
as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room.
SETBACK AREA: The space on a lot required to be left open and unoccupied by
buildings or structures, either by the front, side or rear yard requirements of
this title, or by delineation on a recorded subdivision map.
SIGN: Any structure or natural object, such as a tree, rock, bush and the
ground itself, or part thereof, or device attached thereto or painted or
represented thereon, which shall be used to attract attention to any object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, or
which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant,
insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an
announcement, direction or advertisement. For the purpose of this definition,
the word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation,
state, city or other political unit, or any political, educational, charitable,
philanthropic, civic, professional, religious, or like campaign, drive,
movement or event.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION; CONDITIONAL USE: A use which is not specifically permitted
in a zone, such as an industrial use in a residential zone, but which is
permitted as a special exception to this title subject to compliance with
conditions prescribed by the planning and zoning commission or city council.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above grade,
such basement or cellar shall be considered a "story".
STREET, MAJOR: A public right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian
access to adjacent properties, acceptance or grant of which has been officially
approved by the council. The term "street" includes also the terms highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land, place, and
other such terms.
STREET, MINOR: Any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to
property, which street is not shown on the master street plan, as a principal
thoroughfare.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, except fences, not exceeding three
feet (3') in height, which requires permanent location on the ground or is
attached to something having location on the ground.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption
on the premises, not including restaurants where the principal business is
serving food.
TRAILER: Any vehicle designed to be towed or transported by another vehicle.
The term "trailer" includes a mobile home. (See definition of Mobile Home.)
TRAILER PARK: A mobile home park. (See definition of Mobile Home Park.)
VARIANCE: A waiver of specific regulations of this title granted by the
planning and zoning commission in accordance with the provisions set forth in
this title for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special
circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same zone.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of
buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward,
except as otherwise permitted in this title, and which extends along a lot line
and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending across the full width of the lot adjacent to
the front street line.
YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal
building.
YARD, SIDE: The yard lying between the nearest wall of the principal building,
accessory building and side lot line, and extending from the front yard or the
front lot line to the rear yard.
ZONING COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission.
ZONING MAP: The map incorporated into this title designating the use district
zones.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-406.
2 1. See also definition of "commercial kennel" in section 5-3A-1 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1: Zoning Administrator
10-2-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
10-2-3: Building Permit Requirements
10-2-4: Conflicts; More Stringent Provisions Prevail
10-2-5: Severability
10-2-6: Responsibility For Violations
10-2-7: Violation; Penalty
10-2-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The building inspector appointed under the building code
is hereby designated as the zoning administrator who shall be charged with the
administration and enforcement of this title. The city council may also appoint
other officers to assist in the administration and enforcement of this title.
   B.   Powers And Duties: It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to
inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings in the course of construction or
repair. He shall enforce all of the provisions of this title, entering actions
in the courts, when necessary; and his failure to do so shall not legalize any
act in violation of such provisions.
   C.   Appeal: Upon appeal to the planning and zoning commission of any
matters on which said commission is required to pass, the zoning administrator
shall forthwith transmit all papers, records and other pertinent data
pertaining to the appeal to said planning and zoning commission as required by
the terms of this title. The zoning administrator shall also refer matters to
the planning and zoning commission and city council as set forth in this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-2-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Organization; Meetings; Records:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission shall organize and elect a
chairman and adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this title.
      2.   Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairman
and at such other times as the commission may determine. The chairman or, in
his absence, the acting chairman, shall conduct all meetings and may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the commission
shall be open to the public. The commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such facts, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official acts, all of which shall be filed immediately
in the office of the commission and shall be a public record. "Robert's Rules
Of Order" shall be followed in the conduct of meetings wherever applicable.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The planning and zoning commission shall have
judicial power to interpret the provisions of this title. The commission shall
also have administrative duties to grant variances and special exceptions or
conditional use permits, as follows:
      1.   Intent: It is the intent of this provision to provide a way whereby
applicants who think that the zoning administrator is in error or does not
interpret the provision of this title correctly, to obtain a relief from such
error in an expeditious and inexpensive manner without having to resort to the
courts.
      2.   Duty To Interpret: The planning and zoning commission shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or refusal made in the enforcement of this title.
The planning and zoning commission shall also interpret the zone map and
boundaries therefor in cases of dispute or disagreement.
   C.   Grant Variance: The planning and zoning commission may authorize, upon
appeal, variances from the terms of this title pertaining to area and width of
lot, size of yards, and height and size of buildings where, owing to special
conditions peculiar to the property, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this title would result in a hardship which is unnecessary in carrying out the
intent of this title. Before any variance may be granted, however, it must be
shown that:
      1.   The variance will not substantially affect the comprehensive plan of
zoning and that adherence to the strict letter of this title will cause
difficulties and hardships upon the petitioners which are unnecessary in order
to carry out the purposes of this title.
      2.   Special circumstances attach to the property owned by the applicant
that do not apply to other property in the same zone.
      3.   That because of said special circumstances, property covered by the
application is deprived of privileges possessed by other properties in the same
zone; and that the granting of the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone.
      4.   That the difficulties and hardships were not created by an act of
the appellant subsequent to the effective date of the regulation from which
appealed.
   D.   Grant Certain Special Exceptions Or Conditional Uses:
      1.   Intent: There are certain uses which are not permitted within
particular zones unless they are made to comply with conditions which are
compatible with other uses in the same zone. It is the intent of this provision
to authorize the planning and zoning commission to use its discretion in
prescribing these conditions. However, the planning and zoning commission may
not authorize a conditional use unless such use is specifically permitted by
the terms of this title.
      2.   Duty To Prescribe Conditions In Connection With Special Exceptions
Or Conditional Uses: The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide
requests for "special exceptions" but only when authorized by the terms of this
title to do so. In deciding whether or not to grant a special exception, the
commission shall be guided by the conditions set forth in this title with
respect thereto, which conditions shall be deemed to be the minimum standards
which must be complied with.
   E.   Attaching Reasonable Conditions: The planning and zoning commission may
attach reasonable conditions or requirements to the grant of a variance,
special exception, or conditional use which the petitioner must comply with as
a condition of the grant or approval. A time limit of one year shall be
attached to the exercise or nonexercise of any grant unless specifically
extended by action of the commission.
   F.   Reverse Or Affirm Zoning Administrator: In performing the duties and
powers as set forth herein, the planning and zoning commission is hereby
empowered to reverse or affirm wholly or partly or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the enforcing officer and may make
such order or requirement as ought to be made; provided, however, that in
interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the requirements
contained herein shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the purpose
set forth.
   G.   Authority Limited: The powers and duties of the planning and zoning
commission are limited to judicial and administrative matters as set forth in
this title. The planning and zoning commission shall not have the authority to
amend this title nor to correct what it may consider to be an unwise
requirement. Nevertheless, the planning and zoning commission shall have powers
and duties as set forth in this title and within the limitations and intent of
the provisions of this title shall perform its duties and shall have the power
to perform those acts as herein set forth.
   H.   Vote: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the commission shall
be necessary to decide upon any matter upon which it is required to pass. (Ord.
199, 11-14-1983)
   I.   Application To Appear Before Commission:
      1.   Filing Request; Fee: Any citizen or person, or any officer or
department of the municipality may appeal to the planning and zoning commission
by filing a request in writing with the zoning administrator and by paying a
fee as set by the city council, provided such appeal is made within thirty (30)
days from the grant or refusal of a building permit by the zoning
administrator. The request to appear before the planning and zoning commission
shall be made on forms furnished by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 199, 11-14-
1983; amd. 2011 Code)
      2.   Procedure:
         a.   Upon receipt of the application, the zoning administrator shall
forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning commission all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The
planning and zoning commission shall review the application and shall return
the same to the zoning administrator with its decision pertaining thereto
within thirty (30) days. Failure to return said application within thirty (30)
days shall constitute approval. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the
planning and zoning commission after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him that by reason of fact stated in the certificate a stay would in his
opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by
the planning and zoning commission or by the district court on application and
notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown.
         b.   The planning and zoning commission shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof by publication of
notice at least five (5) days prior to the date of hearing, as well as notice
by mail to adjacent property owners, and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Any party may appear at the hearing, in person, or by agent or by
attorney.
   J.   Action Of Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall make
determinations in harmony with the provisions of this title and shall notify
the zoning administrator of the action taken.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-2-3: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Building Permits Required; Application: No person, firm or corporation
shall commence to construct, alter or move a building or structure, or to make
a change in use of any land within the territory shown on the zone map which
has been adopted as a part of this title without first submitting an
application and obtaining a permit therefor from the zoning administrator or
other authorized officer; provided, however, that permits for the moving of
structures shall be granted only in compliance with the requirements as set
forth in subsection
10-3-23G of this title. Said permit shall also be required for the moving and/
or improvement of mobile homes, demountable homes, manufactured homes, and
similar movable structures, except when being moved from outside the town into
an approved mobile home park.
   B.   Plans Required: All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by plans which have been drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing
buildings, and, as required, the location and layout of off street parking and
a planting plan showing how the premises will be landscaped. A careful record
of said application and plans shall be kept in the office of the zoning
administrator for a period of five (5) years from the date of receipt thereof.
   C.   Compliance With Regulations:
      1.   Compliance: From the effective date hereof, permits shall not be
granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure, or for
the moving of a building or structure onto a lot, or for the change in use of
any land, building, or structure, if such construction, alteration, moving or
change in use would be a violation of any provision of this title, nor shall
any sewer or water service line or electric utilities be installed to serve the
premises if such use would be in violation of this title. (Ord. 199, 11-14-
1983)
      2.   Construction And Alteration Defined: For the purposes of this
subsection, "construction and alteration" shall be defined as the erection,
reconstruction, remodeling, or razing of any structure to the extent of an
amount as set by the city council in replaceable value.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-2-4: CONFLICTS; MORE STRINGENT PROVISIONS PREVAIL:
   A.   It is not intended by this title to impair or interfere with other
regulations of state or local law, or with private restrictions on the use of
land, improvements, and structures.
   B.   Whenever regulations in this title require higher standards than are
required in other ordinances or laws, the provisions of this title shall
govern. Whenever regulations of other ordinances or laws require higher
standards than the provisions of this title, then said other ordinances or laws
shall govern.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-2-5: SEVERABILITY:
This title and the various parts, sections, and clauses are hereby declared to
be severable. If any part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby declared that the
remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby
declares that it would have passed the provisions of this title, or each part,
section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more portions thereof be declared invalid.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-2-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders
and other persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the
erection, altering, changing, or remodeling of any building or structure to see
that a proper permit has been granted before such work is begun. Any such
architect, builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any such
work without a permit having been issued is in conflict with the requirements
of this title, and shall be deemed guilty of violation of this title in the
same manner and to the same extent that the owner of the premises or the
persons for whom the use is established, or for whom such buildings are erected
or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for
violation.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-2-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal,
agent, employee, or otherwise, who shall erect, construct or reconstruct any
building which involves structural alterations or which involves an increase or
decrease in floor area without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
planning administrator (building inspector) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor;
or any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, or employee or
otherwise, who shall change the use of any building or other structure or use
of any land within the city, in violation of the provisions of this title,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 199, 11-14-1983;
amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Each Day A Separate Offense: Such person, firm or corporation violating
this title or any part thereof shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed,
continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be
punished as provided by law as a separate offense.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
CHAPTER 3
SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS AND
PROCEDURES WITHIN ZONES
SECTION:
10-3-1: Intent
10-3-2: Yard Space For One Building Only
10-3-3: Dwellings On Zoning Lot
10-3-4: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space Prohibited
10-3-5: Yards Unobstructed; Exceptions
10-3-6: Accessory Buildings Prohibited As Living Quarters
10-3-7: Storage In Residential Zones
10-3-8: Height Regulations
10-3-9: Location Of Barns
10-3-10: Drainage
10-3-11: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
10-3-12: Effect Of Street Plan
10-3-13: Exception To Front And Side Setback Requirements
10-3-14: Concessions In Public Parks And Playgrounds
10-3-15: Sewage Disposal
10-3-16: Location Of Gasoline Pumps
10-3-17: Off Street Parking And Loading
10-3-18: Motor Vehicle Access
10-3-19: Landscaping Required
10-3-20: Signs
10-3-21: Pollution Prevention
10-3-22: RVs And Mobile Homes Prohibited; Exceptions
10-3-23: Conditional Uses
10-3-24: Foster Care Homes
10-3-25: Temporary Uses
10-3-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to accumulate under one heading, regulations
which apply to two (2) or more zones, rather than to repeat them several times.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-2: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is
hereafter provided around any building, which is needed to comply with the
provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an
adjoining lot be considered as providing the yard or open space on the lot
whereon a building is to be erected or established.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-3: DWELLINGS ON ZONING LOT:
Only one building which contains a dwelling shall be located and maintained on
a zoning lot as defined in this title, except for dwellings within a mobile
home park, or other large scale development.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-4: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE PROHIBITED:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking, or other
requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart
from such lot or building unless other space so complying is provided.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-5: YARDS UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except
for permitted accessory buildings and except for ordinary and customary
projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features and
unenclosed steps and unwalled stoops, porches, and carports, which may project
up to three feet (3') into a required yard. No projection into a required court
which is provided in connection with a court apartment shall be constructed
except for customary sills, belt courses, and cornices which may extend into a
court not more than sixteen inches (16").
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS PROHIBITED AS LIVING QUARTERS:
Living and sleeping quarters in any building other than the main residential
building is prohibited, except by members of the immediate family of the
tenant.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-7: STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   A.   Commercial Vehicles: The storage and/or continuous parking of
construction equipment such as bulldozers, graders, compressors, etc., shall
not be permitted in any residential zone; provided, that construction equipment
may be stored on a lot during construction of a building thereon, but not to
exceed one year.
   B.   Junk And Debris: No yard or other open space surrounding an existing
building in any agricultural or residential zone, or which is hereafter
provided around any building in any agricultural or residential zone, shall be
used for the storage of junk, debris, or obsolete vehicles; and no land shall
be used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-8: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Additional Height Allowed For Public Buildings: Public buildings and
churches may be erected to any height, provided the building is set back from
the required building setback line a distance of at least one foot (1') for
each additional foot of building height above the maximum height otherwise
permitted in the zone in which the building is located.
   B.   Minimum Height Of Dwellings And Fences: No dwelling shall be erected
which has a ceiling height of less than seven feet six inches (7'6") or one
story above grade, whichever is greater. No fence, wall or hedge shall be
constructed higher than four feet (4') above the ground in any required front
or side yard that fronts on a street.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-9: LOCATION OF BARNS:
Unless otherwise stated in this code, no barn, corral, or coop shall be
constructed closer than one hundred feet (100') from any existing dwelling.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-3-10: DRAINAGE:
Surface water from rooftops, lots or irrigation ditches should be controlled to
avoid damage to adjacent lots or streets.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-11: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction which will obscure the
view of automobile drivers shall be placed on any corner lot within a
triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them
at points of forty five feet (45') from the intersection of the street lines.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-12: EFFECT OF STREET PLAN:
Wherever a front or side yard is required for a building, which building abuts
on a proposed street which has not been constructed, but which has been
designated by the planning and zoning commission as a future street, the depth
of such front or side yard shall be measured from the planned street lines.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-13: EXCEPTION TO FRONT AND SIDE SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two (2) existing
dwellings in any residential zone may be the same as the average for said two
(2) existing dwellings, provided the existing dwellings are on the same side of
the street and are located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each other.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-14: CONCESSIONS IN PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS:
Concessions, including, but not limited to, amusement devices, recreational
buildings, and refreshment stands shall be permitted on a public park or
playground when approved by the city council.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-15: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Where domestic sewage disposal facilities are used which are not connected to a
public sewer, approval of such facilities shall be obtained from the health
department before a building permit shall be issued therefor.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-16: LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS:
Gasoline pump islands shall be set back not less than fifteen feet (15') from
any street line to which the pump island is vertical and twelve feet (12') from
any residential zone boundary line. If the pump island is set in an angle on
the property, it shall be so located that automobiles stopped for service will
not extend over the property line. In no case shall pumps be set closer than
twelve feet (12') from any street line, nor closer than ten feet (10') from any
side or rear property line. Lots from which gasoline is dispensed to customers
at retail shall be not less than seventy five feet by one hundred feet (75' x
100') in size. Canopies over pump islands may extend to within five feet (5')
of the property lines.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-17: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Loading And Unloading: Off street loading and unloading space shall be
provided on the same lot for every building used for manufacturing, storage,
warehousing, goods display, department store, grocery, hotel, hospital,
mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, or other use similarly involving the receipt
or distribution by vehicle of materials or merchandise. Such space, unless
otherwise adequately provided, shall include a minimum ten foot by twenty five
foot (10' x 25') loading space with a minimum fourteen foot (14') height
clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor space in the
building or fraction thereof.
   B.   Parking: Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot for any one-family dwelling, plus one space for each
additional dwelling unit. All off street parking spaces shall be graded,
graveled or paved.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-18: MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS:
Access to all lots and parcels of land having a frontage on a public street
shall be controlled as follows:
   A.   Access shall be by not more than two (2) driveways from any one street,
except as may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission when it can be
shown that additional driveways will promote traffic safety.
   B.   Driveways shall be not closer to each other than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Each driveway shall be not more than thirty feet (30') in width in any
commercial or industrial zone measured at a right angle to the centerline of
the driveway. In residential zones, driveways shall be not more than twenty
feet (20') in width except when approved for large scale developments.
   D.   On corner lots, no driveways shall be closer than fifteen feet (15') to
the point of intersection of the front property line with the side property
line which abuts upon a street. (Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-19: LANDSCAPING REQUIRED:
Front yards and side yards of all dwellings which front on public streets must
be landscaped, except that up to twenty five percent (25%) of the front yard or
side yard which faces on a public street may be devoted to driveways and off
street parking.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-20: SIGNS:
Advertising signs shall be regulated as follows:
   A.   Signs In Residential Zones: No advertising signs of any kind shall be
allowed in any residential zone, except signs pertaining to the sale or lease
of residential property, and except for nameplates or signs indicating the
existence of an office of a professional person or a home occupation.
   B.   Setback: All advertising signs shall be set back from public streets a
distance at least equal to the distance that buildings are required to be set
back within the zone in which said signs are located.
   C.   Information On Signs: Except in those zones where nonaccessory signs
are permitted, all signs shall display thereon only information pertaining to
products or services sold on the premises.
   D.   Permits Required: Regardless of cost, no sign shall be erected or
placed within the city without first making application for, and obtaining a
building permit therefor, except temporary window and political posters,
temporary signs pertaining to the sale of adjacent property, and nameplates or
identification signs indicating the existence of an approved home occupation or
professional office. Permits required by said regulations shall be in addition
to the building permit required in this title, and construction or placement of
a sign shall not be commenced until all approvals and permits have been
obtained.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-21: POLLUTION PREVENTION:
Any use which emits or discharges gases, fumes, dust, glare, noise, or other
pollutants into the atmosphere in amounts which exceed the standards as
prescribed by the state department of environmental quality or the board of
health, any use which emits or discharges liquids or solid material onto the
soil or water in amounts which result in pollutants entering groundwater in
amounts exceeding the standards prescribed by the state department of
environmental quality or the board of health shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-3-22: RVs AND MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   RVs: It shall be unlawful to place any recreational vehicle on any lot
or parcel of land in the area covered by the zoning map and to use the same for
human habitation, except when located in a recreational vehicle court.
   B.   Mobile Homes: It shall be unlawful to place a mobile home on any lot or
parcel of land in an area covered by the zoning map and to use the same for
human habitation, except in compliance with one or more of the following
conditions:
      1.   When temporarily located on a lot on which a building is being
constructed and connected to approved water and sewer facilities, but not to
exceed one year.
      2.   When placed in a licensed mobile home park.
      3.   When placed on a zoning lot that complies with the regulations of
the zone in which the mobile home is located, provided:
         a.   The mobile home and site comply with the use, width, location,
height, size of building, and special provision requirements for structures
within the zone.
         b.   The mobile home is independently connected to an approved water
supply and sewage disposal facility.
         c.   The mobile home is constructed in accordance with the building
code for mobile homes in effect within the city.
         d.   The mobile home is placed upon a permanent masonry type
foundation or skirted by a permanent masonry type skirt.
         e.   That, according to the records of the county recorder, the lot
and mobile home are in single ownership.
         f.   The mobile home will be entered upon the tax rolls of Caribou
County as real property as evidenced by a letter or other proof from the county
assessor. A list or form will be provided by the city to the county assessor.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-23: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses shall be permitted only after approval as set forth herein:
   A.   Home Occupations: The planning and zoning commission may grant a permit
for a home occupation, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Home occupations are permitted in the zone.
      2.   The home occupation is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is
carried on in the dwelling only by members of the residing family.
      3.   The home occupation does not involve the use of any accessory
buildings or yard space for storage or activities outside of the dwelling.
      4.   No commercial vehicles are used except one delivery truck which does
not exceed one ton rated capacity.
      5.   The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the
building from that of a dwelling.
      6.   Signs are limited to one nonflashing sign not larger in area than
two hundred twenty six (226) square inches. If lighted, the light shall be
diffused or shielded.
      7.   Not more than the equivalent of twenty five percent (25%) of the
ground floor area of the dwelling is devoted to the home occupation. (Ord. 199,
11-14-1983)
      8.   The home occupation shall be registered with the city clerk-
treasurer. (Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
      9.   Entrance to the home occupation from outside shall be the same
entrance normally used by the residing family, except when required otherwise
by regulation of the state health department or other public agency.
      10.   In the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, the physical
appearance, traffic, and other activities in connection with the home
occupation is not contrary to the objectives and characteristics of the zone in
which the home occupation is located and does not depreciate surrounding
residential values.
   B.   Small Lots: Where a parcel of land at the time of the adoption of this
title is at least one and eight-tenths (1.8) times as wide and one and eight-
tenths (1.8) times as large in area as required for a lot in the zone, the
planning and zoning commission may permit the division of a parcel into two (2)
lots, provided:
      1.   Such division will not cause undue concentration of buildings.
      2.   The characteristics of the zone in which the lot is located will be
maintained.
      3.   In the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, values in the
area will be safeguarded.
   C.   Utility Buildings And Structures Permitted: Water, sewer, and electric
buildings and structures may be constructed in all residential zones subject to
the approval of the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning
commission may require conditions which are reasonably necessary to protect
surrounding property values and residential amenities.
   D.   Frontage On Public Street; Minimum Width Reduced: Except as may be
authorized through the approval of a large scale development, each lot shall
abut upon a city maintained street. The length of said abutting side as
measured at the setback line shall be not less than the minimum frontage
requirement of the zone; provided, however, that the planning and zoning
commission may authorize a reduction of the minimum frontage requirement
subject to the following conditions of this section.
   E.   Uses Prohibited In Zones Unless Expressly Permitted: Uses of land which
are not expressly permitted within a zone are expressly prohibited therein,
except as may be permitted by action of the planning and zoning commission
pursuant to express authority under the terms of this title. The planning and
zoning commission shall not permit a use within a zone which is not expressly
permitted by the terms of this title, unless it can be shown that the use is
similar to other uses permitted in the zone. Where the planning and zoning
commission determines a use to be similar, such use shall thereafter be deemed
to be a permitted use as if it were listed therein on the effective date
hereof.
   F.   Moving Buildings; Permit Application, Information: No permit for the
moving of any residential, commercial, or industrial building within the city,
which has had prior use, shall be issued as required under section 10-2-3 of
this title without first filing an application with the planning and zoning
commission. Said application shall contain the following information:
      1.   Location and address of the old and new sites.
      2.   Plot plan of the new location, also showing adjacent lots on all
sides of the property and indicating all structures and improvements on said
lots.
      3.   Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new
location, including plans for landscaping treatment when required by the
planning and zoning commission.
      4.   Certification by the planning and zoning commission that the
structure is sound enough to be moved and that the condition, location, and use
of the building will comply with this title and all other applicable codes and
ordinances.
   G.   Findings Of Commission Prior To Approval Of Building Moving Permit
Application: Before approving said application and authorizing the issuance of
a permit, the planning and zoning commission must find:
      1.   That the building will have no appreciable detrimental effect on the
living environment and property values in the area into which the structure is
to be moved.
      2.   That the building is in conformity with the quality of buildings
existing in the area into which it is proposed to be moved.
      3.   That said building and the lot on which the building is to be
located will conform to the requirements of this title and other applicable
codes, ordinances, and regulations.
      4.   That its location on the lot does not in any substantial way
adversely affect buildings or uses in abutting properties.
      5.   That all required dedications and improvements for streets and
facilities and buildings shall be provided in conformity with the standards of
the city.
      6.   That adequate provision has been made through the posting of a bond
or other assurance that the building and grounds shall be brought up to the
standard of a new building before it is occupied and that the vacated site
shall be restored to a safe and sightly condition.
   H.   Moving Mobile Or Manufactured Homes: The requirements of this section
shall also apply to the moving of mobile homes, demountable homes, manufactured
homes, and similar movable structures, except when being moved from outside the
city into a mobile home park.
   I.   Transitional Uses: Uses which are permitted on either portion of a lot,
which lot is divided by a zone boundary line or which is coterminous with a
zone boundary line may be permitted to extend to the entire lot, but not more
than one hundred feet (100') beyond the boundary line of such zone in which
such use is permitted. Before a permit for such a use may be granted; however,
the planning and zoning commission must find that the comprehensive plan of
zoning will be maintained and that a more harmonious mixing of uses will be
achieved thereby.
   J.   Adjust Or Reduce Off Street Parking Requirements: The planning and
zoning commission may approve substitute parking locations and may reduce the
amount of off street parking required where sufficient off street parking is
readily available within the vicinity, and/or where acquisition of land for
such use is unnecessary in order to carry out the spirit of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-24: FOSTER CARE HOMES:
Foster care homes shall be permitted in all zones.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-3-25: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Intent: The following regulations are provided to accommodate certain
uses which are temporary or seasonal in nature.
   B.   Permitted Temporary Uses: Certain uses may be permitted on a temporary
basis in any zone when approved by the city council. Said temporary uses may
include, but will not be limited to:
Carnivals and circuses.
Christmas tree sales lots.
Construction storage yards when required in connection with a primary
construction project.
Flower stands.
Music festivals.
Political rallies.
Promotional displays.
Rummage sales.
Tents for religious services.
   C.   Application For Temporary Use: Prior to the establishment of any
temporary use, an application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted to
and approved by the city council. Said application shall contain the following
information:
      1.   A description of the proposed use.
      2.   A description of the property to be used, rented, or leased for the
temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately portray the
property.
      3.   Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary
facilities, and availability of parking space to service the proposed use.
   D.   Approval Required: The city council may approve said application,
provided the council finds:
      1.   That the proposed use is limited as a permitted temporary use or, in
the opinion of the city council, is similar to those uses permitted.
      2.   That the proposed use will not create excessive traffic hazards or
other unsafe conditions in the area, and that if traffic control is required,
it will be provided at the expense of the applicant.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Intent
10-4-2: Nonconforming Buildings, Uses And Lots
10-4-3: (Rep. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
10-4-4: Amendments To Text And Map
10-4-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to accumulate provisions applying to all land and
buildings within the incorporated area of the city into one chapter rather than
to repeat them several times.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-4-2: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, USES AND LOTS:
   A.   Nonconforming Buildings And Uses:
      1.   Generally: In view of the fact that no further development or change
in use can be undertaken contrary to the provisions of this title, it is the
intent of this title that nonconforming uses shall not be increased nor
expanded except where a health or safety official, acting in his official
capacity, requires such increase or expansion. Such expansion shall be no
greater than that which is required to comply with the minimum requirements as
set forth by the health or safety official. Nevertheless, a nonconforming
building or structure or use of land may be continued to the same extent and
character as that which legally existed on the effective day of the applicable
regulations. Repairs may also be made to a nonconforming building or to a
building housing a nonconforming use.
      2.   Damaged Building Restored: A nonconforming building or structure or
a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged or
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or
public enemy may be restored, and the occupancy or use of such building,
structure, or part thereof, which legally existed at the time of such damage or
destruction may be continued or resumed; provided, that such restoration is
started within a period of one year from the date of destruction and is
diligently prosecuted to completion, and provided that such restoration does
not increase the floor space devoted to the nonconforming use over that which
existed at the time the building became nonconforming.
      3.   Discontinuance Or Abandonment: A nonconforming building or
structure, or portion thereof, or a lot occupied by a nonconforming use which
is, or hereafter becomes, abandoned or is discontinued for a continuous period
of one year or more shall not thereafter be occupied, except by a use which
conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
      4.   Change To Conforming Use: A nonconforming use or building may be
changed to a conforming use or building. Any nonconforming use or building
which has been changed to a conforming use or building shall not thereafter be
changed back to a nonconforming use.
      5.   Change To Another Nonconforming Use Prohibited: A nonconforming use
of a building or lot shall not be changed to another nonconforming use
whatsoever. Changes in use shall be made only to a conforming use.
      6.   Reclassification Of Territory: The provision pertaining to
nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall also apply to land and buildings
which hereafter become nonconforming due to an amendment to this title. (Ord.
199, 11-14-1983)
      7.   Prior Permits; Construction: Notwithstanding the issuance of a
permit therefor, no building which becomes nonconforming upon the effective
date hereof or which becomes nonconforming due to an amendment to this title
shall be built unless construction has taken place thereon to the extent of at
least such amount as set by the city council in replaceable value by the
effective date hereof or when said amendment becomes effective. "Replaceable
value" shall be construed to mean the expenditure necessary to duplicate the
materials and labor at market prices. (Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
   B.   Nonconforming Lots Of Record: Notwithstanding any other provision of
this title, a one-family dwelling may be permitted on any lot of record in any
zone in which dwellings are permitted, even though such lot fails to meet the
area or width requirements for one-family dwellings within the zone; provided,
that where two (2) or more contiguous lots of record having continuous frontage
are owned by the same person at the effective date of the controlling
ordinance, the land included in the lots shall be considered to be an undivided
parcel and no portion of said parcel shall be used as a dwelling site or sold
which does not meet the area and width requirements of the zone in which the
lot is located. Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or
width shall conform to the regulations of the zone in which the lot is located,
except when granted by a variance by the planning and zoning commission.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-4-3: ANNEXATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
10-4-4: AMENDMENTS TO TEXT AND MAP:
This title, including the map, may be amended as hereinafter provided.
   A.   Intent With Respect To Amendments: It is hereby declared to be public
policy that this title shall not be changed except to correct manifest errors
or to more fully carry out the intent and purpose of the master plan for the
city and of this title.
   B.   Procedure: Any person seeking an amendment to this title or map shall
submit to the City Council a written petition designating the change desired
and the reasons therefor and shall pay a filing fee in such amount as set by
the city council to the city. Upon receipt of the petition and the payment of
the filing fee, the City Council shall consider the request. City council may
also initiate amendments to this title.
   C.   Public Hearing; Notice: Amendments to this title may be adopted only
after a public hearing in relation thereto before the city council at which
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation within the area at least fifteen (15) days before the
date of hearing, as required by law. (Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code;
Ord. 303, 12-12-2022)
CHAPTER 5
ZONES ESTABLISHED; OFFICIAL MAP
SECTION:
10-5-1: Zones Established
10-5-2: Official Zone Map
10-5-3: Boundaries Of Zones
10-5-4: Regulations Within Zones
10-5-1: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes of this title, the city is hereby divided
into zones, as follows:
 
A-1 Agricultural zone
R-1 Residential zone
R-2 Mobile home zone
R-3 Multiple-family residential zone
C-1 Commercial zone
I-1 Light industrial zone
 
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-5-2: OFFICIAL ZONE MAP:
   A.   The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on the
official zone map of Bancroft, Idaho, and said map is hereby declared to be an
official record and a part of this title.
   B.   Whenever amendments or changes are made in zone boundaries, such
amendments or changes shall be made on the official zone map promptly. No
amendment or change shall become effective until after it has been properly
noted and attested to on the official zone map.
   C.   No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zone map, except
in conformity with the procedure set forth in this title. Any unauthorized
changes of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this
title and punishable as provided in this title.
   D.   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zone
map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zone map,
which shall be located in the office of the city clerk-treasurer, shall be the
final authority in determining current zoning status.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-5-3: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the
following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where the intended boundaries on the zone map are approximately street
or alley lines, said streets or alleys shall be construed to be the zone
boundaries.
   B.   Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot
lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.
   C.   Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the zone boundary shall
be determined by the use of the scale of measurement shown on the map.
   D.   Where other uncertainty exists, the planning and zoning commission
shall interpret the map.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-5-4: REGULATIONS WITHIN ZONES:
Within each of the zones, the use, location, height, and size of buildings and
structures, the use of land and size of lots, yards, courts, and other open
spaces, and the density of population are regulated as set forth in this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
CHAPTER 6
ZONE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. A-1 AGRICULTURAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6A-1: Objectives And Characteristics
10-6A-2: Uses
10-6A-3: Area
10-6A-4: Width
10-6A-5: Location
10-6A-6: Height
10-6A-7: Size Of Dwellings
10-6A-8: Special Provisions
10-6A-1: OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
   A.   The A-1 agricultural zone has been established for the primary purpose
of providing a location where the cultivation of crops and the raising and
keeping of livestock and related uses can be carried on and where such uses can
be protected and encouraged. While dwellings and certain other uses not related
to agriculture are permitted, such development is not encouraged in the A-
1 agricultural zone because of the conflict which occurs between farm and
nonfarm uses. For this reason, owners or developers of land should bear in mind
that primacy is given in this zone to agriculture and livestock raising and any
development should be undertaken in recognition thereof.
   B.   The A-1 agricultural zone is characterized by large lots and tracts of
land intermixed with dwellings.
   C.   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to
stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the
regulations of this article shall apply to the A-1 agricultural zone. (Ord.
199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-2: USES:
The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the
A-1 agricultural zone upon compliance with requirements set forth in this
title:
Accessory advertising signs not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet in area,
provided such sign is maintained in good repair.
Agriculture, including, but not limited to, the raising of row crops, grains,
and fruits, and buildings incidental to the use of land for agricultural
purposes.
Barns, corrals, pens, coops, and feed storage buildings, for the keeping of
animals and fowl, and the storage of farm products, provided such uses for the
care and keeping of livestock and fowl are located at least one hundred feet
(100') in distance from any existing dwelling.
Daycare nurseries which have been approved by the state health department and
the state welfare department.
Fairgrounds and golf courses.
Fences, walls, and hedges.
Home occupations and industries related to agriculture and livestock raising,
fur farms, plant nurseries, and animal hospitals. Animal byproducts, rendering
plants and livestock feed yards shall be prohibited in the A-1 agricultural
zone.
Home occupations shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission. (See
section 10-3-23 of this title.)
Individual mobile homes which comply with the requirements set forth in section
10-3-22 of this title.
Kennels, riding academies and beehives.
Office of a professional person when located in a dwelling in which the
professional person resides.
One- and two-family dwellings and buildings accessory thereto.
Public utility buildings and facilities and airports.
Raising of animals and fowl in unlimited numbers.
Rest homes.
Schools and churches.
Temporary buildings and yards for the storage of construction materials and
equipment incidental and necessary to construction of uses otherwise permitted
in the zone. A permit therefor shall be valid for not more than one year and
shall not be renewable for more than two (2) successive periods at the same
location.
Water reservoirs and water facilities, and oil and gas wells.
Other uses ruled by the planning and zoning commission to be similar to uses
specifically permitted in the zone and which will harmonize with the objectives
and characteristics of the A-1 agricultural zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-3: AREA:
Each single-family dwelling and individual mobile home shall be located on the
lot containing at least one acre of land, plus one-half (1/2) acre for each
additional family unit.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-4: WIDTH:
The minimum width of any building site shall be one hundred feet (100')
measured at a distance of twenty five feet (25') back from the front lot line.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-5: LOCATION:
   A.   Front Setback: All buildings and structures shall be set back at least
twenty five feet (25') from the front lot line.
   B.   Side Setback: All dwellings and individual mobile homes shall be set
back from the side property line a distance of at least eight feet (8') and the
total distance of the two (2) side setbacks shall be at least twenty feet
(20'). The minimum side setback for accessory buildings shall be the same as
for main buildings, except that no side setback shall be required for accessory
buildings which are located more than one hundred feet (100') from the front
lot line and at least twelve feet (12') in the rear of any dwelling. On corner
lots, the side setback from the street for any dwelling or other main building
shall not be less than twenty feet (20') and not less than thirty feet (30')
for an accessory building.
   C.   Rear Setback: For interior lots, all dwellings and other main buildings
shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least thirty
feet (30'). Accessory buildings on interior lots shall be set back not less
than eight feet (8') from the rear property line, except that no rear setback
shall be required for accessory buildings having fire resistive walls of two
(2) hours or more. For corner lots, all dwellings and other main buildings
shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least thirty
feet (30'), except that for dwellings having an attached garage or carport, the
setback shall not be less than twenty feet (20'). Accessory buildings on corner
lots shall be set back from the rear property line a distance of not less than
eight feet (8').
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-6: HEIGHT:
Any building or structure, or portion thereof, hereafter erected shall not
exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or twenty five feet (25') in height.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-7: SIZE OF DWELLINGS:
The ground floor area of any one-family dwelling shall be not less than seven
hundred fifty (750) square feet, and six hundred (600) square feet for each
additional dwelling unit; provided, that these requirements shall not apply to
mobile homes situated within an approved mobile home park.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6A-8: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   For the purpose of determining front, side, and rear setback
requirements, any separate building situated within twelve feet (12') from a
dwelling or other main building shall be considered as a part of the main
building and not as an accessory building. No dwellings shall be located a
distance of more than two hundred feet (200') from a public street.
   B.   See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within
zones,
chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
ARTICLE B. R-1 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6B-1: Objectives And Characteristics
10-6B-2: Uses
10-6B-3: Area
10-6B-4: Width
10-6B-5: Location, Height And Size
10-6B-6: Special Provisions
10-6B-1: OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
   A.   The R-1 residential zone covers the portion of the city which is
primarily suited for residential development represented by a commingling of
one-family, two-family, and three- and four-family dwellings, plus parks,
playgrounds, schools, churches, and other community facilities designed to
serve the residents of the zone. The zone is characterized by spacious lots,
uncrowded buildings, and quiet residential conditions favorable to the rearing
of children. Owners and developers of property within this zone should bear in
mind that primacy is given to residential development and maintain their
properties in recognition thereof.
   B.   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to
stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the
regulations of this article shall apply in the R-1 residential zone. (Ord. 199,
11-14-1983)
10-6B-2: USES:
The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the
R-1 residential zone upon compliance with requirements as set forth in this
title:
Agriculture, with the limitation that no livestock, fowl or other animals shall
be allowed in the R-1 zone, unless otherwise stated in this code, except
household pets.
Fences, walls, and hedges which do not exceed eight feet (8') in height;
provided, that no fence, wall, or hedge shall exceed four feet (4') in height
within the required front or side yard that fronts on a street.
Home occupations when approved by the planning and zoning commission. (See
section
10-3-23 of this title.)
Individual mobile homes which comply with the requirements set forth in section
10-3-22 of this title; also mobile home parks when connected to a sewer subject
to the requirements relating to said uses as set forth under article C of this
chapter.
One- and two-family dwellings and accessory buildings including a private
garage for the storage of vehicles owned by persons residing on the premises,
greenhouses for private use only, private swimming pools and arbors, also
bachelor dwellings and boarding houses.
Public parks and public recreation grounds, not including privately owned
amusement parks or recreation grounds.
Public utility buildings and facilities subject to the approval of the planning
and zoning commission. (See subsection
10-3-23C of this title.)
Rest homes and daycare nurseries.
Schools and churches.
Signboard not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area, appertaining to the
lease or sale of property, also nameplates in connection with dwellings or
offices of professional persons not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and
constructed and maintained in harmony with the residential character of the
zone.
Temporary buildings and yards for the storage of construction materials and
equipment incidental and necessary to construction of uses otherwise permitted
in the zone. A permit therefor shall be valid for not more than one year and
shall not be renewable for more than two (2) successive periods at the same
location.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-6B-3: AREA:
An area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet shall be designated
and maintained for each one-family dwelling, plus two thousand (2,000) square
feet for each additional dwelling unit.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6B-4: WIDTH:
The minimum width of any dwelling site shall be seventy five feet (75'), plus
ten (10) additional feet for each additional dwelling unit measured at a
distance of twenty five feet (25') back from the front lot line.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6B-5: LOCATION, HEIGHT AND SIZE:
Location, height and size requirements shall be the same as required in the A-
1 agricultural zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6B-6: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Same as is required in the A-1 agricultural zone.
   B.   See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within
zones,
chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
ARTICLE C. R-2 MOBILE HOME ZONE
SECTION:
10-6C-1: Purpose
10-6C-2: Uses
10-6C-3: Area, Size, Location And Special Provisions
10-6C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-2 mobile home zone is to provide medium density
residential development areas for mobile homes properly located in the
community pattern compatible for mobile home uses and in harmony with the
community facilities.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6C-2: USES:
Accessory uses as regulated herein.
Churches.
Home occupations as defined in this title.
Mobile home subdivisions.
Mobile homes on individual lots.
Schools.
Signboard not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area appertaining to the lease
or sale of property, also nameplates in connection with dwellings or offices of
professional persons not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and constructed
and maintained in harmony with the residential character of the zone.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses not operated as a commercial
enterprise and where no building is involved, excluding livestock.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6C-3: AREA, SIZE, LOCATION AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Area, width, location, height, and size requirements, and special provisions
shall be the same as required in the R-1 residential zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
ARTICLE D. R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6D-1: Purpose
10-6D-2: Uses
10-6D-3: Area
10-6D-4: Size, Location And Special Provisions
10-6D-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the R-3 multiple-family residential zone is to regulate
development of more than four-family dwellings and to provide for medium to
high density residential development. This type of zoning pattern is intended
to create transition areas and buffer zones between commercial areas and low
density residential development. It is also intended to permit higher density
activities adjacent to the more intensive community use areas.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6D-2: USES:
Those uses allowed in R-1 and R-2 districts.
Accessory uses as regulated herein.
Boarding and rooming houses.
Club and lodge of a service and fraternal character when not operated for
profit.
Convalescent homes and nursing homes.
Homes for ambulatory aged, rest homes, elderly housing.
Hospital.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Nursery school.
Signboard requirement as set out in the R-1 residential zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6D-3: AREA:
   A.   The minimum of lot area for single-family and two-family dwellings is
seven thousand (7,000) square feet, except that corner lots shall contain at
least eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
   B.   The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit above that required for
two-family dwellings shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area for
each additional unit.
   C.   No more than forty five percent (45%) of the lot area may be covered by
buildings or structures.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6D-4: SIZE, LOCATION AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
The height, width, and location requirements, and special provisions shall be
the same as required in the R-1 residential zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
ARTICLE E. C-1 COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6E-1: Objectives And Characteristics
10-6E-2: Uses
10-6E-3: Area, Width, Location And Size
10-6E-4: Special Provisions
10-6E-1: OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
   A.   The C-1 commercial zone has been established for the primary purpose of
providing a location where retail, commercial and service facilities can be
provided to residents and to the traveling public in the area. The zone is
characterized by a mixture of dwellings and commercial uses; however, as
assurance that the goods and services will be made available without undue
detrimental effects upon the surrounding dwellings, certain requirements have
been imposed upon the use of land and buildings within the zone.
   B.   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to
stabilize and protect essential characteristics of this zone, the regulations
of this article shall apply in the C-1 commercial zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6E-2: USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted in the
C-1 commercial zone upon compliance with requirements as set forth in this
title:
Accessory signs and bulletin boards.
Agriculture.
All retail establishments.
All service enterprises such as barbershops, garages, plumbing shops, carpenter
shops, and similar service enterprises and buildings and structures related
thereto, provided all merchandise, materials and equipment except farm
equipment, automobiles, trucks and other vehicles in running order, and except
for seasonal items such as Christmas trees shall be stored within an enclosed
building or within an enclosure surrounded by a sight obscuring metal fence or
masonry wall at least six feet (6') in height.
Buildings, structures, and uses permitted in the R-1 residential zone subject
to the same requirements and conditions of use applying in the R-1 residential
zone.
Motels.
Recreational vehicle courts subject to the requirements relating to said uses
as set forth under
chapter 7 of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6E-3: AREA, WIDTH, LOCATION AND SIZE:
   A.   Area, width, location, height, and size requirements for dwellings
shall be the same as required in the R-1 residential zone.
   B.   For commercial buildings, there shall be no setback requirement;
provided, that doors, overhanging signs, or any other projecting or overhanging
object must be kept back to the property line.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6E-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   All off street parking space shall be hard surfaced and all tanks for
the storage of gasoline and other flammable liquids shall be installed in
accordance with the regulations and requirements as contained in the fire
prevention code adopted by the city.
   B.   See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within
zones,
chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
ARTICLE F. I-1 INDUSTRIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-6F-1: Objectives And Characteristics
10-6F-2: Uses
10-6F-3: Area
10-6F-4: Width
10-6F-5: Location
10-6F-6: Height And Size
10-6F-7: Special Provisions
10-6F-1: OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS:
The I-1 industrial zone has been established for the primary purpose of
providing a location where manufacturing, processing, warehousing, fabrication
of goods and materials can be carried on most appropriately and with minimum
conflict or deleterious effects upon surrounding properties. This zone is
characterized by a mixture of industrial, manufacturing, and processing
establishments with intermittent open land that is served by streets, power,
water and other utilities and facilities, or where such facilities can be
readily provided. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this
title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone,
the regulations of this article shall apply in the I-1 industrial zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6F-2: USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted in the
I-1 industrial zone upon compliance with requirements as set forth in this
title:
Agriculture.
Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, when surrounded by a sight obscuring
metal fence constructed to a height of at least eight feet (8') so that the
material stored in the enclosure cannot be observed from any street adjacent to
the yard.
Barns, corrals, pens, coops, machinery sheds, and other buildings and
structures related to agriculture and the raising of livestock.
Livestock in unlimited numbers.
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, fabrication of goods and
materials, except the processing of animal byproducts and livestock feeding
establishments, dairies and other similar operations.
Other uses ruled by the planning and zoning commission to be similar to uses
specifically permitted in the zone and which will harmonize with the objectives
and characteristics of the I-1 industrial zone.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6F-3: AREA:
There shall be no area requirements, except that an area sufficient to
accommodate setbacks, off street parking, loading and unloading, and vehicular
access shall be provided and maintained.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6F-4: WIDTH:
No requirements.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6F-5: LOCATION:
All buildings shall be set back at least sixty five feet (65') from the center
of any public road or thirty feet (30') from the right of way line, whichever
is the greater distance, except that all buildings situated adjacent to a state
or federally designated highway, except nonaccess highways, shall be set back
at least fifty feet (50') from the right of way line.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6F-6: HEIGHT AND SIZE:
No requirements.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-6F-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   All buildings used for human occupancy having walls made of combustible
material shall be located at least twenty feet (20') apart.
   B.   See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within
zones,
chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
CHAPTER 7
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Intent
10-7-2: Developments
10-7-3: Mobile Home Parks; Location
10-7-4: Approval Of Plans And Documents Necessary
10-7-5: Preliminary Plans And Documents
10-7-6: Standards And Requirements
10-7-7: Other Documents
10-7-8: Review And Approval
10-7-9: Final Site Plan
10-7-10: Stage Construction Permitted
10-7-11: Guarantee Of Performance; Type And Amount
10-7-12: Final Disposition And Release
10-7-13: Continuing Obligation
10-7-14: Development In Parks
10-7-15: License Required For Mobile Home Park
10-7-16: Recreational Vehicle Courts
10-7-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to: a) provide for the construction of certain
large scale development which will permit increased flexibility in land
developments and efficiency in the use of our land resources; and b) establish
minimum standards and procedures for the construction and maintenance of such
developments to the end that the quality of the living environment will be
maintained.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-2: DEVELOPMENTS:
The following large scale developments shall be permitted upon compliance with
the regulations set forth herein but only in the zones in which such large
scale developments are permitted:
   A.   Residential or industrial subdivisions.
   B.   Mobile home parks.
   C.   Recreational vehicle courts.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-3: MOBILE HOME PARKS; LOCATION:
Mobile home parks shall be permitted only in the zones in which mobile home
parks are specifically permitted. All such uses shall be subject to the
restrictions and conditions contained within the zone requirements and also as
hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-4: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS NECESSARY:
Any person wishing to construct a mobile home park shall obtain, from the
planning and zoning administrator, information pertaining to the city plan of
land use, streets, public facilities, and other requirements affecting the land
within the development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction
connected with a mobile home park, the preliminary plans, required documents
pertaining to the development, and the final plan shall have been approved as
hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-5: PRELIMINARY PLANS AND DOCUMENTS:
The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
Three (3) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the planning and
zoning administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the
planning and zoning commission at which the plan will be considered. The
preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') or as recommended by the planning and zoning
administrator, and shall show the following information:
   A.   The topography represented by contours shown at no greater intervals
than two feet (2') when required by the planning commission.
   B.   The proposed street and mobile home space layout.
   C.   Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds, and open spaces.
   D.   Size and character of recreation buildings and other structures
associated with land and facilities to be used by the mobile home park
occupants.
   E.   Layout or typical mobile home spaces.
   F.   Tabulations showing:
      1.   Area of land within the mobile home park.
      2.   Number of mobile homes permitted.
      3.   Number of mobile homes provided for in the mobile home park.
      4.   Percent of area to be devoted to parks and playgrounds.
      5.   Number of off street parking spaces.
   G.   Proposed location of off street parking spaces.
   H.   Proposed landscape planting plan, including type and location of plant
materials.
   I.   Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water
and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs, and other
improvements.
   J.   Draft of proposed documents, including:
      1.   Management policies, covenants, and restrictions.
      2.   Maintenance agreements.
   K.   Typical street cross sections.
   L.   Any other data that the planning commission may require.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-6: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The development of a mobile home park shall conform to the following standards
and requirements:
   A.   The area shall be in one ownership and shall remain in one ownership,
and the same shall not be subdivided.
   B.   The final plan must be prepared by an engineer, architect, or landscape
architect licensed to practice in the state of Idaho.
   C.   The minimum initial site size of a mobile home park shall be two (2)
acres.
   D.   The mobile homes may be clustered and individual mobile home site sizes
may be reduced below that required for single- family dwellings within the zone
in which the development is located; provided, that the gross density of mobile
home units within the development does not exceed eight (8) units per acre and
that all lots or spaces are served by an approved central culinary water and
sewage disposal system.
   E.   The land area not contained in individual lots, roads, or parking shall
be set aside and developed as parks, playgrounds and service areas for the
common use and enjoyment of the occupants of the mobile home park.
   F.   No less than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the mobile home
park shall be set aside for common use. The land covered by vehicular roadways,
sidewalks, off street parking and landscaped areas surrounding mobile home
spaces which are pertinent to each mobile home and area devoted to service
facilities shall not be construed as being part of the area required for parks
and playgrounds.
   G.   No mobile home or add on shall be located closer than fifteen feet
(15') from the nearest portion of any other mobile home or add on; provided,
that when a carport is added to a mobile home, side yards on the carport side
shall be at least six feet (6') from the side lot line, or not less than twelve
feet (12') between structures, whichever is greater. All mobile homes and add
ons shall be set back at least five feet (5') from all roadways.
   H.   All area not covered by mobile homes, buildings, parking spaces or
driveways shall be planted in lawn, trees, and shrubs or otherwise landscaped
within two (2) years from date of final approval of the park.
   I.   All construction and required surfacing shall be applied to all off
street parking space and driveways prior to occupancy of the park.
   J.   A strip of land at least eight feet (8') wide surrounding the mobile
home park shall be left unoccupied by mobile homes and shall be planted and
maintained in lawn, shrubs, and trees designed to afford privacy to the
development.
   K.   All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of the confines of a
mobile home must be housed in a closed structure compatible in design and
construction with the mobile homes and with any service buildings within the
mobile home park. All patios, garages, carports, and other add ons must also be
compatible with design and construction with the mobile home and with the
service buildings as approved by the planning and zoning commission.
   L.   Occupancy shall be by written lease, which lease shall be made
available to the officials of the city upon demand.
   M.   Roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic,
as follows:
      1.   For one-way with no parking: Twelve feet (12') in width, plus extra
width as necessary for maneuvering mobile homes.
      2.   For two-way with no parking: Twenty four feet (24') in width.
      3.   For entrance streets: Minimum of thirty six feet (36') in width. All
streets shall be constructed so as to provide adequate drainage of surface
water and shall be graded and graveled to produce an all weather roadway.
   N.   There shall be no more than two (2) entrances from the mobile home park
into any one street, which entrances shall be no closer than twenty five feet
(25') from each other, nor closer than seventy feet (70') to the corner of an
intersection.
   O.   Access shall be provided to each mobile home stand by means of an
accessway reserved for maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall be kept
free from trees and other immovable obstructions.
Use of planks, steel mats, or other means during placement of a mobile home
shall be allowed so long as the same are moved immediately after placement of
the mobile home.
   P.   Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of two (2) parking
spaces per mobile home space contained within the mobile home park. In no case
shall the parking space be located greater than one hundred feet (100') away
from the mobile home space it is designed to serve, except that one- fourth (1/
4) of the required parking spaces may be located not more than three hundred
feet (300') away from the mobile home spaces it is designed to serve.
   Q.   In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the
other laws of the city, all mobile home parks shall also conform to
requirements set forth in the "Code Of Camp, Trailer Court, Hotel, Motel And
Resort Sanitation Regulations" adopted by the Idaho state board of health, and
to the "Life Safety Code", which codes are hereby adopted by reference, three
(3) copies of which are filed with the office of the city clerk-treasurer for
use of the public, and all restrictions, regulations, and notations contained
therein shall be made a part of this title as fully set forth herein. In the
event of any conflict between said regulations or codes and this chapter, this
chapter shall take precedence.
   R.   Mobile home parks containing not less than twenty five (25) mobile
homes may include a launderette for convenience of the occupants of the park
but not for the general public.
   S.   All mobile homes shall be located at least thirty feet (30') back from
any public street and the resulting yards must be landscaped, except for
driveways.
An area of at least one hundred (100) square feet for each mobile home space
contained within the park shall be provided for the storage of boats, trailers,
and campers. Said storage space shall be enclosed with a sight obscuring fence
of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8') in height.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-7: OTHER DOCUMENTS:
Documents shall also be submitted with the preliminary plan, consisting of:
   A.   A declaration of management policies, covenants, and restrictions
setting forth the responsibilities and duties of the renters or occupants
within the mobile home park.
   B.   An agreement between the developers and the city stating, among other
things:
      1.   That in the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners,
successors, or assigns to maintain the common areas, landscaping and other
improvements in good condition, the city may perform the necessary work, and
for that purpose may enter in upon the land and do said work and charge the
cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, against the owners or their
successors or assigns.
      2.   That the developer will construct the project in accordance with
approved plans.
      3.   That the contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns,
receivers, or successors of the project for the life of the buildings or the
project.
      4.   Any other conditions that the planning and zoning commission deems
to be reasonably necessary to carry out the intent of this title.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-8: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   The planning and zoning commission shall review the plan and proposed
documents to determine compliance with all portions of the city master plan. In
considering said plan, the planning and zoning commission, among other things,
shall make sure that such developments shall constitute a residential
environment of sustained desirability and stability and that it will not
adversely affect amenities in the surrounding areas. The planning and zoning
commission may require changes to be made in the plan. They may also require
additional yards or buffers or other improvements to be installed along with
greater amounts of landscaping or parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed
as conditions of approval where it is determined by the planning and zoning
commission that such changes are necessary to ensure that the development will
mix harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses.
   B.   An application for approval of a mobile home park shall be granted or
denied only after a public hearing by the planning and zoning commission.
Notice of the hearing shall be given at least five (5) days prior to said
hearing. If approved by the planning and zoning commission, the application,
with the planning and zoning commission recommendations, shall be submitted to
the city council for its approval. An application denied by the planning and
zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. Said appeal must be
made, in writing, within ten (10) days after the denial is made by the planning
and zoning commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a
period of one year.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-9: FINAL SITE PLAN:
   A.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the city council, the
developer shall submit to the planning commission a final site plan of either
the entire mobile home park or the first stage of such development that is to
be constructed. Such plan shall be drawn to scale, and provide, in detail, the
information required under this chapter.
   B.   Copies of the final approved documents shall also be recorded in the
office of the county recorder. No building permit shall be issued for said
mobile home park until final plans have been approved by the planning and
zoning commission and the required documents recorded in the office of the
county recorder, and also until the bond required under this chapter has been
properly posted.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-10: STAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:
Development may be carried out in progressive stages, in which event each stage
shall be so planned that the requirements and intent of this title shall be
fully complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for the
initial stage shall cover less than two (2) acres.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-11: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE; TYPE AND AMOUNT:
   A.   In order to ensure that the mobile home park will be constructed in an
acceptable manner, developers shall post a bond, mortgage, or other assurance
acceptable to the city council in an amount equal to the estimated cost of
constructing all required landscaping, road improvements, pedestrianways, curbs
and gutters, hard surfacing, water and sewer lines and other domestic sewage
disposal facilities, and common facilities as shown on the final site plan.
   B.   The duration of the bond or other assurance shall be for two (2) years
from the date of approval of the development by the city council. An extension
of time may be granted by the city council upon application by the developer,
provided such application is submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the bond, and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to
extend the time of the assurance.
   C.   In the event the developer defaults or neglects to satisfactorily
install the required improvements within two (2) years from the date of
approval of the development by the city council, the said council may declare
the bond or other assurance forfeited, and the town may install or cause the
required improvements to be installed using the proceeds from the collection of
the bond or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-12: FINAL DISPOSITION AND RELEASE:
The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and
workmanship. At the completion of the work, or not less than ten (10) days
prior to the release date of the bond or other assurance, the city council
shall make an inspection of the improvements. If the conditions of said
facilities are found to be satisfactory, the council shall release the bond or
other assurance. If the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual
depreciation or does not comply with the acceptable standards of durability,
the city council may declare the developer in default.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-13: CONTINUING OBLIGATION:
Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain the mobile
home park in accordance with the approved management policies, covenants,
conditions, restrictions and agreements shall be, and the same is hereby
declared to be, a public nuisance endangering the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area; and, in addition
to any other remedy provided by law for the abatement or removal of such public
nuisance, the city may remove or abate the nuisance and charge the cost
thereof, including reasonable attorney fees to the owners.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983; amd. 2011 Code)
10-7-14: DEVELOPMENT IN PARKS:
The parks and play areas shall be protected against building development by
conveying to the city an open space easement over such open areas, restricting
the area against any future building or use, except as is consistent with that
of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational
satisfaction of the residents. Buildings or uses for noncommercial,
recreational, or cultural purposes, compatible with the open space objectives,
may be permitted only with the express approval of the city council, following
approval of building, site, and operational plans by the planning and zoning
commission.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-15: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MOBILE HOME PARK:
Prerequisite to the operation of any mobile home park shall be the obtaining of
an annual license which shall be issued only after inspection by the zoning
administrator. It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile home park without first
obtaining a license, and said license shall be refused or revoked upon failure
of the owner and/or operator to maintain the park in accordance with the
standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
10-7-16: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COURTS:
Recreational vehicle courts shall be permitted only in the zones in which uses
are specifically permitted. All such courts shall be permitted subject to
restrictions and conditions contained within the zone requirements and also as
hereinafter set forth.
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of these recreational vehicle court provisions
to provide safe, sanitary, and attractive facilities for the tourist to park a
recreational vehicle while visiting the area. It is also the intent of these
provisions to prevent the use of a recreational vehicle as a substandard mobile
home and to project the integrity and characteristics of the zone or zones in
which recreational vehicle courts are located.
   B.   Approval Of Plans And Documents Necessary: Any person wishing to
construct a recreational vehicle court shall obtain from the planning and
zoning administrator information pertaining to the city plan of land use,
streets, public facilities, and other requirements affecting the land within
the development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction connected
with a recreational vehicle court, the preliminary plans, required documents
pertaining to the development, and the final plan shall have been approved as
hereinafter set forth.
   C.   Preliminary Plan And Documents: The preliminary plan and documents
shall be prepared and submitted as follows: Three (3) copies of the preliminary
plan must be submitted to the planning and zoning administrator at least two
(2) weeks prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which
the plan will be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to the scale
not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or as recommended
by the planning and zoning administrator, and shall show the following
information:
      1.   Proposed road and recreational vehicle space layout.
      2.   Proposed reservation for parks, playgrounds, and other open space.
      3.   Proposed location for service facilities.
      4.   A generalized landscape plan.
      5.   Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water
and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs, and other
improvements.
      6.   Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require.
      7.   Draft copies of proposed documents including statement of management
policies, covenants and restrictions, and maintenance agreements.
   D.   Standards And Requirements:
      1.   Each recreational vehicle court shall be held in one ownership and
shall contain at least one acre of land.
      2.   All recreational vehicle courts shall abut upon a collector or
arterial street, as set forth in the major street plan of the city.
      3.   All recreational vehicles shall be set back at least twenty feet
(20') from any public street.
      4.   The roadway systems shall provide convenient circulation through the
recreational vehicle court and provide access to each recreational vehicle
space. No recreational vehicle space will be permitted direct access to a
public street, road, or highway, other than by means of the recreational
vehicle court roadway system. All entrances and exits from the recreational
vehicle court shall be by forward motion only. No exit or entrance from a
recreational vehicle court shall be through a residential zone and no entrance
or exit shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to the intersection of
two (2) streets.
      5.   All one-way roadways shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width
and all two-way roadways at least twenty feet (20') in width, and all roadways
shall be graded and graveled.
      6.   All areas within the court which are not hard surfaced, including
the twenty foot (20') setback space, shall be landscaped and maintained with
lawns, trees and shrubs designed to provide privacy and noise containment, and
shall be equipped with adequate sprinkling devices as determined by the zoning
administrator.
      7.   Each recreational vehicle space shall be at least twenty feet (20')
in width and at least forty feet (40') in length.
      8.   All recreational vehicle spaces shall be served by an approved water
system and sewage disposal system.
      9.   No recreational vehicle space shall be rented for a period of more
than thirty (30) days, and no recreational vehicle shall be placed in a
recreational vehicle court which exceeds eight feet (8') in width.
      10.   In addition to meeting the above requirements, all travel trailer
courts shall conform to the requirements set forth in the "Code Of Camp,
Trailer Court, Hotel, Motel And Resort Sanitation Requirements".
   E.   Documents: Same as required for mobile home parks.
   F.   Review And Approvals:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission shall review the plan to
determine its compliance with any portion of the master plan that shall have
been adopted by the planning and zoning commission. In considering approval of
the development, the planning and zoning commission shall, among other things,
make sure that such development will mesh harmoniously with the surrounding
area, that it will not produce a volume of traffic beyond the capacity of the
surrounding street system, that requirements for utilities, off street parking,
traffic circulation and other public requirements will be adequately met and
that the standards and intent of this section shall be adequately complied
with.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission may require changes to be made in
the plan. They may also require additional yards or buffers or other
improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or
parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval where it
is determined by the planning and zoning commission that such changes are
necessary to ensure that the development will mix harmoniously with adjoining
or nearby uses.
      3.   An application for approval of a recreational vehicle court shall be
granted or denied only after a public hearing by the planning and zoning
commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least five (5) days prior
to said hearing. If approved by the planning and zoning commission, the
application, with the planning and zoning commission recommendations, shall be
submitted to the city council for its approval. An application denied by the
planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council ten (10)
days after the denial is made by the planning and zoning commission. Approval
of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of one year.
   G.   Final Site Plan:
      1.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the city council, the
developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a final site plan
of either the entire recreational vehicle court or the first stage of such
development that is to be constructed. Such plan shall be drawn to scale and
provide, in detail, the information required herein.
      2.   Copies of the final approved documents shall also be recorded in the
office of the county recorder. No building permit shall be issued for said
recreational vehicle court until final plans have been approved by the planning
and zoning commission and the required documents recorded in the office of the
county recorder, and also until the bond required herein has been properly
posted.
   H.   Staged Construction Permitted: Development may be carried out in
progressive stages, in which event each stage shall be so planned that the
requirements and intent of this title shall be fully complied with at the
completion of each stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall cover less
than one acre.
   I.   Guarantee Of Performance: Same as is required for mobile home parks.
   J.   Continuing Obligation: Same as is required for mobile home parks.
   K.   License Required: Same as is required for mobile home parks.
(Ord. 199, 11-14-1983)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Jurisdiction
11-1-4: Fees And Costs To Review
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
   This Title shall be cited as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this Title is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the City and its residents by establishing regulations,
administrative procedures and a process of review for the subdivision of land
into two (2) or more lots. These regulations are established to prevent
overcrowding of land; to lessen congestion of streets and highways; to provide
adequate space, light and air; to provide adequate facilities for water,
sewage, parks and recreation areas, sites for schools and other public uses; to
provide for proper ingress and egress; and to require the conveyance of land by
accurate legal description.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
   A.   Regulated: The following regulations shall apply to the subdividing of
all land within the corporate limits of the City including property within one
mile of the corporate limits, as required under section 50-1306 of the Idaho
Code, and shall include the following:
      1.   The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lot or parcels for
transfer of ownership or for change of use, or for the development of said
property;
      2.   The dedication of any street or alley through or along any tract of
land;
      3.   The re-subdivision of an original parcel of land into two (2) or
more parcels except as provided in the exceptions listed below;
      4.   The development of condominium projects. In condominium projects, as
permitted by Idaho Code, the City Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council may regulate and attach conditions to the design and location of
buildings, the creation, shape and size of condominium units, the provisions
and maintenance of open space and off-street parking. Unless excepted pursuant
to the provisions of this Title, the Planning Commission and City Council shall
require the installation of public improvements and utilities for condominium
projects as required under the provisions of this Title; and
      5.   Any projected use of land which requires the construction of
multiple buildings or structures thereon for human habitation or occupancy,
roadways for access thereto, or utilities for service to more than one
structure for human habitation or occupancy upon said property, whether said
property remains under single ownership or is transferred to another person.
      For purposes of the administration of zoning and subdivision regulations,
the City may consider a condominium development as a single building, requiring
one front yard, two (2) side yards, a rear yard, and other regulations
pertinent to a given lot, and may grant such exceptions as are necessary to the
zoning and subdivision regulations to permit such development.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   A readjustment of lot lines which does not reduce the area,
frontage, width, depth or building setback lines below the minimum required.
      2.   A subdivision of an original parcel of land into parcels of five (5)
acres or more designated for agricultural purposes, and which does not involve
any new street dedication.
      3.   One division of any original parcel into not more than two (2)
parcels; provided, that each parcel resulting from such subdivision shall front
upon a public street.
      4.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate or a court
decree for the distribution of property thereunder.
      5.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as
defined and allowed in the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-1-4: FEES AND COSTS TO REVIEW:
   A.   Whenever the city is presented with an application or request under
this title or title 10 of this code for the city to approve a subdivision,
development, or zoning issue, including, but not limited to, a variance,
approval of a nonconforming use, rezoning of property, conditional use,
building permit, planned unit development, or subdivision development, the
applicant shall pay an application review fee fixed by resolution of the City
Council.
   B.   In addition to the application review fee, the applicant shall
reimburse the city for all out-of-pocket costs incurred by the city in the
review and approval process, including, but not limited to, copying and
reproduction costs, attorney and engineer fees, mailing and advertising costs,
publication costs, and other costs specifically incurred by the city with
regard to the subject application and project.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Generally
11-2-1: GENERALLY:
For the purpose of this Title certain words, terms and phrases are defined as
follows in this Chapter:
ALLEY:         A public service way used to provide secondary vehicular access to properties
               otherwise abutting upon a street
ARTERIAL       A general term including expressways and arterial streets and interstate, State
ROUTE:         or County highways having regional continuity.
BLOCK:         A piece or parcel of land or group of lots entirely surrounded by public
               streets, streams, railroads or parks, or a combination thereof.
               The Bancroft City Comprehensive Plan, or parts thereof, providing for the
CITY           future growth and improvement of the City and for the general location and
COMPREHENSIVE  coordination of streets and highways, schools and recreation areas, public
PLAN:          building sites and other physical development, which shall have been duly
               adopted by the City Council.
CITY MAJOR     Part of the City Comprehensive Plan which provides for the development of a
STREET AND     system of major streets and highways which may include the location and
HIGHWAY PLAN:  alignment of existing and proposed thoroughfares.
CITY PLANNING  The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
AND ZONING     Commission. If the City Planning and Zoning Commission is not presently
COMMISSION:    constituted and functioning, the City Council shall be deemed to be the
               Planning and Zoning Commission for purposes of this Chapter.
COLLECTOR      Provides for traffic movement within neighborhoods of the City and between
STREET:        major streets and local streets and for direct access to abutting property.
CONDITIONAL    An affirmative action by the Commission, indicating that approval will be
APPROVAL:      forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations.
CONSUL TING    An engineer of the City's choice.
ENGINEER:
               A lot abutting on two (2) or more intersection streets where the interior angle
CORNER LOT:    or intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135 ). A
               corner lot shall be considered to be in that block in which the lot fronts.
CUL-DE-SAC     A short local street having one end permanently terminated in vehicular
STREET:        turnaround.
DEVELOPMENT    A preliminary master plan for the development of a large, unusual or
MASTER PLAN    complicated land area, the platting of which is expected in the progressive
(DMP):         stages. A DMP may be designed by the subdivider, planner and engineer and shall
               be subject to approval of the Commission.
EASEMENT:      A grant by the owner of the use of a parcel of land by the public, corporation,
               or persons for specified use and purposes and so designated on a plat.
               Plans, profiles, cross sections and other required details for the construction
ENGINEERING    of public improvements, prepared by a registered engineer in accordance with
PLANS:         the approved preliminary plat and in compliance with existing standards of
               design and construction approved by the Council.
FINAL          Approval of the final plat by the Council, as evidenced by certification on the
APPROVAL:      plat by the Mayor of the City constitutes authorization to record a plat.
               A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to an
FINAL PLAT:    approved preliminary plat, prepared by a registered professional engineer or a
               registered land surveyor in accordance with this Title and the Idaho Code.
FRONTAGE OR    A minor street parallel and adjacent to an arterial route which provides access
MARGINAL       to abutting property and intercepts local streets and controls access to an
ACCESS STREET: arterial route.
HILLSIDE       Any subdivision or that portion of a subdivision located in terrain having a
SUBDIVISION:   slope exceeding ten percent (10%).
INTERIOR LOT:  A lot having only one side abutting on a street.
IRRIGATION     "Irrigation facilities" includes canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates,
FACILITIES:    pumps, and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage or
               irrigation water.
KEY LOT:       An interior lot, one side of which is contiguous to the rear line of a corner
               lot.
LAND           Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the subdivision which is
EXCEPTION:     not owned by the subdivider.
               Provides for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial or other
LOCAL STREET:  abutting land and for local traffic movements and connects to collector and/or
               major streets.
               A piece or parcel of land separated from other pieces or parcels by
LOT:           description, as in a subdivision or on a record survey map, or by metes and
               bounds, for purposes of sale, lease, or separate use.
               The width of a lot shall be:
               A.   If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between
               these side lines.
LOT WIDTH:     8.   If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be
               the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot a distance equal to
               the front setback required for the district in which the lot is located. The
               axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear
               property lines.
MARGINAL
ACCESS OR      See definition of Frontage Or Marginal Access Street.
FRONTAGE
STREET:
               A vehicle or structure constructed with wheels for transportation or use on
               public streets or highways, and which may have sleeping, cooking and plumbing
               facilities, and intended for human occupancy as a residence or as an office or
               business building.
               The term "mobile home" includes all types of mobile homes or "house trailers",
MOBILE HOME:   including, but not limited to, "double wide" or other oversized structures.
               The term "mobile home" shall not apply to residence or business buildings
               constructed in prefabricated sections and moved from factory or place of
               construction to a location within the City to become affixed to and a part of
               the real property by erection upon a concrete or other permanent foundation in
               the same manner as on-site built structures.
MOBILE HOME    A subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in
SUBDIVISION:   mobile homes exclusively.
NEIGHBORHOOD   A plan to guide the platting of remaining vacant parcels in a partially built
PLAN:          up neighborhood, so as to make reasonable use of all land, correlated street
               patterns, and achieve the best possible land use relationships.
OWNER:         The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title as
               grantee/buyer under land contract, or holding any other title of record.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A public way dedicated entirely through a block from street to street and/or
               providing access to a school, park, recreation area, or shopping center.
PLANNED UNIT   A use or combination of uses planned for a tract of land to be developed as a
DEVELOPMENT:   unit.
PLAT:          A map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY    A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision
PLAT:          development, prepared in accordance with this Title and the Idaho Code.
PUBLIC         A set of regulations setting forth the details, specifications and instructions
IMPROVEMENT    to be followed in the planning, design and construction of certain public
STANDARDS:     improvements in the City formulated by the consulting engineer, the appropriate
               health authority and other City departments.
RECORDED PLAT: A final plat bearing all of the certificates of approval required in this Title
               and duly recorded in the County Recorder's office.
               Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, viaduct, easement
               for access or other way which is an existing State, County or Municipal
               roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
STREET:        or approved by official action; or a street or way in a plat duly filed and
               recorded in the County Recorder's office. A "street" includes the land between
               the right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise
               pavement, shoulder, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
               The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust
SUBDIVIDER:    or other legal entity that titles the application and initiates proceedings for
               the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this Title; and
               said subdivider need not be the owner of the property as defined by this Title.
SUBDIVISION    A Committee established to review preliminary subdivision plats.
COMMITTEE:
THROUGH LOT:   A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
USABLE LOT     That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal uses made of any
AREA:          property as zoned, excluding any areas which may be covered by water,
               excessively steep, or included in certain types of easements.
               Installations of facilities, underground or overhead, furnishing for the use of
               the public electricity, gas, steam, communications, water drainage, sewage
UTILITIES:     disposal or flood control, owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation,
               Municipal department or board duly authorized by State or Municipal
               regulations. Utility or "utilities" as used herein may also refer to such
               person, firms, corporations, departments or boards as applicable herein.
UTILITY        An individual or group of individuals designated by the several utilities as
COMMITTEE:     their representative(s) in subdivision matters.
 
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 3
PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-3-1: Required
11-3-2: Review
11-3-1: REQUIRED:
   Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to
the City the plans and data as required in Chapter 4 of this Title for a
preliminary plat; provided however, that such plans may be generalized in
content and that such submission shall not require the official filing of a
subdivision application and application review fee.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-3-2: REVIEW:
   The City shall review said plans and data as submitted and within twenty
(20) days advise the subdivider in writing as to the general conformance or
nonconformance of the plans with this Title.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 4
PRELIMINARY PLOT
SECTION:
11-4-1: Application
11-4-2: Form Of Presentation
11-4-3: Identification And Descriptive Data
11-4-4: Existing Conditions Data
11-4-5: Proposed Conditions Data
11-4-6: Proposed Utility Methods
11-4-7: Reviewing Fee
11-4-8: Certification
11-4-9: City Council Action
11-4-10: Significance Of Preliminary Approval
11-4-11: Agency Review
11-4-12: Commission Action
11-4-1: APPLICATION:
   Upon completion of the preapplication, the subdivider shall file with the
City copies of the completed subdivision application form and four ( 4) copies
of the preliminary plat with data as required in this Chapter.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-2: FORM OF PRESENTATION:
   The information required in this Chapter as part of the preliminary plat
submittal shall be shown graphically or by note on plans, or by letter, and may
comprise several sheets showing various elements of required data. All mapped
data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same standard engineering scale,
said scale having not more than one hundred feet (100') to an inch. Whenever
practical, scales shall be adjusted to produce an overall drawing measuring
twenty two inches by thirty six inches (22" x 36"), not exceeding forty three
inches by sixty inches (43" x 60").
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-3: IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTIVE DATA:
   Required identification and descriptive data shall be:
   A.   Proposed name of subdivision and its location by dimension, section,
township, and range; reference by dimension and bearing to a section corner or
quarter section corner;
   B.   Name, address and phone number of subdivider;
   C.   Name, address and phone number of engineer, surveyor, landscape
architect or land planner preparing the plat;
   D.   Scale, north point and date of preparation including dates of any
subsequent revisions;
   E.   Vicinity map clearly showing proposed division in relationship to
adjacent subdivisions, main arterial routes, collector streets, etc.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-4: EXISTING CONDITIONS DATA:
   Required data regarding existing conditions shall be:
   A.   Topography by contours related to USGS survey, datum or other datum
approved by the consulting engineer, shown on the same map as the proposed
subdivision layout. Contour interval shall be such as to adequately reflect the
character and drainage of the land;
   B.   Location of water wells, streams, canals, irrigation laterals, private
ditches, washes, lakes or other water features; directional flow, location and
extent of areas subject to inundation whether such inundation is frequent,
periodic or occasional;
   C.   Location, widths, and names of all platted streets, railroads,
utilities right of way of public record, public areas, permanent structures to
remain, including water wells, and Municipal corporation lines within or
adjacent to the tract;
   D.   Name, book and page numbers of any recorded adjacent subdivision having
common boundary with the tract;
   E.   By note, the existing zoning classification of the tract;
   F.   Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided shall be fully dimensioned.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-5: PROPOSED CONDITIONS DATA:
   Required data regarding proposed conditions shall be:
   A.   Street layout, including location, width and proposed names of public
streets, alleys, crosswalks and easements, connections to adjoining platted
tract;
   B.   Typical lot dimensions (scaled); dimensions of all corner lots and lots
of curvilinear sections of streets, each lot numbered individually; total
number of lots;
   C.   Location, width and use of easements;
   D.   Designation of all land to be dedicated or reserved for public use with
use indicated;
   E.   If plat includes land for which multi-family, commercial, or industrial
use is proposed, such areas shall be clearly designated together with existing
zoning classification and status of zoning change, if any.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-6: PROPOSED UTILITY METHODS:
   A.   Sewage Disposal: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
furnish the appropriate health authority such evidence as that department may
require to its satisfaction as to the design and operation of sanitary sewage
facilities proposed. A statement as to the type of facilities proposed shall
appear on the preliminary plat.
   B.   Water Supply: One water hookup or line is required per deeded single-
or multifamily rental structure. The size of the line will be determined by
using the city's current formula.
   C.   Storm Water Disposal: Preliminary calculations and layout of proposed
system and locations of outlets shall be provided, subject to approval of the
city's consulting engineer.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-7: CERTIFICATION:
   Upon receipt of the preliminary plat, all required data as provided in this
chapter and the payment of the appropriate reviewing fee, the city shall
certify the application as complete and shall affix the data of application
acceptance thereon. Thereafter, the preliminary plat shall be placed on the
planning and zoning commission agenda for consideration at the next regular
meeting of the commission.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-8: COMMISSION ACTION:
   A.   The Commission shall approve conditionally or disapprove the
preliminary plat within thirty (30) days after the date of the regular meeting
at which the plat is first considered. If the preliminary plat is disapproved
or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in
writing, a copy of which, signed by the chairman of the Commission, shall be
attached to one copy of the plat and returned to the subdivider.
   B.   If no action is taken by the Commission within thirty (30) days, the
plat shall be deemed to have been approved unless additional time is agreed to
by the subdivider.
   C.   Upon approval or disapproval by the Commission, the plat, together with
a complete copy of the Commission's findings and report of action, shall be
transmitted to the City Council.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-9: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   The City Council shall act upon the report of the commission within
thirty (30) days, or at its next regular meeting following receipt of the
report. At the hearing of the City Council, the Council may hear testimony of
representatives of the commission, and any witnesses in its behalf including
interested citizens affected by the proposed subdivision.
   B.   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall base its
findings upon the testimony presented before it and within thirty (30) days
declare its findings. It may sustain, modify or reject the recommendations of
the commission, and make such findings as are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this title and the Idaho Code.
   C.   The time limits for acting on the preliminary plat as herein specified
may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission
and/or the City Council. If no action is taken within the time limits, the
preliminary plat as filed shall be deemed approved.
   D.   Subdivisions shall be designed to meet the specific requirements for
the zoning district within which it is located. However, in the event that a
variance of zoning is necessary, said action shall be initiated by the property
owner or his authorized agent.
   E.   The commission shall not proceed with the processing of the preliminary
plat until determination has been made regarding any proposed zoning change. In
any event, any such zoning change affecting the preliminary plat shall have
been adopted prior to preliminary plat approval.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-10: SIGNIFICANCE OF PRELIMINARY APPROVAL:
   Preliminary approval constitutes authorization for the subdivider to proceed
with preparation of the final plat and engineering plans and specifications for
public improvements. Preliminary approval is based upon the following terms:
   A.   The basic conditions under which preliminary plat is granted will not
be changed prior to its expiration date.
   B.   Preliminary approval is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from
the date of original Council approval unless an extension is granted by the
City Council.
   C.   Preliminary approval, in itself, does not assure final acceptance of
the streets or public areas for dedication or continuation of existing zoning
requirements for the tract or its environs.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-4-11: AGENCY REVIEW:
   A.   The City shall transmit one copy of the application to the City
departments and such other consultants or agencies that have jurisdiction or an
interest in the proposed subdivision for their review and recommendations.
   B.   If no written reply is received from any of the various consultants,
departments or interested agencies within ten (10) days from the date of
notification, approval of the preliminary plat by such consultant, department
or agency will be considered to be granted.
   C.   Some of the departments and agencies which shall receive copies of the
preliminary plat may be as follows:
      1.   Subdivision Committee;
      2.   City Parks and Recreation Department;
      3.   Appropriate health authority;
      4.   Superintendent of Public Works;
      5.   State Highway Department if the subdivision abuts a State highway;
      6.   Utilities companies;
      7.   Other departments or agencies as determined by the City; and
      8.   Staff review by the City staff.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 5
FINAL PLAT
SECTION:
11-5-1: Generally
11-5-2: Method And Medium Of Presentation
11-5-3: Identification Data Required
11-5-4: Survey Data Required
11-5-5: Descriptive Data Required
11-5-6: Dedication And Acknowledgment
11-5-7: Certifications
11-5-8: Time Limitations
11-5-9: Acceptance Of Final Plat
11-5-10: Agency Review
11-5-11: City Council Action
11-5-1: GENERALLY:
   After approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall cause the subdivision, or part thereof, to be surveyed and a
final plat prepared in accordance with the preliminary plat as approved.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-2: METHOD AND MEDIUM OF PRESENTATION:
   A.   The record plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on linen, plastic, or
other nonshrinking material, on a sheet of eighteen inches by twenty four
inches (111" x 24") proportions with tracing according to Idaho law.
   B.   Copies of the record plat shall be reproduced in the form of blueline
or blackline prints on a white background.
   C.   The plat shall be drawn to an accurate scale having not more than one
hundred feet (100') to an inch unless otherwise approved as to scale.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-3: IDENTIFICATION DATA REQUIRED:
The required identification data shall be:
   A.   A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by
number of section, township, range and county;
   B.   Name, address and registration number of seal of the registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor preparing the plat;
   C.   Scale north arrow and date of plat preparation.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-4: SURVEY DATA REQUIRED:
   A.   Boundaries of the tract shall be subdivided, fully balanced and closed,
showing all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the
field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
   B.   Any excepted parcel(s) within the plat boundaries shall show all
bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the field. All
dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.
   C.   Locations and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced; each of two
(2) corners of the subdivision traverse shall be tied by course and distance to
separate section corners or quarter section corners.
   D.   Location of all physical encroachments upon the boundaries of the
tract.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-5: DESCRIPTIVE DATA REQUIRED:
Required descriptive data shall be:
   A.   Name, right-of-way lines, bearings, lengths; widths of all public
streets, alleys, crosswalks and utility easements, radii, points of tangency
and central angles of all curvilinear streets and alleys, radii of all rounded
street line intersections;
   B.   All drainageways shall be shown on the plat. The right of way of all
major drainageways, as designated by the City's Tract Engineer and Consulting
Engineer shall be dedicated to the public.
   C.   All easements for rights of way provide for public services or
utilities and any limitations of the easements.
   D.   Location and all dimensions of all residential lots.
   E.   All residential lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers
throughout the plat. Exceptions, tracts and "private parks" shall be so
designated, lettered or named and clearly dimensioned.
   F.   Location, dimensions, bearings, radii arcs and central angles of all
sites to be dedicated to the public will be clearly indicated and intended use
specified.
   G.   Location of all adjoining subdivisions with date, book, and page number
of recordation noted, or if unrecorded, so marked.
   H.   Any proposed private deed restrictions to be imposed upon the plat or
any part or parts thereof pertaining to the intended use of the land shall be
typewritten and attached to the plat and to each copy submitted.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-6: DEDICATION AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT:
   A.   Dedication: Statement of dedication of all streets, alleys, crosswalks,
drainageways, pedestrian ways and other easements for public use by the person
holding title or record, by persons holding title as vendees under land
contract, and by any spouses of said parties shall be required. If lands
dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the plat.
   Dedication shall include a written location by section, township and range
of the tract. If the plat contains private streets, public utilities shall
reserve the right to install and maintain utilities in the street right of way.
   B.   Acknowledgment Of Dedication: Execution of dedication acknowledged and
certified by a notary public shall be required.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-7: CERTIFICATIONS:
   A.   Required certifications shall be:
      1.   Certification by the registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor making the plat that the plat is correct and accurate, and that
the monuments described in it have been located as described;
      2.   Certificate of plat approval by City consulting engineer;
      3.   Certificate of plat approval by the City Council;
      4.   Certificate of recordation by the County Recorder.
   B.   The final plat, prepared in accordance with title 50, chapter 13, of
the Idaho Code and the provisions set forth in this Chapter shall be filed with
the City Council.
   C.   In the event the final plat does not conform to the approved
preliminary plat, the City Council shall so inform the subdivider to proceed to
assign the final plat to the Commission agenda for its reverting to a
preliminary plat status.
   D.   Final plat submission shall include all prints thereof as required, two
(2) sets of prints of the plans and specifications for all proposed
improvements as required by this Title, and a current title report or other
evidence acceptable to the City showing proof of ownership of the tract of land
being platted.
   E.   The final plat, when submitted to the City, shall bear all required
certificates and acknowledgments and the signatures of the engineer, owners,
notary public and County engineer.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-8: TIME LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Failure to file and obtain certification of the acceptance of the final
plat application by the City within one year after action by the City Council
shall cause approval of a preliminary plat to be null and void unless an
extension of time is applied for and granted by the City Council.
   B.   In the event that the development of the preliminary plat is made in
successive contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, and
conforms substantially to the approved preliminary plat, such segments, if
submitted within successive intervals of twelve (12) months may be considered
for final plat approval. In the event a longer period elapses, the subdivision
must be reviewed by the Commission.
   C.   The final plat shall be filed with the County Recorder within one year
after approval of the City Council; otherwise such approval shall become null
and void unless an extension time is applied for and granted by the City
Council.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-9: ACCEPTANCE OF FINAL PLAT:
Upon receipt of the final plat, and all other data as required herein, the City
Council shall certify the application as complete and shall affix the date of
acceptance on the agenda for consideration at the regular meeting.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-10: AGENCY REVIEW:
   A.   The City Council shall transmit one copy of the final plat for review
to each of the same departments and agencies, or others as it may deem
necessary, to ensure compliance with the approval of the preliminary plat.
   B.   If no written replies are received from any of the various departments
or interested agencies within ten (10) days from the date of notification,
approval of the final plat by such department or agency will be considered
granted.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-5-11: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   The City Council at its next meeting following receipt of the final
plat, shall consider said plat and any changes from the preliminary plat
approved by the Commission. If the plat conforms to the requirements of this
Title and the Idaho Code, the City Council shall approve the plat.
   B.   At the time of approval and recording of the final plat, the City
Council shall accept the dedications shown thereon and shall, as condition
precedent to the acceptance of any streets, require the subdivider either to
improve or agree to improve the streets by furnishing a surety agreement, in
accordance with standards approved for the preliminary plat.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 6
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Generally
11-6-2: Streets
11-6-3: Block Requirements
11-6-4: Lot Requirements
11-6-1: GENERALLY:
   A.   Subdivisions and improvements constructed therein shall conform to the
Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction (ISPWC), standards of the City
Comprehensive Plan, the applicable Zoning Ordinance and other ordinances and
regulations of the City.
   B.   Land which the City has determined to be unsuitable for subdivision
because of periodic flooding, poor drainage, excessively steep slopes or other
features likely to be harmful to the safety and general health and welfare of
the future residents, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods are
utilized to overcome these conditions.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-6-2: STREETS:
   A.   The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the City Comprehensive Plan and shall be constructed
in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their relation to the proposed uses of
the land to be served by such streets.
   B.   Local or minor residential streets shall be so designed as to
discourage their use by through traffic. Reverse strips controlling access to
public streets may be permitted; provided however, that the control and
disposition of land comprising such strips is placed within the jurisdiction of
the City.
   C.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, railroad, or limited access highway, the City may require frontage
streets, reverse frontage streets or such other treatment for the appropriate
use of the tract.
   D.   Half-street dedications shall be discouraged; provided however, the
City may accept a partial street dedication when such street forms the boundary
of the proposed subdivision and is deemed to be necessary for the orderly
development of the neighborhood, and provided the City finds it will be
appropriate to require the dedication of the remainder of the right of way when
the adjoining property is developed. When a partial street exists adjoining a
proposed subdivision, the remainder of the right of way shall be dedicated.
   E.   There shall be provided right of way of such width as provided for in
the City Comprehensive Plan; provided however, that the width of said right of
way shall in no case be less than the following:
 
MINIMUMS
Type Of Street Right-Of-Way Width
Arterial       100 feet right of way with 80 feet back of curb to back of curb
Collector      80 feet right of way with 60 feet back of curb to back of curb
Local          60 feet right of way with 40 feet back of curb to back of curb
 
   F.   Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular turnaround with a
right-of-way radius of at least forty five feet (45'). The City Council may
approve an equally convenient form of turning space where extreme conditions
justify. The maximum length shall be five hundred feet (500') from the entrance
to the center of a turnaround and not less than two hundred feet (200').
   G.   Dead-end streets will not be approved except in locations designated by
the City Council as necessary to future extensions in development of adjacent
lands. In any case, a dead-end street serving more than four (4) lots shall
provide by easement a temporary turning circle with a forty foot (40') radius
or other acceptable design to accomplish adequate access.
   H.   Loop streets shall be limited to a maximum length of one thousand two
hundred feet (1,200').
   I.   Streets shall be planned to intersect as nearly as possible as right
angles, but in no event at less than seventy degrees (70°). Streets
intersecting an arterial shall do so at a ninety degree (90°) angle.
   J.   Where any street deflects at an angle of ten degrees (10°) or more, a
connection curve shall be required having a minimum center line radius of three
hundred feet (300') for arterial and collector streets and one hundred twenty
five feet (125') for local streets.
   K.   Streets with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty five
feet ( 125') shall be avoided.
   L.   A tangent at least one hundred fifty feet (150') long shall be provided
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
   M.   At street intersections, property line corners shall be as configured
by city regulations.
   N.   Street intersections with more than four (4) legs and Y-type
intersections where legs meet at acute angles shall be avoided.
   O.   Maximum and minimum grades for all streets shall be as determined by
the consulting engineer.
   P.   Alley width of twenty feet (20'), when single-family residence units
abut both sides; twenty four feet (24') if abutting multiple-family, commercial
or industrial districts. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-6-3: BLOCK REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Length: Block lengths shall not exceed seven hundred feet (700') nor
shall they be less than four hundred feet (400'); except when the average lot
size is one-half(½) acre or more, in which case the maximum block length may be
exceeded.
   B.   Design: Block design shall provide for two (2) tiers of lots except
under special conditions where this is not feasible or practical.
   C.   Pedestrianways: Pedestrianways with a right-of-way width of eight feet
(8') or greater may be required where essential for circulation, or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community
facilities.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-6-4: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The lot size, width, depth shape and orientation and minimum setback
lines shall comply with the maximum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
   B.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines, except where other treatment may be justified.
   C.   Every lot shall have access to a public street, except in estate
developments where lots may abut upon a private street furnishing satisfactory
access to public streets.
   D.   Double frontage lots shall be avoided wherever possible.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 7
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Generally
11-7-2: Required Improvements
11-7-3: No Division Of Cost
11-7-1: GENERALLY:
   A.   All improvements of streets, alleys, or easements which are required as
a condition of plat approval shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
   B.   Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by an
licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Idaho.
   C.   All improvements required by this title shall be in accordance with the
Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction (ISPWC), and the city's current
standard specifications for street, sanitation sewer, and domestic water
improvements for development of subdivisions.
   D.   Prior to the time of recording of the final plat, the subdivider shall
file with the city's consulting engineer construction drawings for all
improvements required in the portion of the subdivision contained in the final
plat.
   E.   At the time of recording the final plat, the subdivider shall have
previously constructed all required improvements and secured a certificate of
completion from the engineer, or filed with the City Clerk a surety bond, or
other acceptable guarantee, to ensure the actual construction of such
improvements as previously submitted and approved. The improvements shall be
constructed within one year from the date of approval of the final plat;
provided however, the City Council may extend the period one year upon the
showing of just cause by the subdivider. Such surety bond or other guarantee
shall be in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost
of the improvements as determined by the City's consulting engineer.
   F.   Prior to acceptance by the City of any improvements installed by the
subdivider, two (2) sets of prints of the "as-built" plans and specifications
shall be certified by the subdivider's engineer and filed with the City's
consulting engineer.
   G.   Within ten (10) days after completion of improvements and submission of
"as-built" plans, the consulting engineer shall certify the completion and
acceptance of the construction and shall transmit a copy of said certification
to the subdivider. If a surety agreement has been executed by the subdivider,
the same shall be forwarded to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall thereafter
release said surety or guarantee upon application by the subdivider.
   H.   New electric, communication and television lines shall be installed
underground in accordance with the standards of the current edition of National
Electrical Safety Code. When facilities are installed in public right of way,
the location shall be approved by the City's consulting engineer. When overhead
utility lines exist within the property being platted, said existing overhead
utility lines and any additions or replacements needed to increase the capacity
or improve service reliability may remain overhead; provided however, that any
service drops into the platted area from said peripheral overhead lines shall
be underground. When overhead utility lines exist on the periphery of the
property of five (5) acres or less being platted, then the utility lines within
the platted area may be overhead. When, as a result of the subdivision
development, it is necessary to relocate, renew or expand existing facilities
within the platted area, the subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements
with the serving utility for these installations to be placed underground. The
subdivider shall arrange with the serving utility for, and be responsible for,
the cost of underground service lines to approved streetlight locations, as
required. Those electric lines of greater than three thousand (3,000) kVA
(kilovolt amperes) capacity as rated by the American Standards Association are
excluded from the requirement of this Section.
   I.   All underground utilities to be installed in new streets shall be
constructed prior to the surfacing of such streets. Service stubs to platted
lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed at such
length as not to necessitate the disturbance of street improvements when
service connections are made. If connected to a City-owned system, application
and fee shall be the responsibility of the developer in accordance with City
requirements.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-7-2: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   Standard or matching existing curb and gutters and asphalt plant pavement
shall be required on all streets in a proposed subdivision or dedication;
except the City Council may waive the requirements for curb and gutter for good
cause shown by the subdivider.
   A.   Concrete Sidewalks Shall Be Provided. However, where installation of
sidewalks is not considered necessary by the city, the requirement may be
waived.
   B.   Disposal Of Stormwater: Proper and adequate provision shall be made for
disposal of stormwater. The type, extent, location and capacity of drainage
facilities shall be determined for the individual subdivision by the
subdivision engineer and approved by the city's consulting engineer.
   C.   Sewer System Installed: Central sanitary sewer systems shall be
installed in all subdivisions where they are within the service area of an
existing public system and can be reached by a reasonable extension and said
public system. Construction plans and specifications for central sanitary sewer
extension shall be approved by the agency controlling the system and the
appropriate health authority. In a subdivision where central water is proposed
but a central sanitary sewer system is not available, such subdivision may make
alternate provisions for sewage disposal in accordance with the requirements of
the appropriate health authority and the city council.
   D.   Monuments: Monuments shall be installed in accordance with current city
standards at all corners, angle points, curves and all street intersections.
   E.   Dedication Of Open Space May Be Required: In a proposed subdivision of
twenty (20) or more lots, the city council may additionally require a
dedication to a public of an open area or areas for public parks and
playgrounds of approximately one-tenth (1/10) of the area platted. Such public
open areas shall be graded with due consideration for drainage. Landscaping and
other improvements following final approval of the plat shall be the
responsibility of the city.
   F.   Asphalt Road Surfaces:
      1.   All newly constructed or reconstructed asphalt road surfaces
required for subdivision approval pursuant to this title, whether within a
subdivision or as required off site improvements, shall be warranted for a
period of one year from completion of the installation of the asphalt surface
course and preliminary approval of said surface by the city.
      2.   Following the one year warranty period, the developer shall apply a
chip seal coating on the asphalt road surface as approved by the city engineer
and according to the specifications outlined in the then current edition of the
Idaho standards of public works construction (ISPWC).
      3.   Following the acceptance of the proper installation of the chip seal
coat, the city shall accept the dedication of the newly constructed or
reconstructed road(s) and include said road(s) on its official road inventory.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
11-7-3: NO DIVISION OF COST:
   Cost of improvements which are required under the provisions of this
chapter, as well as the cost of other improvements which the developer may
install, shall be the responsibility of the developer. The city shall in no way
share in the cost of any improvements.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 8
MODIFICATIONS AND WAIVERS
SECTION:
11-8-1: Procedure For Granting
11-8-1: PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING:
   A.   Where the City Council finds extraordinary hardships may result from
the strict compliance with these regulations, it may waive a regulation or
requirement for good cause shown, provided that the public interest is still
secured. Any such waiver granted shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the City Comprehensive Plan or these regulations.
   B.   The fact that an owner could realize a greater financial return by a
use of his property that is contrary to these regulations is not sufficient
reason for change. Hardship cannot be proven where it can be shown that
property was purchased with the knowledge of existing restrictions, nor can
hardship be claimed in terms of prospective sales or potential customers.
   C.   In granting a modification and waiver, the City Council may require
such conditions as will secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements so waived or modified.
(Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
CHAPTER 9
PENALTIES
SECTION:
11-9-1:      Designated
11-9-1:      DESIGNATED:
Any person, firm or corporation using an unapproved and unrecorded plat in the
sale of subdivided land or violating any of the terms or provisions of these
subdivision regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist may constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 305, 12-11-2023)
 
 
