CITY CODE
OF
BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
Code current through:
Ord. 2283, passed 12-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Blackfoot, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2283, passed 12-2-2025. Ordinances of
the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2266
 
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, AMENDING TITLE 2, CHAPTER 4,
SECTION 1 AND TITLE 11, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 3(A), REGARDING THE NUMBER OF
MEMBERS ON THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION AND FOR PROVIDING FOR THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF SAID CHANGE.
 
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT,
IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
 
SECTION 1: That Title 11, Chapter 2, Section 3(A) be amended as follows:
 
A.    Members; Appointment: The planning and zoning commission shall consist of
not less than three (3) nor more than twelve (12) a total of seven (7) members,
to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
 
SECTION 2: That Title 2, Chapter 4, Section 1 be amended as follows:
 
2- 4-1. Appointment. The Mayor, with the consent of council, shall appoint a
Planning and Zoning Commission of not less than three (3) five (5) nor more
than twelve (12) seven (7) members. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
governed by the provisions set forth in Blackfoot City Code 11-2-3.
 
 
SECTION 7:   That the effective date of this Ordinance shall be after passage
and publication as provided by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 4th day of March, 2025.
 
                     CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
 
 
                     By: __________________________
                      Marc Carroll, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST: ________________________________
    City Clerk
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2272
(858 Lilac Zone Change)
 
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, CHANGING THE ZONE ON THE AREA
LISTED AS THE PROPERTY DESCRIBED BELOW; PROVIDING FOR THE EFFECTIVE DATE.
 
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT,
IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
 
   SECTION 1: That the zoning of the property described in Exhibit “A” attached
hereto, commonly known as 858 Lilac Street, Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho,
be and hereby is, changed to C2 (community commercial).
 
SECTION 2: That the Blackfoot City Zoning Map be amended to reflect this zone
change.
 
SECTION 3:   That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and publication as provided by law.
 
   PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 1st day of July,
2025.
 
                     CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
 
 
 
                     By: __________________________
                      Marc Carroll, Mayor
 
 
 
ATTEST: ________________________________
    City Clerk
EXHIBIT “A”
Legal Description:
Approximately the East 120 feet of a parcel of land that lies fully in section
34, township 2 south, range 35 east Boise Meridian, city of Blackfoot, Bingham
County, Idaho described as: Commencing at the South Quarter Corner of Section
34; thence North 00° 56’ 40” East 1318.56 feet (North 00° 56’ 40” West by
record) along the North – South Center Section line to the Southeast corner of
Lot 3 in said Section 34; thence North 00° 56’ 40” East 660.00 feet continuing
along said Center Section line; thence North 89° 46’ 25” West 720.09 feet
to a point on the south line of Ridgecrest Subdivision recorded as Instrument
Number 603304 and to the point of beginning; thence South 00° 55’ 16” West
79.93 feet (South 00° 56’ 40” West by record) to the north line of Cedar Park
Addition division number 1; thence North 89° 44’ 59” West 600.21 feet (North
89° 45’ 04” West by record) to the east line of the Harborside Condominiums
plat as Instrument number. 702768; thence North 00° 43’ 55 East 79.68 feet
(North 00° 44’ 01” East by record) to the south line of the land described in
deed Instrument number 726389 (Instrument no. 692692 by record); thence South
89° 46’ 25” East 600.48 feet along said deed and along the south line of said
Ridgecrest Subdivision to the point of beginning.
Parcel Contains Approximately 1.10 Acres.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3207_12038x9302.jpg]   
 
 
 
ORDINANCE # 2273
 
ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS BILL OF 2025-2026
                        
   AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR
BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2025, APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF $34,398,666 TO DEFRAY THE
EXPENSE AND LIABILITIES OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO FOR SAID FISCAL YEAR,
AUTHORIZING A LEVY OF A SUFFICIENT TAX UPON THE TAXABLE PROPERTY AND SPECIFYING
THE OBJECTS AND PURPOSES FOR WHICH SAID APPROPRIATION IS
MADE.                     
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Blackfoot, Bingham
County, Idaho.                                 
Section 1: That the sum of $34,398,666 be, and the same is appropriated to
defray the necessary expenses and liabilities of the City of Blackfoot, Bingham
County, Idaho for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2025.      
                        
Section 2: The objects and purposes for which such appropriation is made, and
the amount of each object and purpose is as follows:   
 
   
General Fund
                    Administration     $2,881,662
                    Police             $4,960,587
                    Fire               $2,759,397
                    Planning & Zoning  $0
                    Total General Fund $10,601,645
Ambulance                              $2,080,133
Streets                                $2,472,659
Airport                                $655,095
Cemetery                               $273,975
Library                                $601,104
Parks & Recreation
                    Parks & Recreation $688,366
                    Golf               $879,132
                    Pool               $0
Total Parks & Recreation Fund          $1,567,498
Capital Improvement                    $115,723
Water                                  $6,348,527
Sewer                                  $7,524,183
Sanitation                             $2,028,229
Healthcare Reserve                     $129,895
Total Appropriations All Funds         $34,398,666
      
Section 3: That a general tax levy on all taxable property within the City of
Blackfoot be levied in an amount allowed by law for the general purposes for
said City, for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 2025.                     
Section 4: All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed.      
                     
Section 5: This ordinance shall take affect and be in full force upon its
passage, approval, and publication in one issue of the Post Register, a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Blackfoot, and official
newspaper of the said City.                     
                     
PASSES under suspension of rules upon which a roll call vote was taken and duly
enacted an Ordinance of the City of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho at a
convened meeting of the City of Blackfoot City Council held on the 5 th day of
August, 2025.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             Marc Carroll, Mayor
          City of Blackfoot
 
 
ATTEST:
 
 
 
Julie Conan, City Clerk
City of Blackfoot
               
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2284
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2284
 
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, AMENDING TITLE 9 CHAPTER 5,
REGARDING REGULATIONS RELATED TO CITY SANITATION SERVICES AND PROVIDING FOR THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF SAID CHANGE.
 
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT,
IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
 
SECTION 1: That Title 9, Chapter 5, shall be amended pursuant to the proposal
attached hereto as Exhibit “A.”
 
SECTION 2:   That the effective date of this Ordinance shall be after passage
and publication as provided by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 6th day of January,
2026.
 
                     CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
 
 
                     By: __________________________
                      Scott Stufflebeam, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST: ________________________________
    City Clerk
Exhibit “A”
CHAPTER 5
SANITARY SERVICE SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-5-1: Short Title
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Mandatory System; Waste Collection Accumulation; Unlawful Practices;
Exceptions
9-5-4: License, Contract Or Franchise
9-5-5: Sanitary Containers
9-5-6: Precollection Practices
9-5-7: Points And Frequency Of Collection; Curbside Or Alley Collection Service
9-5-8: Rates, Fees, Charges And Deposits
9-5-9: Waste Vehicles; Inspection
9-5-10: Collection Days And Hours
9-5-11: Special Collections
9-5-12: Separation And Recycling
9-5-13: Annexations
9-5-14: Penalty
 
9-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL SANITARY SERVICE
SYSTEM OF THE CITY. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
BULKY WASTE: Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture,
mattresses, appliances, metal poles, tires, and other waste materials, other
than construction debris, dead animals, hazardous materials or stable matter
with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for cans.
CAN: A receptacle approved by the city.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL DUMPSTER: A metal dumpster with a 300-to-600-gallon capacity.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Business, industrial and institutional premises and
activities, as distinct from residential or multi-family premises.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operation.
CONTRACTOR: The person or entity authorized by the city to operate, conduct,
and maintain a municipal solid waste collection and removal system of the city.
COUNTY: The county of Bingham, state of Idaho.
CUSTOMER: An occupant or owner of any premises, including household, apartment,
business, institution or other establishment in the city for which waste
service is, or has been, provided.
DEAD ANIMALS: Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10)
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause. , except those slaughtered
or killed for human use.
FRANCHISEE: Any person authorized by the city of Blackfoot, or employed by the
city of Blackfoot, to collect, handle, transport and dispose of waste and/or
recyclable materials and who has executed a franchise agreement with the city
of Blackfoot.
GARBAGE: Any and all dead animals of less than ten (10) pounds, in weight,
except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste
(animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation,
processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage,
transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits,
grains or other animal or vegetable matter, including, but not by way of
limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or
easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract
flies or rodents; except in all cases any matter included in the definitions of
"bulky waste", "construction debris", "dead animals", "hazardous materials",
"rubbish" or "stable matter".
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article
which is designated by the United States environmental protection agency, or
appropriate agency of the state to be "hazardous", as that term is defined by
or pursuant to federal or state law.
INSPECTOR: The authorized employee or employees of the city of Blackfoot, or
some individual designated by the city council as having the duty of
enforcement of this chapter.
MANDATORY: Every resident, business, entity or owner of a residential unit
within the city is required to use the collection and disposal system
established by the city.
OWNER: The person owning the real property where waste is created or
accumulated.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, public
agency or any other legal entity.
PREMISES: Land and all buildings and structures thereon, including, but not
limited to, single- or multi-family dwellings, rooming house, apartment houses,
hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, restaurants, drive-
in establishments, schools, kindergartens, and other places of habitation,
offices, shops or establishments or places of conducting a business, trade,
profession or occupation.
PROHIBITED WASTE:
   A.   Includes any wastes that have any of the following general
characteristics:
      1. Extreme temperature;
      2. Harmful vapors;
      3. The presence of corrosive, flammable, explosive or toxic chemicals;
      4. Any materials with physical or other properties which render
collection operations hazardous; or
      5. Any materials which create a risk to the environment or public health
and safety.
   B.   In addition to wastes with the general characteristics described above,
prohibited wastes include:
      1. Liquid wastes, both bulk and contained;
      2. Tires;
      3. Any material regulated by the state of Idaho or the United States
environmental protection agency (40 CFR 260-268) as hazardous waste;
      4. Any equipment or machines containing refrigerants;
      5. Infectious wastes generated from business sources, such as hospitals,
clinics, medical, surgical, dental, nursing homes, veterinarian offices, and
laboratories. Generators of infectious waste are required to sterilize, package
or otherwise process the infectious waste so that it may be collected without
hazard to collection personnel and the general public; and
      6. Dead animal remains animals of any kind are prohibited from being
placed in residential cans and commercial dumpsters in amounts exceeding 10
lbs. an amount exceeding ten (10) pounds, excluding animal carcasses if broken
down and placed into plastic waste bags and into a lidded, airtight and
watertight container.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE: Wastes that can decay and stink or become putrid.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Products, including paper, cardboard, metal, glass or
other substance capable of being reprocessed into consumer materials, which
have served the purpose for which they were originally manufactured or produced
and have passed through their end usage as consumer items, and which have been
discarded or placed for collection by their owner, whether or not such products
have monetary value.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible waste (except sewage), including
garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENT: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge,
custody or control of any premises, residential or commercial, where waste is
created or accumulated.
RESIDENTIAL CAN: A plastic residential container with a 95 gallons capacity.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied
by a person or group of persons comprising not more than three (3) families. A
residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light
and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether
single- or multi-level construction, consisting of three (3) or less continuous
or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential
unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit
may be billed separately as a residential unit. Each separate rental unit, in
the case of a multi- family dwelling, shall be considered as a residential unit
and billed separately.
RUBBISH: All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead
plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and
other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass,
ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any
and all other waste materials not included in the definitions of "bulky waste",
"construction debris", "dead animals", "garbage", "hazardous materials" or
"stable matter".
SEWAGE: Water carried wastes from residences, commercial or industrial
establishments, business buildings and other premises, containing polluted
matter subject to treatment at the sewage treatment plant.
SOLID WASTE: Any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish, or any combination thereof.
STABLE MATTER: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
WASTE: Shall include "ashes", "bulky waste", "construction debris", "dead
animals", "garbage", "prohibited waste", "putrescible waste", "recyclable
materials", "hazardous materials", "refuse", "rubbish", "sewage", "solid waste"
and "stable matter", as such terms are defined in this section. (Ord. 2089, 1-
5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-3: MANDATORY SYSTEM; WASTE COLLECTION ACCUMULATION; UNLAWFUL PRACTICES;
EXCEPTIONS:
In order to maintain the public health, safety and aesthetics of the city, all
owners and/or occupants are required to pay for, and are provided, certain
waste collection services. There hereby is established a system of waste
collection, transportation and disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying any
waste over the streets or alleys of the city, or to dump or dispose of the
same, unless and until such person has a franchise, license or contract as an
authorized representative of the city.
   A.   All waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of as provided by this chapter, and no person shall collect or convey
over any of the streets, alleys or public ways in the city, or dispose of any
waste accumulated in the city, except as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Every person who is an owner or occupant of premises within the city
limits shall use the waste collection and disposal system herein provided and
shall deposit or cause to be disposed of in accordance with this chapter all
waste which is accumulated on such premises; provided, that nothing herein is
to be construed to prohibit any owner from transporting and disposing of waste
accumulated on his own premises, subject to all regulations herein contained.
An individual or entity may be granted a special exception from the mandatory
system use by the city council in extreme circumstances upon application and a
showing before the city council that the city, its licensee or franchisee
cannot reasonably accommodate the collection of the individual's or entity's
waste. Upon being granted the exception, the waste collector must comply with
the license, contract and franchise provisions of this chapter. The fact that
another waste collector is willing to collect the waste for a price less than
the price set by the city shall not be a factor in determining whether the
city, its licensee or franchisee can reasonably accommodate the collection of
the individual's or entity's waste. All owners or occupants of premises within
the city limits will be charged the minimum collection charge, regardless of
whether they actually use the collection system provided by the city.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or to cause, the
accumulation in or about any premises or upon any street, alley or public way
of the city adjacent to such premises, owned or occupied by him, any waste.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or leave, or permit to remain,
anywhere in the city, any waste, except as provided in this chapter.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any waste in such
a manner that it can be blown away by the wind or cause littering of public or
private premises, streets, alleys and public ways of the city.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to burn any waste outside of any building at any
time in the city, unless a permit has been obtained therefor.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting and transporting waste upon, on and over the streets, alleys and
public ways of the city, unless such person has received a license, contract or
franchise therefor.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit into the waste system,
dirt or earth debris from construction or building renovation, rocks, stones,
automobile bodies and parts, washing machines, refrigerators, hot water tanks,
stoves, tree trunks and stumps, and other similar materials, dead animals,
furniture, building materials, such as mortar, plaster, scrap lumber, broken
concrete, and brick, waste oils and lubricants from garages, service stations,
machine shops, restaurants and other similar establishments. Such material
shall be collected and disposed of by the building contractor, person, owner,
occupant of the premises, or by the person responsible for same. (Ord. 2089, 1-
5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-4: LICENSE, CONTRACT OR FRANCHISE:
   A.   City Authorized To Enter Into Franchise Agreement: The city may enter
into a license, contract or franchise agreement with an individual or entity to
collect, transport, convey and dispose waste upon, on or over the streets,
alleys and public ways of the city. The mayor and city council have the sole
authority to select and approve all persons who shall enter into a franchise or
license agreement; contract to perform all services pertaining to sanitary
collection and disposal under the provisions of this chapter; to establish
reasonable fees for licenses; and may establish reasonable rules and
regulations governing the conduct and operation of such licensee or contractor.
All franchise holders shall be bound by and comply with the provisions of this
chapter wherever applicable and shall comply with all requirements set forth by
the city council and shall observe and faithfully perform the conditions and
provisions of the license and the ordinances and rules and regulations of the
city.
   B.   Commercial Service: Commercial waste service is provided to residents
of the city by the city. Nevertheless, in some circumstances, the city may not
be able to provide the service needed by a commercial entity. In those
situations, upon the approval of the mayor and city council, such commercial
entity may use the services of the city appointed franchisee, licensee or
contractor. Collection of solid waste within the city limits without a valid
franchise or license agreement is a violation of this chapter, subject to the
penalties contained in section 9-5-14 of this chapter. Beginning February 1,
2003, all residential customers and commercial entities in the city shall use
the city services or the city duly authorized franchisee or licensee for waste
service.
   C.   Residential Premises Service: Residential premises waste service is
provided to residents of the city by the city.
   D.   Franchise Required To Collect: Collection of waste within the city
limits without a valid franchise or license agreement is a violation of this
chapter, subject to the penalties contained in section 9-5-14 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-5: SANITARY CONTAINERS:
   A.   Sanitary containers for residential accounts shall be as set forth by
the city council.
   B.   Sanitary containers for commercial accounts shall be as set forth by
the city council.
   C.   It shall be the duty of resident or owner of any premises at all times
to keep, or cause to be kept, containers, as defined above, and to deposit or
cause to be deposited therein, all waste, except as otherwise herein provided.
   D.   All containers shall be: 1) equipped with close fitting covers; or 2)
securely tied; or 3) otherwise closed to prevent the contents to be blown by
the wind or otherwise littered.
   E.   Waste or recyclable materials shall not be compacted in a container to
the extent of obstructing free and easy removal from the container.
   F.   Residents and owners shall restrain their animals from spreading waste
or recyclable materials left for collection or from interfering with pick up
personnel during collection. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-6: PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES:
   A.   Liquids Drained: All waste, before being placed or deposited in
sanitary containers for collection, shall have drained from it all free liquids
and may be wrapped and placed in paper or plastic bags.
   B.   Trimmings, Clippings: Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar
materials shall be cut to a length not to exceed four feet (4') and securely
tied in bundles no more than two feet (2') diameter before being deposited in
the can for collection.
   C.   Grass Clippings, Leaves: Grass clippings, leaves and garden debris,
except sod, dirt and rocks, may be placed in the collection can.
D. Can &/or Dumpster Placement:
1. There must be a three (3) foot radius around the trash receptacle from any
other objects in order for the trash trucks to be able to pick up the trash. If
the trash receptacle is blocked from trash collection due to placement issues
you will be charged an additional pick-up fee.
2. Commercial dumpsters cannot be over filled. The lid must be able to close
properly or you will be charged an additional dump fee.
   E.   Removal Of Containers; Nuisances Prohibited: At other than commercial
and alley pick up, all containers shall be removed from the curb line of
streets and public ways within twenty four (24) hours and unauthorized
accumulation of waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
thereby prohibited.
   F.   Prohibited Wastes:
      1.   Waste collection service is intended to collect normal commercial,
industrial, residential and multi-family premises wastes. It is a violation of
this chapter for any person to deposit or relinquish for collection or disposal
any prohibited wastes identified herein.
      2.   Customers who are a source of prohibited wastes shall make
appropriate arrangements to collect and dispose of the waste.
   G.   Taking Of Solid Waste Or Recyclables:
      1.   All waste placed for collection shall be owned by and be the
responsibility of the customer until the time of collection. At the time of
collection, all trash and recyclable material become the property of the city
or franchisee.
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to take, examine,
uncover, snoop in, separate, gather, collect or salvage materials deposited in
waste containers, except with the express permission of the generator of the
waste.
   H.   Theft Of Collection Services:
      1.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person, except for the
owner, occupant or invitee, to place or deposit any materials in or around a
waste receptacle provided for the use of a specific business or premises, or in
or around the can or container at a residence without permission from such
owner or occupant.
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to place waste at a
premises within the city limits that is not generated at the commercial,
residential or multi-family premises.
   I.   Disposal Of Waste: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
throw, discard or deposit any waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or
other watercourse. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-7: POINTS AND FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION; CURBSIDE OR ALLEY COLLECTION
SERVICE:
   A.
      1.   The sanitation department shall have the authority to designate the
location where refuse containers and/or “roll away” cans shall be placed for
collection. The sanitation department will only place refuse containers and/or
“roll away” cans in a location that is not within a city right-of-way and that
is convenient for effective, efficient, and safe collection of refuse by the
sanitation vehicles. The sanitation department may allow placement of
containers in city alleyways, if placement on private property is not feasible,
as determined by the sanitation department.
      2.   The sanitation department will only place refuse containers on
surfaces such as asphalt or gravel that allow for the sanitation vehicles to
move freely and safely. All locations must have adequate overhead clearance
from wires, tree branches, eaves, or other overhead obstructions. If a suitable
location is not available for refuse containers, customers will be required to
utilize a sufficient number of “roll away” cans to accommodate the amount of
refuse produced by the customer.
      3.   Refuse containers and/or “roll away” cans shall not be placed on
sidewalks or other public property, except on the day of collection by the
sanitation department.
      4.   Large construction dumpsters may only be placed for up to five (5)
working days on the city street in the parking lane directly in front of the
customer’s residence or business. Dumpsters are not allowed on street locations
where parking is prohibited.
   B.   Treatment Of Containers; Spillage: All containers shall be replaced,
upright where found. Containers and lids shall not be placed or thrown on
streets, alleys, highways or on adjoining property. The collector shall not
permit receptacles to be thrown from the truck to the pavement or parkway nor
in any other way permit damage to occur by rough or improper handling thereof.
Space, private ground, public streets, alleys or ways about the containers and
the collection truck shall be left free from solid waste spilled during
collection. The collector shall be responsible for removal of such spillage,
but shall not be responsible for cleaning up conditions created by the resident
around such containers.
   C.   Frequency Of Collection: Waste accumulated at residences shall be
collected at least once a week.
   D.   Commercial And Business Places: Waste accumulated at the premises of
commercial and business places shall be collected at least once each week,
unless the city provides for alternative collection on a special exception
basis.
   E.   Greater Frequency Of Collection: If residential or commercial users
desire a greater frequency of collection, such residential or commercial user
may pay an additional fee, rate or charge to be fixed and approved by the city.
(Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010; amd. Ord. 2187, 10-1-2019)
 
9-5-8: RATES, FEES, CHARGES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Authority Of City To Prescribe: The rates, fees or charges for the
collection and disposal of waste and refuse by: 1) owners, tenants, lessees or
occupants of premises; or 2) licensed or franchised collectors, shall at all
times be subject to the right of the city to prescribe and regulate the rates,
fees and charges made for services rendered or to be rendered. The city shall
bill and collect all fees and charges.
   B.   Failure To Pay: Failure to pay an account within ten (10) days may
subject the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant to withdrawal or suspension of
service, as well as withdrawal or suspension of water and sewer service, and
such civil remedies provided by law.
   C.   Deposit After Termination Of Service: In the event that waste or water
service has been suspended or terminated by the city for nonpayment of fees,
the city shall, prior to reinstating said service, require an advance deposit
equal to three (3) months projected service charge for said account.
   D.   Deposit For Containers: The city shall have the authority to authorize
its waste contract hauler, if any, to collect a deposit prior to delivery of
temporary box containers.
   E.   Administration Of Funds: The proceeds from the collection of fees and
charges herein provided shall be placed in a special fund to be known as the
"solid waste collection account", and all expenses of the city in the operation
of the sanitary collection system shall be paid out of such fund and any
surplus remaining therein at the end of each fiscal year may be transferred by
the city council to the general fund. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-9: WASTE VEHICLES; INSPECTION:
The contractor, if any, will furnish a sufficient number of personnel, trucks
and equipment to collect and dispose of waste collected in the city. Said
equipment shall be maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary condition at
the expense of the contractor. The contractor shall furnish vehicles especially
designed for the collection and hauling of waste and waste products. All waste
vehicles shall be closed and watertight, front, rear or side loading, commonly
known as packers, for collecting solid waste. The equipment shall be clean,
uniformly painted and marked and identified, subject to review and approval by
the city. All vehicles will be licensed, lighted and safety inspected for
highway operations. No roadside littering from packer vehicles or from loading
practices will be allowed. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-10: COLLECTION DAYS AND HOURS:
The days for collection shall be set by the city council. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010,
eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-11: SPECIAL COLLECTIONS:
The contractor shall provide for the special collection from commercial and
residential units, bulky waste, construction debris, stable matter and any
other refuse as agreed between the city council and the contractor. (Ord. 2089,
1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-12: SEPARATION AND RECYCLING:
The city reserves the right to, and may at its option, require the separation
of waste, require the deposit thereof in separate containers, and prescribe the
method of disposal thereof. The city also reserves the right to issue further
regulations for the placement and disposal of recyclable materials. Any
contractor shall cooperate at all times with efforts to promote recycling of
consumer products in the separation, transportation and deposit of identified
recyclable materials. Any extra work caused by said handling of recyclable
materials over and above the contract price, will be the subject of prior
separate contractual negotiations between the city and the contractor. (Ord.
2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-13: ANNEXATIONS:
In the event that the city annexes additional areas during the term of this
contract, the city's right to collect waste or recyclable material within the
city shall extend to any part of the newly annexed area. Service to begin
ninety (90) days after annexation has received city council approval. (Ord.
2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
 
9-5-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, including any owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of
premises, violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010;
amd. 2012 Code)
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2285
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2285
 
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, AMENDING TITLE 11 CHAPTER 6,
ARTICLE A, SECTION 6, REGARDING LOT AREA REDUCTIONS AND PROVIDING FOR THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF SAID CHANGE.
 
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT,
IDAHO AS FOLLOWS:
 
SECTION 1: That Title 11, Chapter 6, Article A, Section 6 shall be amended
pursuant to the proposal attached hereto as Exhibit “A.”
 
SECTION 2:   That the effective date of this Ordinance shall be after passage
and publication as provided by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council this 6th day of January,
2026.
 
                     CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO
 
 
                     By: __________________________
                      Scott Stufflebeam, Mayor
 
 
ATTEST: ________________________________
    City Clerk
Exhibit “A”
 
11-6A-6: OTHER CONDITIONAL USE APPROVALS:
There are certain conditional uses that require consideration of additional approval criteria
unique to the specific application. In reviewing such applications, the
Planning and Zoning Commission must consider the standards of approval set
forth for each conditional use
described below in addition to the general criteria and findings set forth for conditional use
permits in subsection 11-6A-4M of this article. An application and fee are
required for each request in accordance with sections 11-3-2 and 11-3-3 of this
title. (Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017)
A.   Agriculture: The tilling of soil, aquaculture, raising crops, livestock,
farming, dairying
and animal husbandry, including all uses customarily accessory and incidental thereto; but
excluding hogs, slaughterhouses, fertilizer works, boneyards and commercial feedlots. The
following standards shall apply to agricultural uses:
1.   Stables may board horses commercially.
2.   Lot size requirements for maintaining animals shall be a minimum of one
acre of
pasture area, excluding all structures, except for barns and stables, with an overall animal
density not to exceed:
a.   Two (2) horses per acre; or
b.   Two (2) cows per acre; or (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
c.   Four (4) sheep per acre; or (2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. 2012 Code)
d.   An equivalent animal density as approved by the Zoning Administrator/
Building Director.
3.   Buildings and corrals 
(not perimeter fencing) housing such animals shall not be less than thirty feet
(30') from all property lines and at least fifty feet (50') from all
residential structures, and must meet all requirements of the appropriate
health authority.
4.   Provide a viable method for frequent 
(twice monthly) disposal of manure that will prevent obnoxious odors and the
accumulation of flies from intruding onto adjacent properties. (2003 Code § 11-
06-06)
B.   Childcare And Adult Daycare Requirements:
1.   Classifications:
a.   Family childcare (1 through 7 children, inclusive of own children):
(1)   Permitted in R1, R2, R2T, R3, R3A, RA and C1 Zones.
May also be permitted in A, C2 and C3 Zones with an approved conditional use
permit.
(2)   Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must be met.
(3)   Home based business permit is required.
 
b.   Group childcare (8 through 12 children, inclusive of own children):
(1)   Permitted in R1, R2, R2T, R3, R3A, RA and C1 Zones.
May also be permitted in A, C2 and C3 Zones with an approved conditional use
permit.
(2)   Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must be met.
(3)   Conditional use permit is required.
c.   Childcare center (13 or more children):
(1)   Permitted in R2, R2T, R3, R3A, RA and Commercial Zones. May also be permitted
in A, M1 and M2 Zones with an approved conditional use permit.
(2)   Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must be met.
(3)   Conditional use permit is required.
2.   Building Requirements: Childcare facilities in an inhabited home must
comply with applicable Building Codes and Fire Codes. Childcare facilities in
an inhabited home must obtain a childcare permit. A group childcare facility
for eight (8) to twelve (12) children with no more than five (5) children under
two and one-half (21/2) years of age and which
provides care for less than twenty four 
(24) hours at a time, must meet the requirements of education occupancies (E)
pursuant to the International Building and Fire Codes as adopted by the City.
3.   Exits:
a.   The required exits must be located to provide an unobstructed path outside
the
building to a public way or area of refuge. Exit doors must be able to be opened from the
inside without the use of a key and without any special knowledge or effort.
b.   There must be at least two (2) exits (travel distance between not to
exceed 75 feet) located a distance apart, not less than one-half (1/
2) the diagonal dimension of the building or portion used for childcare.
(1)   Exception:
 In buildings with automatic fire sprinkler systems, the distance may be
increased to one hundred ten feet (110').
c.   Required exits shall not be less than thirty two inches (32") of
clear exit width and not less than six feet, eight inches (6'8") in height.
(1)   Exception:
 Sliding patio doors will be accepted as a required second exit in "family and
group childcare facilities" only.
d.   Two 
(2) exits are required from basements and upper floors. The occupancy load is
determined by the ratio of one occupant per thirty five (35) square feet of
floor space. Egress windows or a second exit door are required from sleeping
rooms within a childcare facility. An egress window may not be more than forty
four inches (44") off the finished
floor to the top of windowsill and must have a minimum of 5.7 square
inches of operational
 
opening. Window wells must have a minimum of nine 
(9) square feet of clear opening and not more than forty four inches (44") in
depth.
4.   Accessibility:
 All new childcare facilities will comply with the adopted version of ANSI
A117.1 as referenced in the building codes (ADA Specification Manual).
5.   Existing Building Modifications:
 Existing buildings that are changing use to accommodate a childcare facility
are subject to the same requirements as new construction.
6.   Parking:
 Sufficient and safe parking and unloading zones must be available to
accommodate the proposed childcare facility.
7.   General Childcare Requirements:
a.   Provide a minimum on site outdoor play area of one hundred (100) square
feet per child. This area requirement may be waived or modified if appropriate
open space with connecting public sidewalks or paths are located near the
facility and that open space can
be used by the children as a play area; or the program of the facility is such that the size of a
group of children using the play area at any one time conforms to the one
hundred (100) square feet per child criteria. This criteria may also be met by
safely transporting students to an approved outdoor play area.
b.   Provide a minimum of thirty five 
(35) square feet of indoor gross play area per child.
c.   Secure and maintain a childcare license from the State 
(for childcare givers with 8 or more children).
d.   Comply with the regulations where applicable by law or jurisdiction of the City
Building and Fire Department, and the County health inspector.
e.   Provide as a minimum, one off street parking space per employee.
f.   Provide for an on-
site child pick up area if located on a collector or arterial street, designed
to prevent vehicles from backing onto the roadway (backing into an alley is
permissible).
g.   The lot size shall be adequate for parking, child pick up area, play area, screening
and setbacks.
h.   An application fee set by the City Council and amended from time to time by
resolution, shall be paid with the submittal of an application.
8.   Standards: The Zoning Administrator/building official may also require the
following standards to protect adjacent properties from adverse impacts or to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the children:
a.   Fencing or landscape screening of the facility to protect adjacent
properties from
activities of the facility, or to protect the children from adverse activities such as traffic on
arterial or collector streets, at intersections or to screen adjacent
properties; or
 
b.   Additional setbacks to play areas from property line to protect adjacent properties
or to protect children from busy streets, irrigation ditches, animal pastures
and other similar conflicts; or
c.   Any other conditions deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator/building
official to protect the health, safety and welfare of the children, or to
protect adjacent property owners from adverse impacts. (Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017)
9.   Adult Daycare Standards:
 Adult daycare has different use characteristics from other allowed uses and
therefor requires additional standards to be determined by the Zoning
Administrator/building official:
a.   There shall be adequate access for physically handicapped patrons of the
facility.
b.   If located on an arterial or collector street, provide for an on site patron pick up
area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto street (backing into alley
is permissible).
c.   The use shall meet the occupancy requirements of the city building and fire
departments.
d.   All applicable licenses must be obtained from the city or the state.
e.   An application fee set by the city council and amended from time to time by
resolution, shall be paid with the submittal of an application.
C.   Drive-Up Windows: No drive-up window establishment shall be permitted
unless the
planning and zoning commission finds that the design and operation of the establishment is
substantially in compliance with the following requirements and conditions that
shall be in addition to those required in section 11-6A-4 of this article:
1.   The location of the establishment shall not cause an increase of commercial traffic in
nearby residential neighborhoods, increase general traffic congestion where
serious congestion problems already exist, or cause other significant adverse
impacts on public or private property in the vicinity of the site. The advice
of the appropriate transportation authority shall be solicited for the purpose
of evaluating existing and projected levels of service and the effects of
projected turning movements on highway safety; and
2.   The internal circulation on the site provides for pedestrians to walk from
parking
lots to the lobby entrances without traversing the waiting lanes for the drive-
up window; and
3.   The waiting lanes be of sufficient length to provide for anticipated average monthly
peak volumes; and
4.   The design, signage or operational characteristics of the establishment prevent or
discourage vehicles from waiting for service on public sidewalks or streets;
and
5.   Drive-
in waiting lanes be designed so that curbs, gates or other devices do not
prevent a vehicle from leaving a waiting lane; and
 
6.   All lights and other illuminated materials shall be designed, positioned,
shielded, directed and located to prevent glare from falling on adjoining
properties. Screening of
lights may be required as a secondary measure of mitigation. Illumination levels shall not
exceed two (2) foot-candles as measured one foot 
(1') above the ground at property lines shared with residentially zoned or used
parcels; and
7.   The drive-up window service does not constitute the entire establishment.
This
finding may be waived upon showing that the public interest would be better served if the
drive-up window service does constitute the entire establishment; and
8.   The design, operation and sign characteristics of the project will attempt to minimize
air pollution and wasteful consumption of fuel. Required mitigation measures
include, but are not limited to:
a.   Prohibiting all parking spaces that are in addition to the minimum number of
parking spaces required by this title; and
b.   Retention of existing desirable trees for reasons of species, location, health, age or
other reason as determined and recommended by the city engineer; and
c.   Maximum placement of landscaped areas and trees; and
9.   Landscaping shall screen drive-up aisles from the public right of way and
shall be
used to minimize the visual impact of vehicular lights, reader board signs and directional
signs; and
10.   Drive-through lanes shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from
adjacent
residentially zoned or used property. This buffer shall include both coniferous trees and
sound abatement walls; and
11.   Any drive-up window establishment that is within three hundred feet
(300') of a residential use or zone, as measured along the shortest distance
between the nearest residential property line and any part of the drive-up
portion of the land use, shall not be
permitted to utilize outdoor order speakers; use of a handheld phone or an order window
shall be required; and
12.   In accordance with section 11-6A-4 of this article, the planning and
zoning
commission has the authority to limit the hours of operation, and may impose such
restrictions on drive-up window establishments.
D.   Adult Bookstore, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Performance Business Or Adult
Entertainment Establishment:
1.   Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city, to
protect the health, safety, and
general welfare of employees and patrons of adult businesses and adult establishments,
and to protect children from being inadvertently exposed to adult material.
2.   Conditions:
 In order to approve a conditional use permit for such uses, the planning and
zoning commission must determine that the following conditions are met:
 
a.   Such business shall not be located within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of a school, preschool, daycare facility, public park, playground or
other institution, either public or private, where children under the age of
eighteen (18) frequent or are taught,
instructed or trained. Distance shall be measured in a straight line from the property line of
the school or park to the property line of the proposed adult bookstore, adult
motion picture theater, or adult performance business; and
b.   Such business shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a
church.
Distance shall be measured as in subsection D2a of this section; and
c.   Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any other
adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult performance business. Distance shall
be measured as in subsection D2a of this section; and
d.   Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet 
(1,000') of any store, bar, tavern or business that sells, vends, serves,
dispenses or distributes any alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited
to, beer, wine and liquor; and
e.   Such business shall not be located on a lot or parcel that is adjacent or
contiguous
to residential zones, even if separated by an alley. This condition may be waived; provided,
that sixty six and two-thirds percent (662/3%) of the residentially zoned
property owners and residents within five hundred feet 
(500') of the proposed use sign a petition approving such a business; and
f.   Distance standards shall apply regardless of the political jurisdiction in which
schools, parks or churches, or other adult businesses, are located; and
g.   The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted with the
conditional use application for review by the planning and zoning commission.
Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so
as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building; and
h.   Lobby and entrance areas should be designed so as to minimize obstruction of
sidewalks during operating hours and shall be oriented and consistent with
other commercial activities in the area; and
i.   All building openings, entries, windows and the like shall be located, covered or
screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any
public or semipublic area; and
j.   No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such businesses that can be
discerned by the public outside the building; and
k.   The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit materials must be
disposed of in a manner that prevents minors from having access to the
material; and
l.   The planning and zoning commission may impose such other conditions and
limitations as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this subsection and to
preserve and protect the general public health, safety and welfare.
 
3.   Applicability Of Standards:
 For purposes of this subsection, the above conditions and standards shall be
applicable in the following circumstances:
a.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business.
b.   The conversion of an existing business to any of the adult businesses regulated
herein.
c.   The addition or expansion of any business to include any of the adult businesses
regulated herein.
d.   The relocation of any such business.
4.   School Defined: For purposes of this subsection, a "school" shall be
considered as an
institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, that offers instruction in those
courses of study required by the state or that is maintained pursuant to
standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a
kindergarten, elementary, junior high or senior high school, or any special
institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the state department of
education, but does not include a vocational or professional institution or
institution of higher education such as a community or junior college, college
or university.
5.   Construction:
 These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or act that is
otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
E.   Lot Area Reduction In R2 District (Combined Residential): Within the R2
district, the lot area for each dwelling unit contained in a building or
buildings on a "lot of record", as defined in section 11-1-
3 of this title, may be reduced to not less than two thousand (2,000) square
feet if authorized by a conditional use permit and the following conditions and
restrictions are met and complied with:
1.   All other applicable zoning and use regulations have been met; and
2.   The applicant must conclusively prove that the lot cannot feasibly be
developed without reduction in lot area; and
3.   The improvements upon the lot would not be out of character with the adjoining and
surrounding improvements; and
4.   Sufficient open space and amenities have been provided to create a desirable living
unit. (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
 
 
F.   Exceptions To Parking Requirements: Parking space requirements for a
particular use
as established by this title, may be reduced upon application for conditional use approval in
accordance with this title. Joint or mixed use of off street parking facilities may be approved
by a conditional use permit submitted in accordance with this title. (2003 Code
§ 11-06-06; amd. 2012 Code)
 
G.   Conversion Of Nonconforming Use: The conversion of a nonconforming use to
any use other than an allowed use is prohibited, except upon application and
issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of
section 11-6A-4 of this article; provided, however, that in addition to the
requirements of section 11-6A-4 of this article,
such conditional use permit will not be granted unless the planning and zoning commission
makes all of the following findings of fact: (2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. Ord.
2085, 5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-2009)
1.   The proposed conversion is compatible with the comprehensive plan, the purposes
of this title and with surrounding land uses; and
2.   Such proposed conversion will not place an undue burden on existing transportation
and service facilities in the vicinity of the application; and
3.   Such proposed conversion will be in compliance with all requirements and
provisions of this code; and
4.   The continuation of a nonconforming use without the benefit of such conversion
would likely result in a deterioration of the neighborhood. (2003 Code § 11-06-
06)
H.   Restoration Of Nonconforming Use: Any nonconforming building or mobile
home destroyed by fire or other calamity to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or
more of the appraised value, where such destruction was not intentionally
caused by the owner or an
agent of the owner of such property, may rebuild or restore such building or mobile home
to its former use. Such rebuilding or restoration shall be substantially the
same as the former building. (Ord. 2085, 5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-2009)
I.   Expansion Of Conditional Uses And Legal Nonconforming Uses:
1.   Findings Required:
 Expansions to conditional uses or legal nonconforming uses that exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the existing facility (based on square footage or other
dimensional measure) require conditional use approval by the planning and
zoning commission. Approval of such requests shall be based upon the following
findings:
a.   The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion will not alter the
zoning classification of the nonconforming use; and
b.   The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion conforms to all
existing requirements of this code; and
c.   The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion will not place an
undue burden on existing transportation and service facilities in the vicinity;
and
d.   The proposed enlargement or expansion is not inimical to the best interest of the
surrounding neighborhood.
2.   Illegal Expansion; Loss Of Status:
 Any illegal expansion of a nonconforming use will result in the loss of the
legal nonconforming use status of that project.
 
J.   General Height Exceptions: Conditional use approval from the planning and
zoning
commission is required to exceed the height limits set forth in this title. The planning and
zoning commission's decision on height exceptions shall be based upon the
criteria set forth in section 11-6A-4M of this article.
K.   Public Services; Height Exception: Public service poles, towers or similar
installations of a height of seventy feet 
(70') or greater must be approved by conditional use permit. The planning and
zoning commission must make the findings required by section 11-6A-4M of this
article and the following additional findings. The pole or tower locations and
heights:
1.   Do not interfere with airport height restrictions; and
2.   Minimize disturbance to views from established residential areas; and
3.   Minimize disturbance to or interference with view of city, state, or federally
registered historic structures; and
4.   Do not obstruct clear vision triangles or otherwise threaten motorist or pedestrian
safety; and
5.   Minimize conflict with existing uses; and
6.   Are within route corridors already established for use by rail, automobile traffic
arterials or electrical transmission; and
7.   Are within route corridors that provide for a satisfactory level of energy efficient
transmission of the product (electrical energy or other signals); or
8.   Are the best available alternative placements and heights, even though they do not
comply perfectly with all the above findings.
L.   Professional, Administrative And Business Offices In M1 And M2 Districts:
Professional, administrative and business offices are conditional uses in the M1 and M2
districts and are subject to the following criteria as well as those in section 11-
6A-4M of this article:
1.   Amenities 
(that may include, but are not limited to, visual screening, orientation and
placement of buildings, parking and access areas) are provided for the future
office to buffer the impact of any conflicting land uses; and
2.   The lot or parcel
occupied by such offices abuts a public right of way that separates such lot or
parcel from residential or office zones or uses; or
3.   Where the use of the subject property for such offices will not encroach
upon or
conflict with existing industrial development or that which may be reasonably expected to
develop.
M.   Composting Facility: Any composting facility shall submit a site and
operational plan
with their application for a conditional use permit. That plan shall demonstrate compliance
with the following requirements:
 
1.   Composting piles or windrows shall be constructed that are no larger than can be
managed in a nuisance free manner by the proposed equipment and composting
technology;
2.   Additional area shall be provided at no less than fifteen percent 
(15%) of size of the active composting pile or windrow area for staging, curing
and storage;
3.   A minimum fifty foot 
(50') setback shall be maintained from the property boundary or public right of
way to any active processing area of the facility, including any area used for
storage, active composting and curing;
4.   A minimum two hundred foot 
(200') buffer zone between the active composting pile or windrow and any
existing adjacent residentially zoned or occupied property shall be maintained;
5.   Compliance with all applicable state or federal laws, regulations or
standards
pertaining to water quality, air quality and solid waste management shall be required;
6.   No composting facility shall be allowed in a floodplain;
7.   Surface slope of one to five percent 
(5%) grade shall be required for any composting facility;
8.   Adequate fencing, barriers or screening shall be required for all composting
facilities;
9.   Public access shall be limited to those times when an attendant is on duty and during
limited operating hours;
10.   Adequate space shall be provided between the piles or windrows to allow access to
vehicles, including firefighting equipment;
11.   Noncompostable residues shall be disposed or processed at a permitted solid waste
disposal facility in accordance with local, state and federal laws, regulations
and standards;
12.   All organic materials received at the composting facility shall be removed from any
containers unless the containers are of a biodegradable type in which case the
container shall be opened before composting;
13.   A permanent sign must be posted and maintained at the composting facility
showing the nature of the project, facility name, address and telephone number
of
operator, operating hours, materials that may be received by the facility, and the phrase,
"No Dumping Of Garbage, Trash Or Rubbish Allowed". (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
 N. Lot Area Reduction In HDR1 and HDR2 District (High Density Residential):
 Within the HDR1 and HDR2 district, the lot area for each dwelling unit
contained in a building or buildings on a "lot of record", as defined in
section 11-1-3 of this title, may be reduced to LDR1 requirements if authorized
by a conditional use permit and the following conditions and restrictions are
met and complied with:
   1. All other applicable zoning and use regulations with LDR1 have been met;
and
 
   2. The applicant must show sufficient proof that the lot cannot feasibly be developed without
reduction in lot area; and
   3. The improvements upon the lot would not be out of character with the adjoining and surrounding
improvements; and
   4. Sufficient open space and amenities have been provided to create a desirable living 
unit.
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2112
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO, CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, containing
the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the city,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED this 4th day of December, 2012
APPROVED this 4th day of December, 2012
/s/   
Mayor Mike Virtue
ATTEST:
/s/   
City Clerk, Suzanne McNeel
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: Councilman Brown, Councilman Jensen, Councilman Woodfin
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
BLACKFOOT CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Alterations
1-1-5: Maintenance Of This Code
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Blackfoot.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the THIRD REVISED CODE OF
ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, and may be referred to as simply "this
code", "code of ordinances", "Blackfoot code" or "city ordinance". This code is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2003 Code § 1-01-01; amd. 2012
Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2003 Code § 1-01-02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with Idaho Code section 50-901 et seq. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2003 Code § 1-01-03; amd. 2012 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city
clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2012 Code)
1-1-5: MAINTENANCE OF THIS CODE:
Upon receipt of each published ordinance from the codifiers, the city clerk
shall promptly forward a copy of each page thereof to each person having an
official copy of this code. The city clerk may collect a fee for each copy of
this code and an annual fee for maintenance thereof, provided such fees shall
be established by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the city council.
(2003 Code § 1-01-04)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this
code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city; sign ordinances; economic development; urban renewal; public
utilities; and all special ordinances.
   B.   The repeal of the ordinances as provided in subsection A of this
section, shall not affect any debt or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed,
any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue
of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person holding office
at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance
have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded.
(2003 Code § 1-02-01; amd. 2012 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2003 Code § 1-02-
02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (2012 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2003 Code § 1-02-03; amd.
2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Except when otherwise provided, the time within
which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in
which case it shall also be excluded.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   F.   Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   G.   Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
   H.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   I.   May/Shall, Must: The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and
"must" are mandatory.
   J.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
meaning.
   K.   Officers And Employees: Whenever any officer, employee, department,
board or commission is referred by title, such reference shall be construed as
if followed by the words "of the city of Blackfoot".
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection", or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2012 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code and the ordinances
of the city, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the
context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is
specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words
and phrases:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BUSINESS: Any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or enterprise for
which a license is required by any ordinance of the city.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The individual appointed to act as the city clerk.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CODE: The city code of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COUNTY: The county of Bingham, state of Idaho.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or other activity subject to city regulation,
authorization or limitation.
HIGHWAY, ROAD: Means and includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the
words "county way", "county road", "common road" and "state road".
LICENSE: Any certificate or license issued by the city.
LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no
reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or required shall be within
the boundaries of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Unless such term is otherwise defined within any applicable section
of this code, "nuisance" shall mean any act or activity creating a hazard which
threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the city, or any activity
which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect
on the property of a person or persons within the community.
OATH: An affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act, action or conduct prohibited by this code, or the failure to
perform any acts required by this code.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL: Any elected or appointed person employed by the city,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the
manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of
debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done
in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time
for such act or notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary
for the expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: All streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares,
curbs or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated
in any law of this state.
TENANT AND OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
WEEK: Any seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (2012 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2012
Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTIES; OFFENSES CLASSIFIED
SECTION:
1-4-1: Classification Of Offenses
1-4-2: Misdemeanor Violations
1-4-3: Penalty For Misdemeanors
1-4-4: Infractions
1-4-5: Parking Violations
1-4-6: City Code Violations
1-4-7: Failure To Obey Citation
1-4-8: Failure To Pay Fine Or Restitution
1-4-9: Restitution For Jail Time Fees
1-4-1: CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES:
There hereby are declared four (4) classes of offenses under this code as
follows:
   A.   Misdemeanors;
   B.   Infractions;
   C.   Parking violations; and
   D.   City code violations. (2003 Code § 1-09-01)
1-4-2: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided, the violation of any ordinance of the city, or any
section of this code, hereby is declared to constitute a misdemeanor and
punishable as such. (2003 Code § 1-09-02)
1-4-3: PENALTY FOR MISDEMEANORS:
Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by ordinance or
limited by state statute, every public offense and every unlawful act declared
by ordinance to be a misdemeanor is punishable by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to
exceed six (6) months. (2003 Code § 1-09-03; amd. 2012 Code)
1-4-4: INFRACTIONS:
   A.   Penalty: Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by
ordinance, every public offense and every unlawful act declared by ordinance to
be an infraction is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   B.   Failure To Appear On Citation Or Summons: If the defendant fails to
appear before the clerk at or before the time stated in an infraction citation
or summons, the court shall enter default judgment against the defendant for
the infraction as provided by law without giving further notice to the
defendant.
   C.   Failure To Appear After First Appearance: If a defendant fails to
appear at the time fixed by a trial date notice or continuance notice served on
the defendant as provided by law, the court shall enter default judgment
against the defendant for the infraction without giving further notice to the
defendant. (2003 Code § 1-09-04)
   D.   Notice Of Default Judgment: If a default judgment is entered against a
defendant for an infraction pursuant to law, the clerk shall mail a notice of
judgment to the defendant at the address stated in the citation advising the
defendant that the defendant must pay the judgment by a date, which shall not
be less than fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice. The notice shall
state that failure to pay the judgment will result in suspension of the
defendant's license. (2003 Code § 1-09-04; amd. 2012 Code)
1-4-5: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Parking violations, penalties and procedures shall be as set forth in title 7,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 1-09-05)
1-4-6: CITY CODE VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Penalty: Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by
ordinance, every public offense and every unlawful act declared by ordinance to
be a city code violation is punishable by a civil violation penalty not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   Procedure For Payment: Payment for a city code violation shall be made
directly to the city clerk within ten (10) days or within the time prescribed
on the ticket or citation, but in no event shall the time so prescribed be less
than ten (10) days.
   C.   Contesting Citation: In the event that the citation for a city code
violation is contested, the person charged shall appear at the city clerk's
office within the time prescribed on the citation and sign a document
contesting the violation charged. In the event that a contest is made, the city
attorney may do one or more of the following: 1) set the matter for an informal
conference with the contesting individual; 2) dismiss the citation; 3) amend
the citation to another applicable city or state code infraction or misdemeanor
charge and file an amended citation or a misdemeanor or infraction complaint
with the magistrate division of the district court.
   D.   Failure To Contest And Failure To Pay Penalty: Failure to timely
contest the citation as set forth above shall be deemed an admission to the
violation and the city clerk shall enter a default. Subsequent failure to pay
the applicable penalty within fourteen (14) days after the entry of default
shall constitute a misdemeanor and, in addition to the penalty for the city
code violation, will subject the violator to up to a three hundred dollar
($300.00) fine and/or six (6) months in the county jail. Upon entering the
default for the violation, the city clerk shall notify the violator that the
penalty must be paid within fourteen (14) days or a misdemeanor citation for
failure to pay penalty will be filed in the magistrate division of the district
court subjecting the violator to penalties of up to a three hundred dollar
($300.00) fine and/or six (6) months in the county jail. (2003 Code § 1-09-06)
1-4-7: FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION:
   A.   Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to appear in
court at the time promised on a misdemeanor or infraction citation or to fail
to appear at the time indicated on a misdemeanor or infraction citation served
upon the defendant or, to fail to appear at the time indicated on a misdemeanor
or infraction summons served upon the defendant, regardless of the disposition
of the charge upon which such citation or summons was originally issued.
   B.   Appearance By Counsel: The duty to appear in court at the time
indicated in a misdemeanor or infraction citation or summons may be complied
with by an appearance by counsel in the manner prescribed by rule of the
supreme court.
   C.   Misdemeanor Violation: Violation of the provisions of this section
shall be a misdemeanor. (2003 Code § 1-09-07)
1-4-8: FAILURE TO PAY FINE OR RESTITUTION:
A failure to pay any civil fine or other fine, penalty or court ordered
restitution, after having opportunity to contest and exhaust all default grace
periods, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or imprisonment in the county
jail not to exceed six (6) months. In addition to the fine and/or jail time,
the defendant shall be ordered to pay restitution to the applicable entity in
the amount of the original fine, penalty or restitution attributable to the
original charge, citation or violation. (2003 Code § 1-09-08)
1-4-9: RESTITUTION FOR JAIL TIME FEES:
Any criminal defendant who is incarcerated for violating this code shall, in
addition to any fine or penalty imposed by the court, reimburse the city in the
form of restitution for all charges incurred by the city for such
incarceration. Failure to pay such restitution to the city shall be a violation
of section
1-4-8 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 1-09-09)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Order Creating Municipality
1-5-2: Corporate Seal
1-5-3: Official Newspaper
1-5-1: ORDER CREATING MUNICIPALITY:
The municipality known as the city of Blackfoot hereby is recognized as being
created on January 17, 1901, under the laws of the state, and hereinafter shall
be known as the city of Blackfoot. (Ord. 2120, 3-4-2014, eff. 3-4-2014)
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Design:
      1.   The corporate seal of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho,
shall be circular in form with inner circle of solid silver band design and
outer circle of rope design. Within the circle are three (3) silver stars over
the image of an eagle. Under the eagle are the words, "BINGHAM COUNTY, IDAHO".
The words, "GREAT SEAL OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT", appear in a circular pattern
in silver color with blue background between the outer circle of rope design
and the inner circle of solid silver band. At the bottom of the seal is a
ribbon and the following, "Incorporated 1901".
      2.   A facsimile of the above described seal is as follows:
   B.   Adoption Of Seal: The seal described in subsection A of this section
hereby is adopted as the corporate seal of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham
County, Idaho.
   C.   City Clerk Custodian Of Seal: The city clerk shall be the custodian of
the corporate seal of the city and shall affix said seal's imprint upon all
official documents, records and licenses. (Ord. 2120, 3-4-2014, eff. 3-4-2014)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Post Register / Idaho State Journal, a daily newspaper, that is the nearest
Idaho newspaper of general circulation within the city, hereby is designated
and appointed as the official newspaper of the city. (Ord. 2120, 3-4-2014, eff.
3-4-2014; amd. Ord. 2193, eff. 7-7-2020; Ord. 2232, 3-7-2023)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Mayor
1-6-2: City Council
1-6-3: Election Of Members By Designated Seat
1-6-4: Mayor And Council; Salaries
1-6-1: MAYOR:
   A.   Duties Of Mayor: The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the City.
He shall devote full time to the duties of his office so that he may
efficiently and faithfully discharge the same. He shall maintain his office at
the City Hall. He shall from time to time give the City Council such
information and recommend such measures as he may deem beneficial to the City.
He shall examine the grounds of all complaints against any of the officers to
determine existence of a violation or neglect of duty, and report the evidence
thereof, if deemed sufficient for the removal of said officer to the City
Council. He shall require that every officer, on the expiration of his term of
office or resignation or removal from the same, deliver to his successor all
monies, books, papers, maps, plats, furniture, fixtures, apparatus, machinery,
tools and instruments and appurtenances belonging to such office. He shall
perform all other duties imposed by the State. (2003 Code § 1-06-01)
   B.   Additional Powers And Functions Of Mayor: The Mayor, in addition to the
powers, duties and functions vested in him by statute as the Chief Executive
Officer of the City and those specifically vested in him by the provisions of
this Code, shall have authority to act, or designate the officer who shall act,
in the enforcement of any provision of this Code in all cases where this Code
fails to specify the officer who shall be charged with the duty of enforcement.
The Mayor also shall have the following powers and functions:
      1.   Mayor To Sign Contracts: The Mayor is authorized and empowered to
sign his name officially for and in behalf of the City on all contracts,
including deeds, bonds, bills, notes, obligations and other agreements,
documents and papers, to which the City is a party, and to require that the
conditions in the said instruments are faithfully performed, and to borrow
money on the credit of the City when authorized by the City Council.
      2.   Accounts And Reports Of Officers: The Mayor shall have the power,
when he deems it necessary, to require any officer of the City to exhibit his
accounts or other papers, and to make reports to the City Council in writing,
touching any subject or matter he may require pertaining to his office.
      3.   Police Power Of Mayor: The Mayor shall have jurisdiction over all
places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits of the City for the
enforcement of any health or quarantine ordinance and regulations thereof, and
shall have jurisdiction in all matters vested in him by ordinance, excepting
taxation, within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of said City and over
such properties as may be owned by the City without the corporate limits. (2003
Code § 1-06-02)
      4.   Mayor May Require Aid: The Mayor is hereby authorized to call every
resident of the City over twenty one (21) years of age to aid in enforcing the
laws. (2003 Code § 1-06-02; amd. 2012 Code)
      5.   Other Powers: The Mayor shall have all other powers granted by the
laws of the State.
      6.   Appointment Of Council Members: The Mayor may appoint Council
members to special projects and/or to watch over, oversee, review and give
advice to the Mayor and City Council on one (1) or more City departments. (2003
Code § 1-06-02)
   C.   Duties As Administrator Of City: The Mayor, as Administrator of the
City shall:
      1.   Manage the City administration and personnel.
      2.   Coordinate management functions of the various departments or
agencies to effectuate the directions and programs of the executive as defined
or directed by the Mayor and City Council.
      3.   Coordinate with the City Treasurer to draft a two (2) year
preliminary budget plan to be submitted to the City Council for review and
comment by June 30 of each calendar year.
      4.   Oversee and ensure that procurement regulations are implemented
pursuant to State law and City policy.
      5.   Provide reports as required by State law.
      6.   Provide a state of the City report to the City Council by the last
day of February of each year. (2003 Code § 1-06-03)
   D.   Majority Required For Election: A majority of the votes cast for the
Office of Mayor shall be required for election to that office. In the event no
candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in the general election, there
shall be a runoff election between the two (2) candidates receiving the two (2)
highest numbers of votes cast in said general election. Such runoff election
shall be conducted as in a general election, and shall be conducted within
thirty (30) days after said general election, in accordance with Idaho Code
section 50-612. (2003 Code § 1-06-04; amd. 2012 Code)
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Parliamentary Rules: Except as may be inconsistent with the provisions
of this section, the parliamentary rules and law for the conducting of
regularly scheduled Council meetings shall be guided by "Robert's Rules of
Order", current edition. The failure to comply with "Robert's Rules of Order"
shall not invalidate any action taken by Council. (Ord. 2176, 3-5-2019)
   B.   Quorum: A majority of the Council members elected shall constitute a
quorum. A less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance
of absent members. (2003 Code § 1-07-02)
   C.   Regular Meetings: The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the
first Tuesday of each month, unless that date conflicts with a national
holiday, election day, or other event necessitating a meeting be cancelled.
Regular meetings will be held at City Hall at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Special meetings on other dates or times may be scheduled as provided
herein. The Mayor shall preside at Council meetings. (Ord. 2179, 5-7-2019)
   D.   Special Meetings: A special meeting of the City Council may be called
at any time by the Mayor or a majority of the members of the Council in the
manner provided by statute. (2003 Code § 1-07-04)
   E.   Election Of President Of Council: At the time of taking office, the
City Council shall elect one of its members President of the Council, who shall
preside at all meetings of the Council and perform all other duties of the
Mayor in the absence of the Mayor; and, in the absence of the President of the
Council, shall elect one of their members to occupy his place temporarily and
who shall be styled Acting President of the Council, and the President and
Acting President, when occupying the place of Mayor, shall have the same
privileges as other members of the Council and all acts of the President and
Acting President, while so acting, shall be binding upon the Council and upon
the City as if done by the Mayor. (2003 Code § 1-07-05)
   F.   Order Of Business: The business of the City Council shall be presented
in the order as set forth by the Mayor. (2003 Code § 1-07-06)
   G.   Presiding Officer: The presiding officer shall preserve order and
decorum, may speak to points of order in preference to other members, and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the City Council, on
which appeal no member shall speak more than once without leave of the Council.
(2003 Code § 1-07-07)
   H.   Priority Of Business: All questions relating to priority of business
shall be decided without debate. (2003 Code § 1-07-08)
   I.   Recognition By Presiding Officer: When two (2) or more members happen
to request recognition at once, the presiding officer shall name who is to
speak first. (2003 Code § 1-07-09)
   J.   Privileges Of Members: No member shall speak more than twice on the
same question without leave of the City Council, nor more than once until every
member choosing to speak shall have spoken. (2003 Code § 1-07-10)
   K.   Motions: When a motion is under debate, no motion shall be received
except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone to a day certain, to refer
or amend, to postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall have precedence
in the order in which they are stated. (2003 Code § 1-07-11)
   L.   Adjournment: A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when
once put and voted down; the same shall not again be in order until some other
business shall have been taken up, and shall be always decided without debate.
(2003 Code § 1-07-12)
   M.   Members Addressing Chair: When any member is about to speak in debate
or deliver any matter to the City Council, he shall respectfully address the
presiding officer, and shall confine himself to the question in debate and
avoid personalities. (2003 Code § 1-07-13)
   N.   Members Must Vote; Exceptions: Every member who shall be present when a
question is put shall vote for or against the same, unless the City Council
shall excuse him; but no member shall be permitted to vote on a question when
the yeas and nays are called for, unless present when his name is called in its
regular order. (2003 Code § 1-07-14)
   O.   Motion Recorded: No motion shall be considered unless the same shall be
recorded by the City Clerk. When a motion is recorded, it shall be stated by
the presiding officer before debate. The mover may withdraw it at any time
before a decision or amendment is made to it. (2003 Code § 1-07-15)
   P.   Reconsideration: When a question has been once decided, it shall be in
order for any member who voted in the affirmative to move for a reconsideration
thereof, but no motion for a reconsideration of a vote shall be made after
adjournment of the next regularly scheduled meeting following the final reading
of any ordinance or resolution to be reconsidered or any vote to be
reconsidered. No motion for such reconsideration shall be made more than once.
(2003 Code § 1-07-16)
   Q.   Suspension Of Rules: No rule of order shall be suspended except by an
affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of City Council;
provided, however, that no formal motion to suspend a rule of order shall be
required if the Council member requesting suspension of the rule of order
receives unanimous consent for the suspension of the rule of order. Standing
rules (those rules adopted without previous notice and by a majority vote) may
be suspended by an affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of
the City Council. (2003 Code § 1-07-17)
   R.   Questions: All questions shall be put in the order in which they are
moved. (2003 Code § 1-07-20)
   S.   Lay On The Table: The motion "to lay on the table" shall be decided
without debate. (2003 Code § 1-07-21)
   T.   Ordinances And Resolutions:
      1.   Classifications: All actions of the City Council involving the
exercise of the City legislative and police power functions, or actions
otherwise required by law to be in ordinance form, shall be designated as
ordinances and appear in the form required by law. All other actions of the
City Council of a ministerial nature relating to the administrative business of
the City and/or requiring written findings or statements, shall be designated
as resolutions.
      2.   Reading Ordinances And Resolutions: Ordinances shall be read on
three (3) different days, two (2) readings of which may be by title only and
one reading of which shall be in full, unless one-half (1/2) plus one of the
members of the full Council shall dispense with the rule. In preparation,
passage and publication, ordinances shall contain no subject which shall not be
clearly expressed in the title, and no ordinance or section thereof shall be
revised or amended unless all ordinances, which are intended to amend existing
ordinances, shall have the words which are added to such ordinance underlined;
when the amendment is to strike out or repeal any part of an existing
ordinance, the letter, figure, word or words stricken or repealed shall be
printed with a line through such letter, figure, word or words in the printed
bill to indicate the part stricken or repealed; provided, however, that when an
ordinance includes or consists of the repeal of an entire section or chapter,
or a substantial revision of an entire title, it shall not be necessary to
print such repealed section or chapter. (2003 Code § 1-07-18)
      3.   Passage: The passage of every ordinance and resolution shall be by
roll call of the City Council with the yea or nay of each member present being
recorded, with the majority vote of the Council members constituting a quorum
being required for passage. For purposes of such passage, however, it shall be
permissible for any Council member to move for the roll call, recording of
votes, and passage of all or any number of ordinances or resolutions appearing
on the agenda for final passage. The maker of such a motion must specify by
agenda number or classification, which ordinances or resolutions appearing on
the agenda are to be included for purposes of the motion. Upon the objection of
the Mayor or any Council member, any ordinance or resolution so included may be
removed from the motion and considered separately. In the absence of such an
objection, all ordinances and resolutions included in the motion shall be
subject to consideration for final passage, and upon such consideration, the
minutes shall reflect the yea or nay votes of each Council member on each
ordinance or resolution so considered. (2003 Code § 1-07-19)
   U.   Duties Of Council Members Generally: The members of the City Council,
the legislative and policy making branch of the government of the City, shall
devote so much of their time to the duties of their office as an efficient and
faithful discharge thereof may require and act as a liaison between the body of
the City Council and the departments to which they are assigned by the Mayor,
and give advice to the Mayor and City Council with respect to the operations of
such departments. They shall attend all meetings of the City Council unless
excused therefrom by the Mayor or by a majority of the remaining members, and
perform all duties which by the nature of their office they should reasonably
perform, such as the passing of ordinances, resolutions and the investigation
and study of work done for the City according to the character of committee
upon which they may severally be appointed by the Mayor. (2003 Code § 1-07-23)
   V.   Examination Of Accounts Of Fiscal Officers: Pursuant to Idaho Code
section 50-708, at least once in each quarter of each year, the City Council
shall examine the accounts and doings of all officers or other persons having
the care, management or disposition of monies, property or business of the
City. (2003 Code § 1-07-24)
1-6-3: ELECTION OF MEMBERS BY DESIGNATED SEAT:
   A.   Purpose: The City Council does, by this section, find that the citizens
of the City would be best served by providing for the election of Council
members by designated Council seats pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-707.
(2003 Code § 1-08-01)
   B.   Council Membership: The City shall have a City Council composed of four
(4) members. During each general City election, two (2) of the four (4) members
of the City Council shall stand for reelection for a four (4) year term of
office. (2003 Code § 1-08-02)
   C.   Residency Requirement: Each candidate for the City Council shall meet
the residency requirements in the City as set out in Idaho Code. (2003 Code §
1-08-03)
   D.   Assignment Of Council Seats: Each of the Council seats shall be
designated by the numbers 1 through 4 inclusive. The City Clerk shall assign
said numbers to the Council seats. Any candidate seeking election to the City
Council shall file for one (1) of the assigned Council seats and so designate
that number upon his petition for candidacy. (2003 Code § 1-08-04)
   E.   Plurality Vote Required For Election Of Council Members: Where an
election for an office of a City Council member involves more than two (2)
candidates, the candidate that receives the greatest number of votes from
qualified electors shall have a plurality of the votes and shall be declared
the winner. (Ord. 2100, 1-3-2012, eff. 1-3-2012)
   F.   Filling Vacancies: In the event an office of Council shall become
vacant, through death, moving out of the City, or for any other cause, the
Mayor shall appoint, with the approval of a majority of the City Council, a
resident of the City to fill the unexpired portion of the term to serve until
the next general election, at which time the unexpired term shall be filled by
regular election. (2003 Code § 1-08-06)
1-6-4: MAYOR AND COUNCIL; SALARIES:
The annual salaries of the Mayor and the members of the Council of the City of
Blackfoot shall be as follows:
   A.   The Mayor of the City of Blackfoot shall receive an annual salary of
sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) beginning January 1, 2026.
   B.   Each member of the City Council shall receive an annual salary in the
sum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) beginning January 1, 2018. (Ord. 2156,
8-1-2017; amd. Ord. 2274, 8-5-2025)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Applicability
1-7-2: Department Head Defined
1-7-3: Appointment, Confirmation And Removal Of Appointive Officers
1-7-4: Term Of Appointment
1-7-5: Employment Of Personnel
1-7-6: Personnel Policies, Practices And Procedures
1-7-7: Bond Requirements
1-7-8: Inspection, Copies Of City Documents; Fees
1-7-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all municipal employees,
including those under civil service, unless otherwise fixed by collective
bargaining agreement. (2003 Code § 1-11-01)
1-7-2: DEPARTMENT HEAD DEFINED:
"Department head" shall mean any appointed person who has direct supervision
and responsibility for personnel, records, funds, maintenance and service to be
performed by a municipal department. (2003 Code § 1-11-02)
1-7-3: APPOINTMENT, CONFIRMATION AND REMOVAL OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
   A.   Appointment: The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall
appoint the city treasurer, the city clerk, the city attorney and such other
officers as may be deemed advisable for the efficient operation of the city.
(2003 Code § 1-11-03; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Confirmation: If the city council shall refuse to confirm any
nomination, the mayor shall then, within ten (10) days thereafter, nominate
another person to fill the office and he may continue to so nominate until his
nominee is confirmed. If the mayor fails to make another nomination for the
same office within ten (10) days after the rejection of a nominee, the city
council shall appoint a suitable person to fill the office. The affirmative
vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full city council shall be required to
confirm any nomination made by the mayor.
   C.   Vacancy: Whenever a vacancy shall occur in an appointive office, the
vacancy for the unexpired term shall be filled by appointment in the same
manner as the original appointment.
   D.   Removal: Any department head, the city treasurer and the city clerk,
may be removed by the mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient, but such
removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of
the members of the full city council; provided, that the city council, by the
unanimous vote of all of its members, may upon their own initiative remove any
appointive officer. (2003 Code § 1-11-03)
1-7-4: TERM OF APPOINTMENT:
All appointive officers shall hold office for the term for which they are
appointed and qualified. (2003 Code § 1-11-04)
1-7-5: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL:
The department head, in accordance with the established personnel policies,
practices and procedures of the city, shall have the authority to employ the
necessary personnel to perform the necessary duties of their respective
departments. It shall be the department head's duty to:
   A.   Be responsible for the effective administration of their respective
departments and all activities assigned thereto;
   B.   Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and
inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor and city council, such new practices
as appear to be of benefit to the city and to the public;
   C.   Establish and maintain records and reports in sufficient detail to
furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities
and to form a basis for reports required by the mayor and city council;
   D.   Dismiss, subject to personnel regulations, personnel and subordinates
under him for just cause;
   E.   Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and
equipment used in his department. (2003 Code § 1-11-05)
1-7-6: PERSONNEL POLICIES, PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES:
The personnel handbook of the city, as amended from time to time, is
incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. Such handbook shall be
the rules, regulations and standards governing terms, conditions, tenure and
benefits of employment. If any conflict or repugnancy exists between this
chapter and the aforesaid handbook, this chapter shall prevail. (2003 Code § 1-
11-06)
1-7-7: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   City Clerk, City Treasurer: The city shall furnish surety bonds to
cover the city clerk and city treasurer. (2003 Code § 1-11-07; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Blanket Bond: All other officers and employees of the city not required
by law to be bonded, except the mayor and city council, shall, nevertheless, be
bonded by a blanket bond to be secured by the city, which bond shall be in an
amount to be determined by the city council, and shall extend to and cover all
officers and employees of the city, except the mayor and council members. (2003
Code § 1-11-08)
1-7-8: INSPECTION, COPIES OF CITY DOCUMENTS; FEES:
Every officer having the custody of an instrument, paper or document which is
required by statutes of this state or by ordinance of this city to be made,
kept and maintained, shall upon the request and demand of a citizen, permit a
citizen to inspect such instrument, paper or document, under the supervision
and such reasonable rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by that
officer having custody of such instrument, paper or document. Unless otherwise
specified, department heads shall be the custodians of all records, reports and
documents within their respective departments. At no time shall such officer of
the city ever authorize a citizen to remove such instrument, paper or document
from his immediate presence. Requests for copying or inspection of documents
shall be processed in a manner consistent with provisions of Idaho Code
regarding public records. No instrument, paper or document shall be inspected
or copied by the public, which is exempted from disclosure by Idaho Code. Fees
charged the public for copies of public records shall be promulgated pursuant
to Idaho Code section 9-338(8). The city council shall adopt the fee schedule
by resolution if it finds that it is consistent with said Idaho Code section 9-
338(8), or as that section may be amended. (2003 Code § 1-11-09)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Duties
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall, with approval of the city council, appoint a city clerk, who
shall hold office for the duration of his appointment, or until such time as he
may be removed pursuant to subsection
1-7-3D of this chapter. (2003 Code § 1-11-10)
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Clerk To Keep Seal, Ordinances And All City Records: The city clerk
shall be custodian of the city seal and affix the same to documents as provided
herein. The city clerk shall also be custodian of all public records,
documents, ordinances, resolutions and orders of the city council, and such
other papers and documents as may be delivered into his custody.
   B.   Attend Meetings Of Council And Keep Minutes And Records: The city clerk
shall attend all sessions of the city council, keep a correct journal and shall
keep in a separate book a record of ordinances passed by the city council and
of the titles of such ordinances; and all ordinances not published in book form
shall be carefully indexed alphabetically. The city clerk shall see that each
ordinance is published as required by law, and he shall keep on file the proof
of such publication. (2003 Code § 1-11-10)
   C.   Report To Council: The city clerk shall present to the city council, a
full and complete statement of the financial transactions of his office during
the month preceding.
   D.   Furnish Copies Of Records: It shall be the duty of the city clerk to
furnish any officer with a certified copy of any record, paper or public
document on file in his office or in his custody, for the use of such officer
in the discharge of his official duties, and he shall also furnish a certified
copy of any such record, paper or document to any person not an officer of the
city upon the payment in advance of a fee in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 1-11-10; amd. 2012 Code)
   E.   Keep Books And Records: The city clerk shall keep such books and
permanent records of the transactions and business of his office as may be
necessary to accurately disclose all transactions and business of his office.
He shall also countersign all warrants, and keep a "warrant register and
abstract of expenditures", showing the number and amounts of warrants issued
and the person to whom issued, the date redeemed, the interest paid, and the
several funds against which each of said warrants is drawn. (2003 Code § 1-11-
10)
   F.   Issue Licenses: The city clerk shall issue all licenses, a duplicate of
which shall be kept on file, but no license shall be issued to any person
unless fees and charges fixed by either ordinance or resolution shall have
first been paid, for which payment the city clerk shall issue a receipt in
duplicate. The city clerk shall endorse upon the receipt and duplicate receipt
the number of the license issued, the number of the application for license,
and the duplicate of such receipt so issued shall be kept on file with the
duplicate license. (2003 Code § 1-11-10; amd. 2012 Code)
   G.   Keep Record Of Municipal Bonds: The city clerk shall keep records of
outstanding bonds of the city, showing the number and amount of each, for what
and to whom said bonds were issued, and when any of said bonds are purchased or
paid or canceled, said record shall show the fact, and in his report at the
close of each fiscal year he shall describe particularly the bonds issued and
sold during the year, the terms of sale, and itemize each and every expense
thereof.
   H.   Turn Money Over To Treasurer: Within ten (10) days after the filing of
his monthly report as provided herein, the city clerk shall deposit with the
city treasurer all funds collected by him during the preceding month, less
refunds of money paid on applications for licenses which are disallowed by the
city council.
   I.   Warrants:
      1.   Fund Drawn Upon And Amount Appropriated To Such Fund: Each warrant
shall show the fund upon which the same is drawn and if against any fund based
upon an appropriation shall show the amount appropriated to such fund and the
amount expended therefrom after deducting the amount of such warrant.
      2.   When Called: Outstanding warrants shall be called for payment in
their order whenever the city treasurer shall have on hand in the fund upon
which such warrants are drawn one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more;
provided, that if the aggregate of such warrants is less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), they may be called at any time that money is available to
pay the same.
      3.   Order Of Payment; Registration: Every fund in the hands of the city
treasurer will be paid out in the order in which the warrants are presented for
payment; provided, that applicable to the payment of any warrant when
presented, the city treasurer shall endorse on the same "not paid for want of
funds" and enter the same in a book to be kept for such purpose known as the
"warrant register", and thereafter said warrants shall bear interest at the
rate of seven percent (7%) per annum until there are funds in the hands of the
city treasurer with which to pay the same. (2003 Code § 1-11-10)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-2: Duties
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint or contract, with approval of the city council, a city
treasurer, who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment or
contract, or until such time as he may be removed pursuant to subsection
1-7-3D of this chapter, or pursuant to contract. (2003 Code § 1-11-11)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
   A.   Receive And Safely Keep Funds: It shall be the duty of the city
treasurer to receive and safely keep in designated depositories, as required by
law, all monies or funds belonging to the city which may come into his hands;
to disburse the same upon an appropriation by ordinance or resolution of the
city council after audit and allowance by the council of claims therefor, and
upon warrant of the mayor, countersigned by the city clerk, and not otherwise.
Securities belonging to the city, incapable of deposit in a checking account,
shall be kept by the city treasurer in a safety deposit box in some banking
institution designated by the city council. All bonds or securities delivered
to the city treasurer by any designated depository of city funds as security
for such funds shall be deposited with the county auditor or other public
official as may be provided by law.
   B.   Keep Proper Records And Books: The city treasurer shall keep in a
suitable book or books a full and accurate account of city money and funds
received by him, showing the date of the receipt thereof, the person from whom
received, on what account, and to what fund the same is credited with the date
of disbursement, the person to whom disbursed, on what account and against what
fund.
   C.   Deliver All Paid Vouchers And Warrants To Clerk: All warrants or orders
paid and redeemed and all vouchers shall be delivered to the city clerk
immediately upon payment or redemption and such redeemed warrants shall have
written or stamped on the face thereof, the word "paid".
   D.   Issue Duplicate Receipts For Money Received: The city treasurer shall
execute and deliver to every officer or other person paying money or funds into
the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, the amount
thereof and upon what fund or account the same is received.
   E.   Deliver Books And Papers To Successor: The city treasurer shall deliver
to his successor in office, all books, money, papers and other property
pertaining to his office.
   F.   Publish Quarterly Reports Of Receipts And Expenditures: It shall be the
duty of the city treasurer to cause to be published for at least one insertion
in some newspaper in the city, between the first and third Mondays of May,
August, November and February of each and every year, a full statement of the
receipts and expenditures of the city, giving the source from whence received,
to what purpose applied and to whom paid.
   G.   Collect All Monies: The city treasurer shall receive and all officers
or other persons shall forthwith pay to the city treasurer, except as otherwise
provided by this code, all money due the city on any account whatsoever.
   H.   Make Monthly Report To Council: The city treasurer shall, at the end of
each and every month, and at other times when required by the mayor or city
council, render an account under oath, showing the condition of the treasury at
the date of such account, including in said statement the balance of money in
the treasury with a detailed statement of the specified amount in each
designated depository and of the amount and class of security held to guarantee
each deposit. Such account shall also contain a statement of receipts and
disbursements and of all warrants redeemed and paid by him, which said
warrants, with all vouchers held by him, shall be filed with his accounts in
the city clerk's office. The mayor, city attorney or any member of the city
council shall have free access to any and all books or papers in the office of
the city treasurer for the purpose of inspection or examination. (2003 Code §
1-11-11)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment
1-7C-2: Powers And Duties
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor shall appoint or contract, with approval of the city council, a city
attorney, who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment or
contractual term, or until such time as he may be lawfully removed. Nothing
herein shall limit the mayor and city council's ability to appoint or contract
with other attorneys on a case by case basis as the need may arise from time to
time. (2003 Code § 1-12-01)
1-7C-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the council and the chief law
enforcement officer of the city. He shall have, in addition to those
necessarily or fairly implied in or incidental to or essential to, the powers
and duties hereinafter expressly authorized and specified:
   A.   Advise the body of the council, when required or requested to do so, in
all matters arising in the conduct of city business.
   B.   Prepare or revise ordinances and resolutions when so requested by the
body of the council.
   C.   Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by
the body of the council or mayor.
   D.   Attend regularly scheduled city council meetings for the purpose of
giving the city council legal advice.
   E.   Prepare for execution of contracts and instruments to which the city is
a party and shall approve, as to form, all contracts and bonds required to be
submitted to the city.
   F.   Prepare and direct all charges and complaints against and appear in the
appropriate court in the prosecution of every person charged with violation of
ordinance or any regulation adopted under authority of law and over which the
city attorney has jurisdiction.
   G.   Have independent prosecutorial discretion to charge or not charge,
prosecute or not prosecute, dismiss or not dismiss, negotiate and settle any
and all misdemeanors, infractions, and other offenses, and violations of this
code and the state code over which the city attorney has jurisdiction. (2003
Code § 1-12-02)
ARTICLE D. SEXTON
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Appointment, Removal
1-7D-2: Duties
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL:
The Grove City Cemetery shall be managed by a sexton, who may be employed by
the mayor, and who shall perform such duties and receive such compensation as
shall from time to time be provided at the mayor's direction and shall hold
office for the duration of his employment or until such time as removed by the
mayor. (2003 Code § 1-11-12; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2215, 12-7-2021)
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the sexton to take charge of the cemetery and improve
the grounds thereof, under the direction and subject to the approval of the
mayor; to dig or cause to be opened all graves required for the burial of the
dead therein; and to keep a record of the same in books provided for that
purpose. (2003 Code § 1-11-12; amd. Ord. 2215, 12-7-2021)
ARTICLE E. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Appointment
1-7E-2: Responsibilities
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT:
A city administrator - chief financial officer ("CFO") shall be appointed as an
officer of the city by the mayor with the consent of the city council. The city
administrator/CFO shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor, subject to the
removal provisions set forth in Blackfoot City Code section 1-7-3D, unless the
city administrator/CFO is party to an express employment contract, approved by
the Mayor and City Council, which provides otherwise. Such a contract is hereby
authorized. The city administrator shall be subject to policy direction by the
city council through its official actions and to direct supervision by the
mayor. (Ord. 2263, 12-3-2024)
1-7E-2: RESPONSIBILITIES:
The city administrator/CFO shall be responsible for management and supervision
of departments designated by the mayor, this code or city council resolution.
Such duties may be changed at any time by direction of the mayor or by
ordinance or resolution of city council. The city administrator/CFO shall have
the responsibility to ensure all treasurer responsibilities set forth in this
code have been fulfilled. Unless otherwise directed by the mayor or formal city
council action, the city administrator/CFO shall have supervisory authority
concerning the activities of all city departments which are assigned by the
mayor as the administrator's responsibility. Any rights or administrative
prerogatives established by such resolutions shall inure to the administrative
position held by the city administrator/CFO and shall not be personal rights of
the individual appointed to the position. (Ord. 2263, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 8
CITY DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Created
1-8A-2: Director Of Department
1-8A-3: Powers And Duties
1-8A-4: Divisions
1-8A-1: CREATED:
There hereby is created an administrative department of the city to be known as
the department of public works. (2003 Code § 3-09-01)
1-8A-2: DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT:
There hereby is created the office of director of public works, who shall
superintend, direct and manage the department and all officers, assistants and
employees assigned to and employed for the department and its various
divisions. Said director may be employed by the mayor. The public works
director may be an individual or a group of individuals as directed by the
mayor. (2003 Code § 3-09-02; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2215, 12-7-2021)
1-8A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of public works, in addition to those necessarily or fairly
implied in or incidental to or those essential to the powers, duties and
functions hereinafter expressly delegated and specified shall supervise, and be
in charge of:
   A.   Sewer System, Treatment; Drainage: The planning, design, construction,
management, maintenance and operation of the sewer system and sewage treatment
facilities, and storm drains and drainage systems.
   B.   City Equipment: The condition, maintenance and repair of all motor
vehicles, trucks and other equipment of the city.
   C.   Garbage Collection: The collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and
rubbish.
   D.   Communication, Alarm Equipment: Maintenance and repair of all
communications and alarm equipment and systems.
   E.   City Conducted Work: All survey, design, construction, repair or
maintenance work conducted by the city, unless specific directions to the
contrary are made by the city council.
   F.   Water: All city wells, water lines, water towers.
   G.   Other Duties: Assume and perform such other duties, functions and
services as may be required by ordinance or the mayor or city council.
   H.   Streets, Rights Of Way: The planning, design, construction, management,
maintenance and operation of the city streets, alleys, rights of way and
easements.
   I.   Construction Projects: All city construction projects. (2003 Code § 3-
09-03)
1-8A-4: DIVISIONS:
   A.   Specified: The department of public works shall be divided into the
following divisions:
      1.   Water department;
      2.   Sanitation department;
      3.   Street department;
      4.   Airport department;
      5.   Water pollution control (sewer).
   B.   Water Department: There hereby is established a water department in the
city consisting of such personnel as may from time to time be deemed necessary.
The water department shall operate under the direction of the department of
public works. The rules and regulations governing the water department and the
water usage in the city are codified in title 9 of this code.
   C.   Sanitation Department: There hereby is established a department of
sanitation in the city, consisting of a superintendent and such additional
personnel as may from time to time be deemed necessary. The sanitation
department shall operate under the department of public works.
   D.   Airport Department: There is hereby created an airport department for
the city. An administrative officer for such department may be employed by the
mayor.
   E.   Street Department:
      1.   Organization: There hereby is organized and created a street
department for the city. The administrative officer shall be known as the
superintendent of the street department. The street department shall operate
under the department of public works.
      2.   Supervision: The superintendent of streets shall have general
supervision over all public thoroughfares within the city. (2003 Code §§ 3-01-
01, 3-05-01, 3-06-01, 3-06-02, 3-08-01, 3-09-04; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2215, 12-
7-2021)
ARTICLE B. PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Created
1-8B-2: Supervision
1-8B-1: CREATED:
There hereby is created a park and recreation department for the city. An
administrative officer for such department may be employed by the mayor. (2003
Code § 3-07-01; amd. Ord. 2215, 12-7-2021)
1-8B-2: SUPERVISION:
Said employed officer shall at all times be under the direct supervision of the
mayor. (2003 Code § 3-07-02; amd. Ord. 2215, 12-7-2021)
ARTICLE C. POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8C-1: Membership
1-8C-2: Chief Of Police
1-8C-3: Duties And Responsibilities
1-8C-4: Special Police
1-8C-5: Rules And Regulations
1-8C-6: Lost Or Abandoned Property
1-8C-1: MEMBERSHIP:
The police department shall consist of a chief of police, a captain and other
officers as may be, from time to time, prescribed by this code or by the chief
of police, mayor or city council. (2003 Code § 3-02-04)
1-8C-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The head of the police department shall be the chief of police, who shall be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. He shall have such
powers, functions and perform such duties as may be prescribed by this code,
civil service rules and regulations, and statutes of the state, as may be
imposed upon him by the mayor or city council. In the carrying out of the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the chief of the police department, the
chief of the police department shall report to and coordinate with the mayor.
(2003 Code § 3-02-01)
1-8C-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Administration Of Department: The chief of police shall exercise all of
the powers and duties necessary to carry out the proper administration of the
police department and may delegate duties to employees and officers of the
police department.
   B.   Enforcement Of Laws:
      1.   The police department shall have the power to enforce all penal and
regulatory laws of the state and the city and to preserve order and exercise
any and all powers, duties and authority of any sheriff or other peace officer
anywhere in the state within the limits of the boundaries of the city, in the
same manner and with like authority as the sheriff of any county of the state.
The police department may employ, from time to time as authorized by the mayor
and city council, such officers as may be deemed necessary to carry out these
duties and powers, which officers shall be under the direction of the chief of
police as the head of the department, in accordance with the established policy
of the city as duly authorized by the city council. (2003 Code § 3-02-02)
      2.   It shall be the duty of each police officer within the police
department to enforce the provisions of this code, other laws of the city and
the statutes of the state, and to perform such duties as may be prescribed by
his superior officers and by the mayor and council. (2003 Code § 3-02-05)
1-8C-4: SPECIAL POLICE:
Special police may be appointed and upon appointment shall be assigned to such
functions, area of operation, duties and powers of police as may be designated
by the chief of police. (2003 Code § 3-02-06)
1-8C-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of the police department may propose such rules and regulations, as
he may deem advisable subject to approval by the mayor and city council. Such
rules and regulations may cover conduct of the members of the police
department, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of service,
vacations, employee conduct, grievance procedures and all other matters
necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the department. (2003 Code
§ 3-02-03)
1-8C-6: LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY:
   A.   Custody: All lost or abandoned property found upon property belonging
to the city shall be deposited with, and transferred to the custodial
possession of, the police department. All other property, lost or abandoned,
turned in to the police department shall become the property of the city until
the true owner is ascertained and claims the property or the procedure for
disposal of such property set forth in this section has been followed. (2003
Code § 6-05-01)
   B.   Disposition: All lost or abandoned property coming into the possession
of the police department shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions
of Idaho Code section 55-403. (2003 Code § 6-05-02)
   C.   Public Use: Any lost or abandoned property that has come into the
possession of the police department and has been held for a minimum period of
six (6) months, may be put to a public use, rather than be sold at public
auction. Prior to such public use, however, the city council must, by
resolution, describe the property to be subject to public use, and specifically
authorize the utilization of such property for such public use. (2003 Code § 6-
05-03)
ARTICLE D. FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8D-1: Established
1-8D-2: Personnel; Duties Of Fire Chief
1-8D-3: Violations
1-8D-4: Mitigation Cost Schedule And Recovery System
1-8D-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department, herein designated as the fire
department. (2003 Code § 3-03-01)
1-8D-2: PERSONNEL; DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
   A.   Specified: The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire
department, to be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city
council, and such other personnel as the mayor and city council may from time
to time determine necessary. The duties of the chief of the fire department
shall be as follows:
      1.   Direct the fighting of fires.
      2.   Have charge of, be responsible for, and keep in good order and
repair all equipment and apparatus connected with or belonging to the fire
department.
      3.   Call and direct such fire drills and meetings as he deems necessary
for the training of persons in efficient firefighting.
      4.   Have authority over the personnel of the fire department during
their activities while firefighting and during drills and meetings.
      5.   Have police authority while on duty as fire chief.
   B.   Volunteer Members: It shall be the duty of the volunteer members of the
fire department to respond to all fire calls, unless prevented from so doing by
unavoidable circumstances. They shall attend fire department drills and
meetings and obey such rules and regulations as are established for the fire
department. (2003 Code § 3-03-01)
1-8D-3: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   False Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to turn in or give a false alarm of a fire emergency, or aid or abet in the
commission of such an act or acts.
   B.   Code Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to violate any provision of this code or the international fire
code as amended from time to time. Such international fire code hereby is
adopted and incorporated herein by reference thereto.
   C.   False Representation:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, display or have in his
possession the official badge and/or uniform insignia of the department, unless
that person at the time of the possession or display is a regular member of the
department of fire duly appointed and employed to perform the duty of
extinguishing or preventing fires.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, display or have in his
possession any representation, facsimile or counterfeit of the official badge
and/or uniform insignia of the department of fire.
   D.   Interference With Hydrant: To interfere with any fire hydrant, either
by turning the water on or off or by attaching any hose, pipe or other
connection thereto.
   E.   Obstructing Hydrant: To obstruct in any manner the use of any fire
hydrant or place any material in front thereof or within ten feet (10') of
either side of said hydrant. (2003 Code § 3-03-01)
1-8D-4: MITIGATION COST SCHEDULE AND RECOVERY SYSTEM:
   A.   Purpose, And Authority To Establish A Mitigation Cost Schedule And
Recovery System:
      1.   In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting
from the utilization of city resources in response to certain public safety or
fire emergency incidents, this section authorizes the imposition of charges to
recover costs incurred by the city in responding to such incidents.
      2.   The mitigation cost shall be charged or billed to the responsible
party, representing an add-on cost of the claim for damages of the vehicles,
property and/or injuries. The claim for mitigation costs may be charged or
billed to the insurance coverage of the owner of a vehicle, owner of property,
or other responsible parties where an authorized agent of the city, county, or
state, or a court of competent jurisdiction determines the owner, owners, and/
or responsible party or parties is/are at fault, allocating all or some of such
costs jointly and severally. In some circumstances, a responsible party may be
charged or billed directly.
      3.   The city of Blackfoot shall initiate recovery of mitigation costs
for the delivery of emergency services by the fire department for personnel,
supplies, and equipment taken to the scene of emergency incidents involving
power lines or underground pipelines. Only incidents involving negligent,
intentional and/or illegal conduct shall be assessed mitigation costs. Fees
shall be set by city council by resolution.
      4.   The city may recover all mitigation costs in connection with a
public safety or fire emergency incident, as allowed herein, from any or all
responsible parties jointly or severally. The fire chief or his or her designee
shall, pursuant to the resolution setting forth applicable fees, determine the
total mitigation costs and shall determine whether to assess any, all, or part
of such costs against any of the responsible parties. The fire chief or his or
her designee may allocate mitigation costs among and between any responsible
parties, including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally
against more than one responsible party regardless of whether a responsible
party has any other legal liability. If the fire chief determines not to assess
all or a portion of mitigation costs against a responsible party, such
determination shall not in any way limit, reduce, or extinguish the liability
of the responsible party to any other parties.
      5.   After determining to assess mitigation costs against a responsible
party, the fire chief or his or her designee shall mail an itemized invoice to
the responsible party at its last known address. Such invoice shall be due and
payable within thirty (30) days of the date of the mailing. Any amounts not
paid in full within the thirty (30) days shall accrue interest as allowed by
Idaho Code. If a responsible party shall appeal the claim of mitigation costs,
such costs, if upheld, shall be due and payable thirty (30) days after the date
of determination of the appeal.
      6.   Any responsible party who receives an invoice for mitigation costs
shall have an opportunity to meet with the fire chief or his or her designee to
request a modification of mitigation costs. The responsible party shall request
in writing within ten (10) days from the date of the invoice assessing the
mitigation costs. If after meeting with the fire chief or his or her designee
the responsible party is still not satisfied, he or she may request an appeal
to city council as set forth herein.
      7.   Any responsible party aggrieved by the determination of being a
responsible party and/or the assessment of mitigation costs who desires an
appeal to city council shall submit the request in writing to the city clerk
within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice assessing the mitigation
costs. The city clerk shall place the matter on the next city council agenda.
All determinations of city council shall be deemed final. (Ord. 2152, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 9
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Policy
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Standard Of Conduct
1-9-4: Disclosure
1-9-5: Prohibited Influence And Conduct
1-9-6: Exception
1-9-7: Appointments
1-9-8: Terms Of Office
1-9-9: Penalty
1-9-1: POLICY:
It hereby is declared to be the policy of the city, and the city council hereby
finds and declares such policy to be necessary, in order to promote and provide
efficient and good government, where government is based on the consent of the
governed, that the proper operation of democratic government requires the
public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people, that government decision and policy be made in the best interest of the
people, the community and the government, that public office not be used for
personal gain, and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. (2003 Code § 1-21-01)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms herein defined shall have the
meaning given in this section unless a different meaning is clearly required by
the context. All words used in the present tense shall include the future;
words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural number the singular, unless the natural construction of the sentence
indicates otherwise, and the word "shall" is mandatory, not directory:
BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise,
franchise, association, organization, self-employed individual, and any legal
entity.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE IS ASSOCIATED: Any business of which the person or a
member of his household is a director, officer, owner, employer, or holder of
more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock, and any business which is
a client of the person.
CITY OFFICIAL: For the purposes of this chapter, a city official is defined as
any elected official, employee, any member of a board or commission appointed
by the mayor or city council, or any agent of the city. (2003 Code § 1-21-02)
1-9-3: STANDARD OF CONDUCT:
No city official shall knowingly:
   A.   Use his official position or office to obtain financial gain for
himself, any member of his household, or any business with which he or a member
of his household is associated.
   B.   Use or disclose confidential information gained in the course of or by
reason of his official position or activities in any way that could result in
financial gain for himself or for any other person.
   C.   Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing
or promise from any person or business which is interested directly or
indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city;
provided, however, any city official who is a candidate for public office may
accept campaign contributions and services in connection with such campaign.
(2003 Code § 1-21-03)
1-9-4: DISCLOSURE:
Any city official, who in the discharge of his official duties would be
required to take an action or make a decision that would affect directly or
indirectly his financial interests, or those of a member of his household, or a
business with which he is associated, or who shall have any interest, directly
or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any
department, commission, board or council of the city, shall:
   A.   If an official, other than an appointed or elected member of a
commission, board or council, verbally disclose such interest to the mayor (or
if such official is the mayor, then to the city council), who may require the
assignment of the matter creating the conflict to another official of the same
department of the city who does not have a conflict of interest, or determine
such conflict de minimus.
   B.   If an appointed or elected member of a commission, board or council,
disclose such interest on the records of said commission, board or council and
shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating
thereto, unless following such disclosure a majority of the remaining members
of such commission, board or council determined by official action at a public
meeting of such commission, board or council that such conflict of interest is
de minimus. (2003 Code § 1-21-04)
1-9-5: PROHIBITED INFLUENCE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   No person shall offer or give to a city official, or a member of any
official's household, and no city official shall solicit or receive, anything
of value, including a gift, favor, service or promise of future employment,
based on any understanding that such official's vote, official action, or
judgment would be influenced thereby, or where it could reasonably be inferred
that the thing of value would influence the official in the discharge of his
duties, or as a reward, of which would cause the total value of such things
received from the same person not a member of such official's household to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) during any single calendar year.
   B.   No person shall offer or pay to a city official, and no such official
shall solicit or receive, any money in addition to that received by the
official in his official capacity, for advice or assistance given in the course
of the official's employment or relating to this employment. (2003 Code § 1-21-
05)
1-9-6: EXCEPTION:
A city official shall not be deemed to have a financial interest in a matter if
his interest is solely that of a general taxpayer or solely that of a recipient
of public services generally provided by the city on the same terms and
conditions as if he were not an official. (2003 Code § 1-21-06)
1-9-7: APPOINTMENTS:
Appointments to boards and commissions of the city shall be made with a view to
minimizing potential conflicts of interest described in this chapter, and no
person shall be appointed to any such board or commission if his potential
conflicts of interest are of such a degree that they are likely to
substantially interfere with the performance of his duties as an official.
Appointments to such boards and commissions have memberships, which approximate
the diverse interests of the residents of the city. (2003 Code § 1-21-07)
1-9-8: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of office for each board and/or commission shall be provided by
ordinance. Reappointment for a successive term or terms shall be subject to the
approval of the mayor and city council. Prior to the expiration of a term of
office, the board of commission upon which a member serves may submit a
majority recommendation to the mayor and city council for the reappointment of
such member or the appointment of a new member for city council consideration.
(2003 Code § 1-21-08)
1-9-9: PENALTY:
Any person or business violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 1-21-
09; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTION PRECINCTS
SECTION:
1-10-1: City Clerk Chief Election Officer
1-10-2: Election Precincts Boundaries And Number Established
1-10-1: CITY CLERK CHIEF ELECTION OFFICER:
It is hereby declared that the city clerk shall be the chief election officer
of the city and shall perform all duties in accordance with the provisions of
Idaho Code section 50-400. (2003 Code § 1-10-01)
1-10-2: ELECTION PRECINCTS BOUNDARIES AND NUMBER ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The city council, in conjunction with the board of county
commissioners, shall establish a convenient number of election precincts, or
create new or consolidate established precincts, only within the boundaries of
the legislative districts provided by Idaho Code section 67-202. All municipal
election precincts shall, insofar as possible, have the same boundaries as
established by the board of county commissioners of Bingham County.
   B.   Pursuant to the laws of the state, there hereby is established a
convenient number of election precincts within the city. The six (6) precincts
herein established conform as nearly as possible and practicable to the Bingham
County, Idaho, election precincts within the city. (2003 Code § 1-10-02; amd.
2012 Code)
CHAPTER 11
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-11-1: Creation Of Right
1-11-2: Number Of Petitioners Required
1-11-3: Form Of Petition
1-11-4: Time For Filing Petitions
1-11-5: Printing Petition And Sheets; Time Limits For Perfecting Petition
1-11-6: Verification On Sheets For Signatures
1-11-7: Examination And Certification Of Signatures
1-11-8: Sufficiency Of Petition; Notification; Council Action; Election
1-11-9: Form Of Ballot
1-11-10: Conduct Of Election
1-11-11: Costs Of Election
1-11-12: Canvass Of Returns
1-11-13: Violations; Penalty
1-11-1: CREATION OF RIGHT:
The people of this city shall have the right to enact ordinances through the
initiative process, and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process,
according to the procedures set forth herein. (2003 Code § 1-22-01)
1-11-2: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum,
there shall be attached or appended to the petition the signatures of the legal
voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number
of electors who cast votes at the last general election in the city. (2003 Code
§ 1-22-02; amd. 2012 Code)
1-11-3: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and Council of the City of Blackfoot City,
Idaho: "We, the undersigned citizens and legal voters of the City of Blackfoot,
respectfully demand that the following proposed ordinance, to wit: (setting out
full test of measure proposed) shall be submitted to the legal voters of the
City of Blackfoot, for their approval or rejection at an election to be called
in accordance with Idaho Code Section 50-501(3), and each for himself says I
have personally signed this petition; I am a legal voter of the City of
Blackfoot; my residence and post office are correctly written after my name.
Name street and number post office
(2003 Code § 1-22-03)
1-11-4: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures shall be filed
with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days following the final adoption
of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (2003 Code § 1-22-04)
1-11-5: PRINTING PETITION AND SHEETS; TIME LIMITS FOR PERFECTING PETITION:
   A.   Examination Of Petition; Determination Of Form: Before or at the time
of beginning to circulate any petition for initiative or referendum, the person
or persons, organization or organizations, under whose authority the petition
is to be circulated, shall send or deliver to the city clerk a copy of such
petition duly signed by at least twenty (20) electors eligible to sign such
petition. The city clerk shall immediately examine the petition and specify the
form and kind and size of paper on which the petition shall be printed and
circulated for further signatures. All petitions and sheets for signatures
shall be printed on a good quality bond or ledger paper, on pages eight and
one-half inches (81/2") in width by thirteen inches (13") in length, with a
margin of one and three-fourths inches (13/4") at the top for binding, and the
sheets for signatures shall have numbered lines thereon from one to twenty (20)
for signatures. The petition shall be prepared in sections with each section
numbered consecutively. Each section of a petition shall have attached to it
not more than ten (10) sheets for signatures.
   B.   Approval Of Petition; Time Limit Specified: The city clerk shall
indicate in writing on the petition that he has approved it as to form. The
city clerk shall inform the person or persons, organization or organizations
under whose authority the petition is to be circulated, in writing, that the
petition must be perfected with the required number of certified signatures
within sixty (60) days following the date of approval as to form. Any petition
that has not been perfected with the required number of certified signatures
within the sixty (60) days allowed shall be declared null and void ab initio in
its entirety. (2003 Code § 1-22-05)
1-11-6: VERIFICATION ON SHEETS FOR SIGNATURES:
Each and every signature sheet of each petition containing signatures shall be
verified on the face thereof in substantially the following form by the person
who circulated said sheet of the petition, by his or her affidavit thereon, as
a part thereof:
   STATE OF IDAHO )
            ) ss.
   County of Bingham )
I,                     , swear, under penalty of perjury, that every person who
signed this sheet of the foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in
my presence. I believe that each has stated his or her name and the
accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that
the person was eligible to sign this petition.
Signature
Post Office Address
Subscribed and sworn to before me this      day of              , 200      .
(Notary Seal)   Notary Public                          
      Residing at                            
(2003 Code § 1-22-06)
1-11-7: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented on
the same day to the city clerk, who shall make a cursory examination of them to
determine whether the petitions apparently contain the necessary number of
signatures.
      2.   If the total number of signatures on the petitions is not sufficient
to satisfy the number required by section
1-11-2 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the city clerk who shall notify in writing the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered, if within the time limit of section
1-11-5 of this chapter.
      3.   If the cursory examination of the signature sheets reveals:
         a.   Erasures on any signature;
         b.   Illegible or undecipherable signatures:
         c.   Signatures not properly identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
         d.   Duplicate signatures;
         e.   Signatures of persons who have requested in writing to have their
names removed from the petition;
the city clerk shall summarily reject such signatures and they shall not be
counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed
by the city clerk. If the total number of signatures not rejected is not
sufficient to satisfy the number required by section
1-11-2 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the city clerk, who shall notify in writing the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered, if within the time limit of section
1-11-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Certification: All petitions presented to the city clerk found to
apparently contain the necessary number of signatures, after the cursory
examination provided for above, shall be filed with the city clerk and become
public records of the city not to be returned. The city clerk shall examine
each such signature purported to be that of a registered elector of the city,
and compare each such signature with the registration documents available to
the city clerk. The city clerk shall summarily reject all signatures which are
not the signatures of a registered elector of the city; and such rejected
signatures shall not be counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through
with ink and initialed by the city clerk. The city clerk may take not to exceed
ten (10) days after filing of the petition to complete his examination. The
city clerk shall certify each signature found to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter by an appropriate mark following each signature.
   C.   Required Number Of Signatures: The city clerk shall total the number of
certified signatures, and if found to total the number of signatures required
by section
1-11-2 of this chapter, shall proceed as provided in section
1-11-8 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 1-22-07)
1-11-8: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; COUNCIL ACTION; ELECTION:
   A.   Notice Of Insufficient Petition; Time For Correction: In the event that
a petition filed with a city clerk does not contain the required number of
certified signatures, the city shall inform the person or organization under
whose authority the petition was circulated that the petition is defective for
lack of certified signatures, and specify the number of additional signatures
required to make the petition valid. If the city clerk's determination that the
filed petition is defective occurs after the time limitation of section
1-11-5 of this chapter has expired, then an additional period of thirty (30)
days after notice of correction will be granted to perfect the defective
petition. If the petition is not perfected within the additional thirty (30)
day period after notice of correction, the city clerk shall declare the
petition null and void ab initio in its entirety.
   B.   Notice Of Sufficient Petition: In the event that a petition filed with
a city clerk is found by the city clerk to contain the required number of
certified signatures, the city clerk shall promptly, by certified mail, inform
the petitioners, and shall also notify the city council at its next meeting,
that the initiative or referendum petition is in proper form.
      1.   If the petition is for a referendum, the city council shall have
thirty (30) days from the date of certification of a petition to repeal the
ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event the city council repeals
the ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void.
      2.   If the petition is an initiative petition, the city council shall
have thirty (30) days to pass an ordinance substantially as proposed by the
petition. In the event the city council passes such an ordinance, the
initiative petition shall be null and void.
      3.   In the event the city council neither repeals the ordinance, which
is the subject of a referendum petition, nor enacts an ordinance that is the
subject of an initiative petition, an election shall be ordered by the city
clerk to be conducted citywide. A special election for initiative or referendum
shall be provided not more than ninety (90) days following the certification of
the petition; provided, that in the event a municipal election will occur
within the ninety (90) days, the initiative or referendum shall be submitted at
the time of the municipal election. (2003 Code § 1-22-08)
1-11-9: FORM OF BALLOT:
The city council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum
election in one of the following ways:
   A.   If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted
upon does not exceed two hundred (200) words in length, it may be set out in
full on the election ballot; or
   B.   If the full text of the ordinance or proposed ordinance to be voted
upon exceeds two hundred (200) words in length, and the city council votes not
to have it printed at length on the election ballot, it shall, with the
assistance of the city attorney, prepare a short title and description of the
ordinance or proposed ordinance, which shall clearly and impartially state its
purpose and effect, which short title and description shall be printed on the
election ballot. (2003 Code § 1-22-09)
1-11-10: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be
conducted and the results thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as
near as practicable, in like manner as general elections, except as otherwise
provided. (2003 Code § 1-22-10)
1-11-11: COSTS OF ELECTION:
The costs of any election held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be the sole responsibility of the city. (2003 Code § 1-22-11)
1-11-12: CANVASS OF RETURNS:
The mayor and city council shall meet within five (5) days after said election
to canvass the votes cast at such election, and the city clerk shall
immediately announce the results. Any initiative measure approved by a majority
of the votes cast shall be in full force and effect from the date of such
announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject of a referendum receiving less
than a majority of the votes cast shall be repealed, effective on the date of
such announcement. (2003 Code § 1-22-12)
1-11-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in chapter
4 of this title, who: (2003 Code § 1-22-13; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   Signs any name other than his own to any initiative or referendum
petition;
   B.   Knowingly signs his name more than once on the same initiative or
referendum petition;
   C.   Knowingly signs his name to any initiative or referendum petition if he
is not a registered city elector;
   D.   Wilfully or knowingly circulates, publishes or exhibits any false
statement or representation concerning the contents, purpose or effect of any
initiative or referendum petition for the purpose of obtaining any signature to
any such petition, or for the purpose of persuading any person to sign any such
petition;
   E.   Presents to any officer for filing any initiative or referendum
petition to which is attached, appended or subscribed any signature which the
person so filing such petition knows to be false or fraudulent, or not the
genuine signature of the person purporting to sign such petition, or whose name
is attached, appended or subscribed thereto;
   F.   Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or referendum
petition, knowing the same to contain false, forged or fictitious names;
   G.   Makes any false affidavit concerning any initiative or referendum
petition or the signatures appended thereto;
   H.   Offers, proposes or threatens for any pecuniary reward or
consideration:
      1.   To offer, propose, threaten or attempt to sell, hinder or delay any
initiative or referendum petition of any part thereof or any signatures
thereon;
      2.   To offer, propose or threaten to desist from beginning, promoting or
circulating any initiative or referendum petition;
      3.   To offer, propose, attempt or threaten in any manner or form to use
any recall petition or any power of promotion or opposition in any manner or
form for extortion, blackmail or secret or private intimidation of any person
or business interest. (2003 Code § 1-22-13)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
RULES, REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY
SECTION:
2-1-1: Policy
2-1-2: Duties Of Boards And Commissions
2-1-3: Compensation
2-1-4: Organization; Reports To City Council
2-1-5: Appointments And Removal
2-1-6: Residency Requirement
2-1-7: Resignations Or Vacations
2-1-1: POLICY:
It is hereby determined by the city council that a single, cohesive and
consistent policy is required to order the relationship of all city boards and
commissions pursuant to this code and state law. (2003 Code § 2-01-01)
2-1-2: DUTIES OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
Unless specific activities or duties are enumerated elsewhere in this code, all
city boards and commissions shall operate in an advisory capacity only to the
mayor and the city council. Any activities, duties or responsibilities
delegated by permanent boards and commissions shall be by ordinance and not
otherwise. (2003 Code § 2-01-02)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, all members of any city boards and
commissions shall serve without compensation. However, actual and necessary
expenses may be allowed with the prior approval of the mayor and city council.
(2003 Code § 2-01-03)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION; REPORTS TO CITY COUNCIL:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, each city board or commission shall
provide its own rules for conducting business, including, but not limited to,
the regularity of its meetings. Each city board or commission shall provide
minutes of its meetings to the city council after each regular or special
meeting of such board or commission. Each city board or commission shall
maintain such records as are required by law, provided for in the internal
organization of the board or commission, or as the mayor or city council may
from time to time require or request. (2003 Code § 2-01-04; amd. 2012 Code)
2-1-5: APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVAL:
Unless otherwise provided, all appointments to boards or commissions, which
shall be permanent boards or commissions, shall be made by the mayor, with the
consent of the city council. All members of boards or commissions may be
removed from service on such boards and committees in a like manner as is
provided for their appointment. (2003 Code § 2-01-05)
2-1-6: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT:
Unless otherwise provided by this code, members of every city board or
commission must be, at the time of their appointment and throughout the tenure
of their membership, residents of city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
airport board and the planning and zoning board may have out of city board
members as provided in applicable ordinances. (2003 Code § 2-01-06)
2-1-7: RESIGNATIONS OR VACATIONS:
Should any member of any city board or commission resign or should a vacancy on
any city board or commission become available, a replacement board or
commission member shall be appointed in a manner consistent with this chapter
to fill out the term of office for that originally provided for the member
resigning or vacating office on such board or commission. (2003 Code § 2-01-07)
CHAPTER 2
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Name
2-2-2: Membership And Terms Of Office; Compensation
2-2-3: Vacancies
2-2-4: Organization
2-2-5: Meetings
2-2-6: Duties
2-2-1: NAME:
The name of this chapter shall be the TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION. (2003 Code §
2-04-01)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION:
The transportation commission shall consist of seven (7) members, to be
appointed by the mayor, with the consent and approval of the city council.
Members of said commission shall hold office for a period of six (6) years each
and said terms shall be staggered in such a manner so that the terms of not
more than three (3) members shall expire in any one year. Two (2) of such
members shall hold office for a term of two (2) years, two (2) for four (4)
years, and three (3) for six (6) years, the respective terms of office to be
determined by lot at the first meeting of the commission. Thereafter, the term
of office for each appointed member shall be six (6) years. Members of the
commission shall serve without compensation. (2003 Code § 2-04-02)
2-2-3: VACANCIES:
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with the consent of the
city council. (2003 Code § 2-04-03)
2-2-4: ORGANIZATION:
The commission shall elect its own chairperson and secretary, and create and
fill such other offices as it may determine necessary, and adopt such rules as
it shall deem necessary to carry out its purpose. (2003 Code § 2-04-04)
2-2-5: MEETINGS:
The commission shall hold one regular meeting each month for not less than nine
(9) months in each year. The majority of the appointed members of the
commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting. All
meetings shall be open to the public. A written record of its meetings,
resolutions, findings and determinations shall be kept, which shall be a public
record. (2003 Code § 2-04-05)
2-2-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to recommend and make suggestions to the
city council regarding transportation issues in the city. Such transportation
issues shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the adoption of plans
for traffic safety, coordination of city traffic safety plans with the state
plans, making suggestions for projects designed to increase safety in
pedestrian and school traffic in the city, reviewing and making recommendations
regarding transportation projects within the city, and to generally recommend
to the city council plans to improve transportation and traffic safety in the
entire city. (2003 Code § 2-04-06)
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY BOARD
SECTION:
2-3-1: Appointment
2-3-2: Qualifications
2-3-3: Term
2-3-4: Quorum
2-3-5: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-3-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council shall appoint a Library Board
of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) library board members for the
Public Library. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-3-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Board member shall be a citizen of the City. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-3-3: TERM:
Library Board members shall hold office for five (5) year terms. Terms shall
expire on December 31st in the year in which the five year term ends. The term
of not more than two (2) members shall expire in any one (1) calendar year. All
appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same manner as appointments
are originally made. Any member whose term has expired, but a replacement has
not been appointed, shall retain their full authority to act as a Board member
until such replacement has been appointed. Appointments to complete unexpired
terms shall be for the remainder of the term only. Any Board Member may be
removed by City Council by the unanimous vote of all its members. (Ord. 2219,
1-4-2022)
2-3-4: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed Board Members shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting business. All actions by the Board shall require an
affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-3-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board Members shall have all of the powers and duties afforded to it by
Idaho State statute. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
CHAPTER 4
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-4-1: Appointment
2-4-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the consent of council, shall appoint a Planning and Zoning
Commission of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) members. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be governed by the provisions set forth in
Blackfoot City Code
11-2-3. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
CHAPTER 5
BLACKFOOT URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
SECTION:
2-5-1: Appointment
2-5-2: Qualifications
2-5-3: Term
2-5-4: Quorum
2-5-5: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-5-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council shall appoint an Urban Renewal
Board of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) board members. (Ord.
2219, 1-4-2022)
2-5-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Board member shall be a citizen of Bingham County. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-5-3: TERM:
Urban Renewal Board members shall hold office for three (3) year terms. Terms
shall expire on December 31st in the year in which the three year term ends.
The term of not more than three (3) members shall expire in any one (1)
calendar year. All appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same
manner as appointments are originally made. No member shall serve for more than
three (3) full terms. Appointments to complete unexpired terms shall be for the
remainder of the term only. Any Board Member may be removed by City Council by
the majority vote of all its members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-5-4: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed Board Members shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting business. All actions by the Board shall require an
affirmative vote of a majority of the Members present in the quorum. (Ord.
2219, 1-4-2022)
2-5-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board Members shall have all of the powers and duties afforded to it by
Idaho State statute. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
SECTION:
2-6-1: Appointment
2-6-2: Purpose
2-6-3: Qualifications
2-6-4: Term
2-6-5: Quorum
2-6-6: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-6-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council may appoint an Industrial
Development Corporation of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) board
members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this commission is to promote higher employment, encouraging new
job development, and maintaining/supplementing the capital investments in
industry, ensuring future capital investment, and other acts necessary to aide
in the accomplishment of these and similar goals. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-6-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Board member shall be a citizen of the City. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-6-4: TERM:
Board members shall hold office for three (3) year terms. Terms shall expire on
December 31st in the year in which the three year term ends. The term of not
more than three (3) members shall expire in any one (1) calendar year. All
appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same manner as appointments
are originally made. No members shall serve for more than three (3) full terms.
Appointments to complete unexpired terms shall be for the remainder of the term
only. Any Board Member may be removed by City Council by the majority vote of
all its members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-6-5: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed Board Members shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting business. All actions by the Board shall require an
affirmative vote of a majority of the Members present in the quorum. (Ord.
2219, 1-4-2022)
2-6-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board Members shall have all of the powers and duties afforded to it by the
Mayor, City Council and Idaho State statute. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
CHAPTER 7
WATER ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Appointment
2-7-2: Purpose
2-7-3: Qualifications
2-7-4: Term
2-7-5: Quorum
2-7-6: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-7-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council may appoint a Water
Conservation Board of not more than five (5) nor more than seven (7) board
members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-7-2: PURPOSE:
The Board shall advise the City regarding development and support of a
comprehensive, balanced plan of City-wide water conservation steps that may be
used to decrease the overall water consumption in the City. The Board shall
also advise the City regarding such other water usage, water ownership, or
other related matters as may be requested by the Mayor and/or City Council.
(Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-7-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Board member shall be a citizen of the City. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-7-4: TERM:
Members shall hold office for three (3) year terms. Terms shall expire on
December 31st in the year in which the three year term ends. The term of not
more than three (3) members shall expire in any one (1) calendar year. All
appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same manner as appointments
are originally made. No member shall serve for more than three (3) full terms.
Appointments to complete unexpired terms shall be for the remainder of the term
only. Any Board Member may be removed by City Council by the majority vote of
all its members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-7-5: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed Board Members shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting business. All actions by the Board shall require an
affirmative vote of a majority of the Members present in the quorum. (Ord.
2219, 1-4-2022)
2-7-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board Members shall have all of the powers and duties afforded to it by the
Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
CHAPTER 8
TEMPORARY COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
2-8-1: Appointment
2-8-2: Purpose
2-8-3: Qualifications
2-8-4: Term
2-8-5: Quorum
2-8-6: Powers And Duties Of Board
2-8-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, may appoint a temporary
commission to advise the City on issues, concerns, or other activities that may
arise from time to time. Any such temporary commission shall consist of not
less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) board members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-8-2: PURPOSE:
The Board shall advise the City regarding the purpose or concerns for which it
was appointed. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-8-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Board member of any temporary commission shall be a citizen of the County.
(Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-8-4: TERM:
Members shall hold office for no more than three (3) year terms. Terms shall
expire on December 31st in the year in which the three year term ends. The term
of not more than three (3) members shall expire in any one (1) calendar year.
All appointments to fill vacancies shall be made in the same manner as
appointments are originally made. No member shall serve for more than three (3)
full terms. Appointments to complete unexpired terms shall be for the remainder
of the term only. Any Board Member may be removed by City Council by the
majority vote of all its members. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
2-8-5: QUORUM:
A majority of the appointed Board Members shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of conducting business. All actions by the Board shall require an
affirmative vote of a majority of the Members present in the quorum. (Ord.
2219, 1-4-2022)
2-8-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board Members shall have all of the powers and duties granted to it by the
Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 2219, 1-4-2022)
TITLE 3
FINANCES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Claims And Warrants
3-1-2: City Funds
3-1-3: Surety Bonds
3-1-1: CLAIMS AND WARRANTS:
   A.   Filing Claims: Any party having claims or accounts against the city,
except refund payments or accounts from funds or monies held in trust for
performance guarantee purposes only, shall file the same with the city clerk at
least three (3) business days before the regular meeting of the city council.
The claims or accounts shall be in the form of a bill of particulars, stating
the item in detail and for what, and when the same accrued. When on account or
claim or any item thereof, has once been disallowed, in whole or part, by the
city council, the same shall not be again presented to the city council, and in
no case shall such account be presented to any council other than the one that
has passed on the same; and every claim or account when presented shall contain
all items of accounts and demands which the party claims against the city, up
to the time of filing the same. (2003 Code § 1-14-01)
   B.   Paid By Warrants: All claims and accounts allowed against the city
shall be paid by a warrant upon the city treasurer, to be drawn by the mayor
and countersigned by the city clerk, or on a check signed by the mayor and city
treasurer. (2003 Code § 1-14-02)
3-1-2: CITY FUNDS:
   A.   Daily Deposits: Every officer of the city receiving money in his
official capacity for or on behalf of the city shall deposit the same timely
and accurately and in accordance internal accounting procedures promulgated by
the city treasurer. Every officer so depositing money shall be responsible for
assuring that monies are allocated to the correct revenue account and that the
documentation accompanying the deposit is accurate. (2003 Code § 1-16-01)
   B.   Purchasing Supplies: No officer or employee of the city shall purchase
any supplies for any purpose except upon authorization, nor contract any
indebtedness of any nature whatsoever, employ any labor, nor appoint any
officers without first obtaining consent or permission from the mayor or the
city council, unless otherwise specifically provided, and all contracts made
otherwise shall be null and void as against the city, and shall not be allowed
or paid by the city council. (2003 Code § 1-16-02)
3-1-3: SURETY BONDS:
   A.   Guarantee In Lieu Of Surety Bonds: Whenever any chapter, section or
provision of this code, and as hereafter amended, or any rule, regulation or
ordinance printed and contained in a book in code form now ratified, adopted
and in force, and as hereafter amended, requires a surety bond as a condition:
1) of acceptance of a plat; 2) for the approval of a grant for a permit or
license; or 3) for the permission to do any thing, act or work, the city
council may, in lieu of a surety bond, require another type of guarantee
sufficient to secure the actual and faithful observance and performance of: 1)
all conditions and requirements therein imposed by said plat, permit, license
or contract, or thing, act or work approved; 2) all ordinances of the city; and
3) the duties required by ordinances, rules or regulations now in force or as
hereinafter enacted, ratified or adopted and otherwise do, perform and observe
all provisions and conditions of any approval, permit, license or contract.
(2003 Code § 1-19-01)
   B.   Security Of Thing, Act Or Work Approved: The guarantee in lieu of a
surety bond acceptable to secure the actual performance and observance of the
plat, permit, license or contract or thing, act or work approved by the city
council may be the following:
      1.   A general undertaking in a form similar to that required by Idaho
Code section 12-613, and acknowledged by and before an officer authorized by
law to take acknowledgments in order for such undertaking to be recorded.
      2.   The assignment or pledge of savings passbooks, time certificates or
certificates of deposit of a bank or savings and loan association authorized to
do business in the state.
      3.   The pledge, assignment or other act of rendering custody to the city
in and to securities, bills or notes of the United States Of America, or the
bonds of the state of Idaho, municipal corporations, or local improvement
districts. (2003 Code § 1-19-02)
CHAPTER 2
BUDGET
SECTION:
3-2-1: Budget Officer Designated
3-2-2: Forms Approved
3-2-3: Personnel To Furnish Budget Information
3-2-4: Itemization Of Budget
3-2-5: Bond And Interest Payments
3-2-6: Final Budget
3-2-7: Fee And Tax Increases
3-2-1: BUDGET OFFICER DESIGNATED:
The mayor shall be the budget officer for the city. (2003 Code § 1-15-01)
3-2-2: FORMS APPROVED:
All forms for reports, proposed and final budgets, as hereinafter provided,
shall be uniform in size, and type and such form as the budget officer, with
the approval and advice of the city council, shall prescribe. (2003 Code § 1-
15-02)
3-2-3: PERSONNEL TO FURNISH BUDGET INFORMATION:
All officers and employees of the city shall furnish to the budget officer or
his designee such information and perform such duties and services, in
preparation of the budget, as may be requested or required. (2003 Code § 1-15-
03)
3-2-4: ITEMIZATION OF BUDGET:
   A.   Classifications: The budget shall itemize and show for each department,
office, service, agency or activity of the city, information under the
following classifications:
      1.   All revenue from all sources.
      2.   An itemized and detailed statement of salaries and wages; provided,
that intermittent and nonsalaried employees, and laborers, shall be shown by
the total for each department, office, service, agency or activity.
      3.   All expenses and expenditures, other than salaries and wages.
   B.   Information Required: Said estimates and reports for each of the
foregoing classifications shall cover the following:
      1.   Audited numbers for the preceding fiscal year;
      2.   The current year operating budget; and
      3.   A forecast for the upcoming fiscal year budget. (2003 Code § 1-15-
04)
3-2-5: BOND AND INTEREST PAYMENTS:
The budget, in addition to the information required by section
3-2-4 of this chapter, shall itemize and show, on appropriate forms, the amount
required during the next fiscal year for payment of bonds, interest and for
sinking fund requirements. (2003 Code § 1-15-05)
3-2-6: FINAL BUDGET:
Before August 31 of each year, the city council, after such revision as it
desires, shall adopt and approve a final budget for the following fiscal year.
In addition, on the same date, the city council shall pass a resolution
approving a conceptual budget plan for the year that follows the next fiscal
year. Such conceptual budget plan shall be the blueprint for the following
year's budgeting process. (2003 Code § 1-15-06)
3-2-7: FEE AND TAX INCREASES:
All proposed fee increases and tax increases that are relied upon in a proposed
budget must be voted upon and approved by the city council prior to or at the
same time that the final budget is voted upon and approved by the city council.
(2003 Code § 1-15-07)
CHAPTER 3
PURCHASING AND BIDDING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Adoption Of State Law
3-3-2: Sale Of Property
3-3-3: Legal And Contractual Remedies
3-3-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
All public works construction and the purchases of goods and services shall be
governed by Idaho Code section 67-2801 et seq. (2012 Code)
3-3-2: SALE OF PROPERTY:
   A.   Surplus Property: The mayor shall dispose of all surplus property,
including land, building, equipment, and other city assets no longer required
for city use, in the manner which is in the best interest of the city and in
such form as is described in the property management policy. Departments shall
submit to the mayor, at such times and in such form as is described in the city
procurement policy, reports describing all property recommended for surplus
property designation.
      1.   Declaration Of Surplus: Department heads or designees may recommend
designation of property as surplus. The mayor may declare property items with
an estimated current value of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less
surplus property. The mayor, with the approval of city council, may declare
property items with an estimated current value over twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) surplus property. (2003 Code § 1-13-11)
      2.   Transfer: The mayor shall have the authority to transfer surplus
property to other departments with appropriate reimbursement or to make a
recommendation to the city council to donate surplus property to other
government agencies as provided for in Idaho Code. (2003 Code § 1-13-11; amd.
2012 Code)
      3.   Disposition: The mayor may sell all surplus property. The mayor may
also dispose of surplus property through exchange for, or in trade, or as trade
in credit on property to be acquired.
         a.   All sales of surplus personal property items except as provided
for later in this section, shall be made through auction or sealed bid to the
highest responsible bidder and be preceded by public notice whenever possible.
Choice of the procedures to be followed for auction or sealed bid is the
responsibility of the mayor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the mayor
determines that the property to be disposed is not worth more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), he may dispose of such property in any appropriate manner to
maximize financial return to the city without the requirement of the process of
a sealed bid or auction.
         b.   If disposition of surplus property pursuant to the bids received
are determined to not be in the best interest of the city, or no bids are
received, the mayor shall proceed to dispose of the property at his discretion
in any appropriate manner to maximize financial return to the city.
         c.   In the event items of surplus personal property are determined to
have no salable value because of condition, obsolescence or are inappropriate
for use by the public, the mayor shall dispose of the property in any manner he
deems appropriate.
         d.   Personal property received by the city as a result of lawful
confiscation or abandonment shall either be used by the city for public purpose
or sold by sealed bid or auction unless it is the determination of the mayor
that the city's interest would be better served by another method of disposal;
in which event, the mayor shall dispose of the property in an appropriate
manner.
   B.   Sale At Retail: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the
city may sell personal property to employees and members of the public at
retail, in accordance with pricing schedules approved by the mayor and city
council, at city facilities and events. For purposes of this section,
"facilities and events" shall include, but shall not be limited to, vending
machines, snack bars, gift shops, pro shops or other marketing methods catering
to city employees or members of the public utilizing city facilities or
participation in city sponsored events. (2003 Code § 1-13-11)
3-3-3: LEGAL AND CONTRACTUAL REMEDIES:
   A.   Authority To Resolve Protested Solicitations And Awards:
      1.   Right To Protest: Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or
contractor who is aggrieved by an action of the mayor or of a department
related to the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the mayor.
The protest shall be submitted in writing within four (4) working days after
such aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise
thereto. The deadline may be waived by the city council. Actions by the mayor
and the city council are not subject to protest under this section.
      2.   Authority To Resolve Protests: The mayor, with concurrence of the
department head, or a designee, the city attorney and the supervising council
member shall have the authority, prior to the commencement of an action in
court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve a protest of an
aggrieved bidder, offeror or contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the
solicitation or award of a contract, unless the settlement entails the payment
of city funds in excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), in which
case it must be approved by the mayor and city council.
      3.   Decision: Unless a protest is withdrawn, the mayor, or a designee,
shall issue a decision in writing. The decision shall:
         a.   State the reasons for the action taken; and
         b.   Inform the protestor of its right to administrative review as
provided in this chapter.
      4.   Notice Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection A3 of
this section shall be mailed by certified letter or otherwise furnished
immediately to the protestant and any other party intervening.
      5.   Finality Of Decision: A decision under subsection A3 of this section
shall be final and conclusive. The party adversely affected by the decision may
appeal administratively to a hearing officer or to the city council within
three (3) working days of notification of the decision by filing the notice of
appeal with the city clerk.
      6.   Stay Of Procurement During Protests: In the event of a timely
protest under subsection A1 of this section, the city shall not proceed further
with the solicitation or with the award of the contract until the mayor, after
consultation with the department head of the using agency, the city attorney,
and the supervising council member, makes a written determination that the
award of the contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial
interests of the city.
   B.   Authority To Debar Or Suspend:
      1.   Authority: After reasonable notice to the person involved and
reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the mayor, after
consultation with the department head of the using agency, the city attorney,
and the supervising council member, shall have the authority to debar a person
or firm for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment
shall not be for a period of more than three (3) years. The same officer, after
consultation with the department head of the using agency, shall have the
authority to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if
there is probable cause for debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not
exceeding three (3) months.
      2.   Causes For Debarment Or Suspension: The causes for debarment or
suspension include the following:
         a.   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.
         b.   Conviction under city, state or federal statutes of embezzlement,
theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving
stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity
or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a city contractor.
         c.   Conviction under city, state or federal antitrust statutes
arising out of the submission of bids or proposals.
         d.   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a
character which is regarded by the mayor to be so serious as to justify
debarment action:
            (1)   Failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the
specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
            (2)   A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided,
that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the
control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment.
         e.   Any other cause the mayor determines to be so serious and
compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including
debarment by another governmental entity.
      3.   Decision: The mayor shall issue a written decision to debar or
suspend. The decision shall:
         a.   State the reasons for the action taken; and
         b.   Inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights to
administrative review of the city council.
      4.   Finality Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection B3 of
this section shall be final and conclusive. The debarred or suspended person
may appeal to the city council within fourteen (14) days of notification of the
decision by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk.
   C.   Authority To Resolve Contract And Breach Of Contract Controversies:
      1.   Applicability: This section applies to controversies between the
city and a contractor and which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract
between them. This includes, without limitation, controversies based upon
breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract
modification or recision.
      2.   Authority: The mayor, with the concurrence of the department head or
designee, the city attorney, and the supervising council member, prior to
commencement of an action in a court concerning the controversy, is authorized
to settle and resolve a controversy described in subsection C1 of this section,
unless the settlement entails the payment of city funds in excess of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), in which case it must be approved by the mayor
and city council.
      3.   Decision: If such a controversy is not resolved by mutual agreement,
the mayor shall promptly issue a decision in writing. The decision shall:
         a.   State the reasons for the action taken; and
         b.   Inform the contractor of its right to administrative review by
the city council.
      4.   Notice Of Decision: A copy of the decision under subsection C3 of
this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the
contractor.
      5.   Finality Of Decision: The decision under subsection C3 of this
section shall be final and conclusive. The contractor may submit a written
appeal to the city council within seven (7) working days of notification of the
decision by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk.
      6.   Failure To Render Timely Decision: If the mayor does not issue the
written decision required under subsection C3 of this section within one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after written request for a final decision,
or within such longer period as may be agreed upon by the parties, then the
contractor may proceed as if an adverse decision had been received.
   D.   Remedies Prior To An Award: If prior to award it is determined that a
solicitation or proposed award of a contract is in violation of law, then the
solicitation or proposed award shall be:
      1.   Canceled; or
      2.   Revised to comply with the law.
   E.   Remedies After An Award: If after an award it is determined that a
solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of law, then:
      1.   If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently nor in
bad faith nor been party to the illegality:
         a.   The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is
determined by city attorney and the mayor that doing so is in the best interest
of the city; or
         b.   The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the
contract shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred under
the contract prior to termination.
      2.   If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad
faith:
         a.   The contract may be declared null and void; or
         b.   The contract may be ratified and affirmed if it is determined by
the mayor such action is in the best interests of the city, without prejudice
to the city's rights to such damages as may be appropriate. (2003 Code § 1-13-
12)
CHAPTER 4
OFFICIAL CITY FEES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Set By Resolution
3-4-1: SET BY RESOLUTION:
Unless otherwise stated in any other provision of this code, city fees shall be
as set by one or more resolutions. Such resolutions may be amended at any time
by the city council. Applicable state sales tax shall be added to fees that
require such. (2003 Code § 1-23-01)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-1-1: License Required
4-1-2: Payment Of License Fee
4-1-3: Application For License
4-1-4: Separate License For Each Activity
4-1-5: Term Of License
4-1-6: Investigation Of Applicant; Requirements
4-1-7: Compliance With Law
4-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, prosecute or carry on any trade, business,
profession or activity within the limits of the city, for which a license may
be required by this chapter, or by any ordinance of the city, until he shall
have obtained the license required for that trade, business, profession or
activity, all hereafter referred to as "activity". (2003 Code § 5-01-01)
4-1-2: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE:
   A.   Payment Of Fee; License Issuance: Every person required by this
chapter, or any ordinances of the city, to obtain a license to engage in any
trade, business, profession or activity, for which a license is required, shall
pay to the city treasurer the sum, or sums, required to be paid for a license.
With the receipt of the city treasurer, which receipt shall set forth the kind
of activity for which a license is desired, the applicant shall apply to the
city clerk for the license desired. The city clerk may issue a license to the
party applying upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions relating to
obtaining a license for the business, trade, profession or activity, for which
such license is desired.
   B.   Payment In Advance: All licenses required by this chapter shall be paid
in advance and prior to issuance. (2003 Code § 5-01-02)
4-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every license to be taken out under and by virtue of this chapter, or other
city ordinance, shall contain and set forth the purpose, trade, business,
profession or activity for which such license is granted, and the name and
address of the person or entity requesting the same. Said license shall
authorize the continuance of the activity named therein for the term of such
license, but shall not authorize the carrying on of said activity in any other
location. If the entity to which, or to whom, a license has been issued changes
its name or address, the entity shall inform the city clerk of such and request
that a new license be issued. Until the new license is issued, the existing
license shall be void. (2003 Code § 5-01-03)
4-1-4: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH ACTIVITY:
In every case where more than one activity for which a license is required is
carried on in the same place by the same person or entity, the person or entity
performing the activity must obtain a license for each activity and pay the
license fee for each activity. (2003 Code § 5-01-04)
4-1-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses are issued as annual licenses, unless otherwise stated. (2003 Code
§ 5-01-05)
4-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Determine Suitability Of Applicant: In order to determine an
applicant's suitability for a license relating to the following activities:
      1.   City alcohol licenses and permits,
      2.   Vendors, peddlers and solicitors,
      3.   Itinerant merchants,
      4.   Secondhand stores,
      5.   Pawnbrokers,
      6.   Escort business operators and employees,
      7.   Private security service operators and employees,
      8.   Obscenity activists who are subject to licensing,
      9.   Taxicabs,
the city shall require the applicant to, and the applicant shall, furnish to
the police department a full set of fingerprints. The police department shall
perform, or have the state department of law enforcement (or state police) or
the federal bureau of investigation, a criminal background investigation.
   B.   Background Investigation; Consent Required: The police department shall
obtain the written consent of the applicant for the criminal background
investigation and if the applicant does not execute the consent, the
application shall be denied. The police department shall submit the completed
fingerprint card to the state department of law enforcement (or state police).
Such department is authorized to submit the fingerprints to the FBI for a
national criminal history record check.
   C.   Payment Of Costs: The applicant shall pay for the costs of the city for
all federal bureau of investigation, state department of law enforcement, or
any other investigations requested, or performed, by the city. (2003 Code § 5-
01-06; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-7: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
All applicants for licenses and all holders of city licenses must be in
compliance with all city, state and federal regulations, codes and ordinances,
and may not be delinquent in payment on any indebtedness, fines or fees owed to
the city. Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for denying a
license and/or grounds for revoking an existing license. Once an applicant has
come into compliance with this section after denial or revocation, such
applicant may reapply for the license. (2003 Code § 5-01-07)
CHAPTER 2
BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR
SECTION:
4-2-1: Adoption Of Beer, Wine And Liquor Laws
4-2-2: Liquor By The Drink
4-2-3: Wine
4-2-4: Beer
4-2-5: Election Day Sales
4-2-6: Liquor Related Offenses
4-2-7: Hours Of Sale
4-2-8: Penalty
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR LAWS:
   A.   Adoption Of State Law: With the exception of the hours of sale for
beer, wine and liquor, there hereby is adopted for the purpose of governing the
licensing, sale and use of alcoholic beverages within the City, the laws of the
State, being particularly Idaho Code title 23, as presently in effect or as may
be amended hereafter by the legislature of the State, and/or by City Council,
as may be contained in that certain volume "Idaho Liquor and Beer Laws",
revised through acts of the legislature, published by authority of the
Department of Law Enforcement, Liquor Law Division, as the same may be revised
by the legislature, or by the City Council. The same hereby are adopted and
incorporated herein as an ordinance of the City as fully as though set forth in
full herein. (Ord. 2162, 12-5-2017)
   B.   Copies On File: Three (3) copies of the "Idaho Liquor and Beer Laws",
together with all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the Office of
the City Clerk for use and examination of and by the public. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-
2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-2: LIQUOR BY THE DRINK:
   A.   License Required: It shall be lawful to sell liquor by the drink within
the City, as provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, provided a license
shall first be obtained from the City for the sale of liquor by the drink.
   B.   Application For License; Fee: An applicant for a liquor by the drink
license shall make application to the City Clerk and pay the license fee. If
the license fee is paid prior to July 1, the fee shall be prorated, but if the
license fee is paid after July 1, the fee shall not be prorated and shall be
one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee.
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant: The application shall be submitted to the
Chief of Police for investigation and report to the Mayor and City Council; the
application must be approved by the Mayor and City Council before a license can
be issued. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
   D.   License Transfer; Fee: Licenses may be transferred under the provisions
of Idaho Code title 23, chapter 9, provided that the transferee meets the
requirements of a licensee, has paid a transfer fee as established by
resolution of the City Council and the Mayor and City Council have approved of
the transfer of the license. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012
Code)
4-2-3: WINE:
"Wine" shall be defined as any alcoholic beverage containing not more than
sixteen percent (16%) alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the
natural sugar content of fruits or other agricultural products containing
sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff.
3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   License Required: It shall be lawful to sell wine within the City, as
provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13, provided a license shall first be
obtained from the City for the sale of wine.
   B.   Application For License; Fee: An applicant for a wine license shall
make application to the City Clerk and pay the license fee. If the license fee
is paid prior to July 1, the fee shall be prorated, but if the license fee is
paid after July 1, the fee shall not be prorated and shall be one-half (1/2) of
the annual license fee.
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant: The application shall be submitted to the
chief of police for investigation and report to the mayor and city council; the
application must be approved by the mayor and city council before a license can
be granted. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
   D.   License Transfer; Fee: Licenses may be transferred under the provisions
of Idaho Code title 23, chapter 13, provided the transferee meets the
requirements of a licensee, has paid a transfer fee as established by
resolution of the city council and the mayor and city council have approved of
the transfer of the license. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012
Code)
   E.   Exception To License Requirement: Any establishment, lounge or bar that
has a liquor by the drink license, need not also have a wine license to sell
wine by the drink or by the bottle, for consumption on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-4: BEER:
   A.   License Required: It shall be lawful to sell beer within the city, as
provided in Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, provided a license shall first be
obtained from the city for the sale of beer.
   B.   Application For License; Fee: An applicant for a beer license shall
make application to the city clerk and pay the license fee. If the license fee
is paid prior to July 1, the fee shall be prorated, but if the license fee is
paid after July 1, the fee shall not be prorated and shall be one-half (1/2) of
the annual license fee.
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant: The application shall be submitted to the
chief of police for investigation and report to the mayor and city council; the
application must be approved by the mayor and city council before a license may
be issued. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
   D.   Transfer Of License; Fee: Licenses may be transferred under the
provisions of Idaho Code title 23, chapter 10, provided the transferee meets
the requirements of a licensee, has paid a transfer fee as set by resolution of
the city council and the mayor and city council have approved of the transfer
of the license. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-5: ELECTION DAY SALES:
The city shall follow the state laws for the sale of liquor by the drink, wine
and beer on election days. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-6: LIQUOR RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited In City Parks:
      1.   Consumption Or Possession Prohibited: Except as provided below, it
shall be unlawful and illegal for any person to consume or have in their
possession any type of alcoholic beverage in any shape or form, in or on the
city parks or parks maintained by the city.
      2.   Park Alcoholic Beverage Permit; Fee: It shall not be a violation of
this section to consume or to have in their possession an alcoholic beverage of
beer or wine in Jensen Grove Park and Memorial Park if the person has obtained
from the city clerk a park alcoholic beverage permit. The city clerk may issue
park alcoholic beverage permits upon application and upon proof of age, and
payment of the required fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. The
person obtaining the permit shall have the permit available at the park for
inspection, upon demand, by any police officer or other city official, and the
failure to have the permit for inspection shall subject the person who actually
obtained the permit, and all other persons in his corporation, partnership,
association or organization, to the criminal penalties cited in subsection A1
of this section.
   B.   Open Container Law:
      1.   Removal Of Liquor From Premises; Definition: It shall be unlawful
for any person to remove an open container containing any alcoholic beverage
from the premises of any business establishment which holds a beer, wine or
liquor license. "Premises" shall mean the building and contiguous property
owned or leased, or used under government permit, by the holder of a liquor,
wine or beer license as part of the business establishment in the business of
the sale, at retail, of liquor, wine or beer, which property is improved to
include decks, docks, boardwalks, lawns, gardens, golf courses, courtyards,
patios, abutting sidewalks, poolside areas, or similar improved appurtenances
in which, or on which, the sale of liquor, wine or beer is authorized by the
city.
      2.   Open Container In Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person,
while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a public highway of
the City, County or State, to consume beer, wine or liquor, or have in his
possession any beer, wine or liquor in an open or unsealed container of any
kind. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
4-2-7: HOURS OF SALE:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
    MEAL: A heated food served at a restaurant that was cooked or prepared at
the "restaurant" as defined in this subsection.
   RESTAURANT: The term restaurant, as defined by Idaho Code section 23-942(c),
is further defined as an establishment maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as primarily a food eating establishment, where individually priced
meals are prepared and regularly served to the public, for on premises
consumption. The establishment must also have a dining room or rooms, kitchen
and cooking facilities for the preparation of food, and the number, and type of
employees normally used in the preparing, cooking and serving of meals.
Primarily as defined for the purposes of IDAPA 11.05.01.010, also includes that
the licensee must show to law enforcement personnel, when requested, the
following:
      1.   An established menu identifying the individually priced meals for
consumption;
      2.   That food service and preparation occurs on the premises by
establishment employees;
      3.   That stoves, ovens, refrigeration equipment or such other equipment
usually and normally found in restaurants are located on the premises of the
establishment;
      4.   The licensee must demonstrate to the satisfaction of law enforcement
personnel, through appropriate business records, that the establishment is
advertised and held out to the public as primarily a food eating establishment,
or that at least forty percent (40%) of the establishment's consumable
purchases are derived from purchases of food and nonalcoholic beverages. (Ord.
2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-16-2010)
   B.   Restricted Hours Of Sale: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for
any person in any place licensed to sell beer, wine or liquor, whether
conducted for pleasure or profit, to sell, dispense or give away beer, wine or
liquor for consumption on the premises, or off the premises, or to permit the
consumption of such on the premises during the following hours:
      1.   All days of the week from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. (Ord. 2161, 12-5-2017)
   C.   Time Limit After Service: Any patron present on the licensed premises
after the sale of beer, wine or liquor has stopped as provided in subsection B
of this section, shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30)
minutes, to consume any beverage already served. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-
16-2010)
4-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this Code, or such provision or penalty contained in Idaho Code title 23, as
applicable, whichever may be more of a penalty. (Ord. 2092, 3-16-2010, eff. 3-
16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE A. ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CATERING PERMITS
SECTION:
4-2A-1: Definitions
4-2A-2: Permit Required
4-2A-3: Application For Permit; Term Limitation
4-2A-4: Filing Fee
4-2A-5: Approval Or Disapproval Of Application
4-2A-6: Conditions Of Denial
4-2A-7: Penalty
4-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONVENTION: A formal meeting of members, representatives or delegates, as of a
political party, fraternal society, profession or industry.
PARTY: A social gathering, especially for pleasure or amusement, and includes,
but is not limited to, such social events as weddings, birthdays and special
holiday celebrations to include, but not be limited to, New Year's
celebrations, Super Bowl Sunday, St. Patrick's Day, the Fourth Of July and
Labor Day. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An alcohol beverage catering permit is a permit issued pursuant to this article
that authorizes the permittee to serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer and
wine, or beer or wine, at a party or convention, and not to exceed three (3)
consecutive days. An alcohol beverage catering permit shall be limited to
authorization to sell liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based
upon the type of license which the applicant possesses. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012,
eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; TERM LIMITATION:
   A.   Term Limitation: Any person authorized to sell liquor or beer or wine,
or any combination thereof, may apply for a catering permit to serve and sell
liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer or wine, at a party or convention,
for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days.
   B.   Application; Procedure: All applications for a catering permit must be
filed with the city clerk's office on a form provided by the city clerk's
office, verified by the applicant and accompanied by the filing fee, no less
than three (3) working days prior to the proposed party or convention. The
application must state:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant and the number of his state
liquor, beer or wine license;
      2.   The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not
to exceed three (3) consecutive days;
      3.   The names of the organizations, groups or persons sponsoring the
event;
      4.   The address at which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served; and
      5.   The purpose for the party or convention. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff.
3-6-2012)
4-2A-4: FILING FEE:
The filing fee shall be the fee designated by the city council. (Ord. 2102, 3-
6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-5: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
   A.   The city clerk, as the city council's designee, upon the advice and
recommendation of the chief of police or his designee, shall approve or
disapprove the application and indicate the determination on the face of the
application by endorsement signed by the city clerk, and a copy shall be mailed
or delivered immediately to the chief of police and the applicant. A signed
copy shall be retained by the city clerk.
   B.   An application approved in this manner shall constitute an alcohol
beverage catering permit. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-6: CONDITIONS OF DENIAL:
An alcohol beverage catering permit is subject to the following limitations:
   A.   An application for a permit may be denied because of the applicant's
previous violation within three (3) years of any state or city code provisions
regulating noise, alcohol or food service.
   B.   An application for a permit may be denied if, based on the totality of
the circumstances, the applicant is attempting to use the alcohol beverage
catering permit to avoid having to properly license another establishment to
serve beer, wine or alcohol. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-2012)
4-2A-7: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2102, 3-6-2012, eff. 3-6-
2012; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Applicability Of State And Federal Regulations
4-3-2: Fee For Permit
4-3-3: Itinerant Restaurant Fee
4-3-4: Sanitary Facilities
4-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF STATE AND FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
All eating and drinking establishments within the city shall comply with all
applicable federal and state regulations. All restaurants, eating or drinking
establishments must apply and obtain from the city a permit to operate. The
permit may be suspended for failure to comply with city, state or federal
ordinances and regulations. (2003 Code § 5-11-01)
4-3-2: FEE FOR PERMIT:
A fee for each permit issued under the authority contained in this chapter
shall be paid to the city clerk; such fee to be the sum as established by
resolution of the city council for each eating and drinking establishment.
(2003 Code § 5-11-02; amd. 2012 Code)
4-3-3: ITINERANT RESTAURANT FEE:
A fee for each itinerant restaurant permit issued shall be paid to the city
clerk; such fee to be in the sum as established by resolution of the city
council. The permit to be valid for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
Any extension over thirty (30) days requires another permit. (2003 Code § 5-11-
03; amd. 2012 Code)
4-3-4: SANITARY FACILITIES:
In each eating and drinking establishment in the city, provision shall be made
for public toilet and lavatory facilities. (2003 Code § 5-11-04)
CHAPTER 4
PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Purpose
4-4-2: Jurisdiction
4-4-3: Definitions
4-4-4: License Required; Exceptions
4-4-5: Application For License
4-4-6: Investigation Of Applicant
4-4-7: Bond Requirement
4-4-8: Fees For License
4-4-9: Issuance Or Denial And Exhibition Of License
4-4-10: Restrictions
4-4-11: Unlawful Conduct
4-4-12: Revocation Of License
4-4-13: Penalty
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the health, safety and/or
welfare of residents of the city and to protect its citizens from crime by
means of regulation of vendors, peddlers and/or solicitors. (2003 Code § 5-04-
01)
4-4-2: JURISDICTION:
The following provisions shall apply to peddlers, vendors and/or solicitors
operating or doing business within the incorporated areas of the city. The
provisions of this chapter are not intended to prohibit or hamper speech that
is protected by the first amendment of the U.S. constitution, but merely to
regulate specific activities of a commercial nature. (2003 Code § 5-04-02)
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PEDDLER OR VENDOR: Any person traveling by foot, motor vehicle, bicycle or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from
street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise, food or farm products or provisions, offering and/or exposing the
same for sale, making sales, or delivering articles to purchasers.
SOLICITOR: Any person traveling either by foot, motor vehicle, bicycle or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from street
to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares,
merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or
for services to be furnished immediately or performed in the future, whether he
or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. (2003 Code § 5-04-
03)
4-4-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to act as a vendor, peddler or
solicitor, or to employ another in such business within the meaning and
application of this chapter, without first securing a license to do so from the
city clerk.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   A person invited to the premises or place by the occupant or owner
of the premises or place.
      2.   Any sales under a court order.
      3.   The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person
engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper.
      4.   The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a
function of their school or in support of a school program or fund raising
sales by local service clubs or groups such as Soroptimists, Elks, Kiwanis,
Rotary, Lions, Boy or Girl Scouts.
      5.   Garage, yard or similar sales by individuals at their residence or
place of business, not exceeding three (3) separate sales in one calendar year,
and not to exceed three (3) days each, which sales shall not include business
inventory or items that have been purchased for the purpose of resale from
another garage sale.
      6.   Any political group or candidate seeking funds, membership or
support.
      7.   A bona fide auction sale. (2003 Code § 5-04-04)
4-4-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license to engage as a vendor, peddler or solicitor
within the city shall make application therefor to the city clerk on a form to
be provided, which shall state the following information, but which shall not
necessarily be limited to the following information:
   A.   Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is an association,
company or corporation, then it shall state its name along with the names and
descriptions of those who will be soliciting in the city.
   B.   Address, both headquarters and local.
   C.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold and in the case of farm or garden products, whether produced or grown by
the applicant.
   D.   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship between the employer and the
applicant.
   E.   The proposed method of operation, length of time for which the right to
do business is desired and if a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of
the same, together with license number and other means of identification.
   F.   Whether a permit or license issued to the applicant has been revoked
during the last five (5) years, and if so, where and when.
   G.   A statement as to whether the applicant, or any partner or any officer
or director has:
      1.   Forfeited bail;
      2.   Been arrested;
      3.   Been convicted;
      4.   Been fined;
      5.   Been jailed; or
      6.   Been placed on probation for any violation of the law.
   H.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery.
   I.   When the applicant proposes to sell any prepared food product for human
consumption, a certification from the Central district health department and/or
any other applicable license required shall be required prior to the issuance
of this license.
   J.   An agent upon whom service of process may be made in the state of
Idaho. (2003 Code § 5-04-05)
4-4-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
   A.   Upon receipt of application, or application for renewal, the city clerk
shall refer the application to the chief of police, who shall cause an
investigation to determine the validity and completeness of the information
presented on the application. The chief of police shall endorse upon the
application the findings of the investigation and return it to the city clerk.
   B.   If the applicant or his employer has been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude within the past five (5) years, or if the applicant
has made a false statement on the application, it shall be denied.
   C.   Two (2) photographs of the applicant that are two inch by two inch (2"
x 2"), showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishable manner.
   D.   Any applicant, or employee of an applicant, shall be required to have
their fingerprints taken as a part of the investigation. (2003 Code § 5-04-06)
4-4-7: BOND REQUIREMENT:
Before any license as provided herein shall be issued for engaging in the
business of "peddler", "vendor" or "solicitor" as defined in this chapter, the
following must occur:
   A.   Individuals: Every applicant plying his trade as an individual, shall
file with the city clerk a surety bond, a cashier's check, or a letter of
credit from a bank in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), running
to the city.
   B.   Business: Every business, firm, company, individual or corporation,
which has two (2) or more employees or agents acting in the capacity of vendor,
solicitor or peddler, shall file with the city clerk a surety bond, cashier's
check or letter of credit from a bank in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), running to the city for each employee or agent. The surety bond
must be made by an agent upon which service of process may be made in the
state.
   C.   Claim Against: Action on the surety bond or cashier's check may be
brought directly by any person damaged by a licensee's violation of any
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Return Of Surety: After expiration of a license, the city clerk shall,
upon application of the licensee, return the bond, cashier's check or letter of
credit ninety (90) days after receipt of application for return, unless the
city clerk has been notified of the prudence of any claim or cause of action by
any person upon the bond, cashier's check or letter of credit. (2003 Code § 5-
04-07)
4-4-8: FEES FOR LICENSE:
License fees charged for administration and enforcement of this chapter shall
be as established by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 5-04-08; amd.
2012 Code)
4-4-9: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL AND EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Approved: The city clerk shall notify the applicant when his license
request is approved, and shall issue a license.
   B.   Denied: The city clerk shall notify the applicant if his license is
denied, the reasons therefor, and advise him of his rights to appeal to the
city council.
   C.   Exhibited: The license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the
motor vehicle or other mode of transportation if the licensee is using a motor
vehicle or other mode of transportation. Otherwise, the license must be kept on
the person and exhibited at any time upon request. (2003 Code § 5-04-09)
4-4-10: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No Fixed Location; Congested Area: No licensee shall have any right to
any fixed, regular or established location in a public street, sidewalk or
right of way, nor shall the licensee be permitted to conduct his business in
any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the
public. The judgment of a police officer is deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced. (2003 Code § 5-
04-10)
   B.   Certain Areas Prohibited:
      1.   No business activity shall be carried on in any area of the city by
any licensee where such business is prohibited by the city zoning ordinance.
Without prior approval by city council, no licensee shall be permitted to
conduct his business or trade in or on any city park, city building, or
adjacent grounds. (Ord. 2134, 8-4-2015, eff. 8-4-2015)
      2.   Vendor carts and motor vehicles are prohibited within fifteen feet
(15') of a fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop or loading zone.
   C.   Private Property: Business activity as regulated by this chapter shall
only be conducted on private property with written approval of the property
owner.
   D.   Hours Of Operation: Vendors, peddlers or solicitors shall be allowed to
engage in their licensed business only between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. All vending stands, carts or vehicles must be
removed from public property during nonvending hours. The city council may make
an exception to the usual hours of operation if a special event permit is
sought.
   E.   Removal Of Trash: All trash or debris accumulating within twenty feet
(20') of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor, peddler or
solicitor and deposited in trash containers. All vendors or peddlers selling
food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of
their stands. (2003 Code § 5-04-10)
4-4-11: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No licensee hereunder shall:
   A.   Mislead Customer: Misrepresent the purpose of, or affiliation of those
engaged in the solicitation, peddling or vending.
   B.   Harass: Continue efforts to solicit or peddle to an individual once
that individual informs the solicitor or peddler that they do not wish to give
or purchase anything from that solicitor, peddler, or vendor.
   C.   Claim Endorsement: Represent the issuance of any license under this
chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of solicitation.
   D.   Trespass: Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign
stating "No Peddlers Allowed", or "No Solicitation Allowed", or "No Vendors
Allowed", or other words to such effect.
   E.   False Statements: Knowingly make any false statement on an application
for a license. (2003 Code § 5-04-11)
4-4-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council has the power to revoke any license granted in accordance with
this chapter for any of the following causes:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
conducting the business or trade. (2003 Code § 5-04-12)
4-4-13: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. Additionally, any applicant for a license having signed under oath upon
penalty of perjury may be prosecuted under the laws of the state pertaining to
perjury if any portion of the application is found to be untrue or if the
applicant has been found to have violated the Idaho consumer protection act.
(2003 Code § 5-04-13; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Pawnbroker Defined
4-5-2: Application Of Chapter
4-5-3: License Required; Application And Procedure
4-5-4: Fee For License
4-5-5: Records
4-5-6: Minors And Intoxicated Persons
4-5-7: Sales
4-5-8: Forfeitures
4-5-9: Hours Of Operation
4-5-10: Report To Chief Of Police
4-5-11: Notice From Police Department
4-5-12: Stolen Property; Return To True Owner
4-5-13: Appeal From Denial Of License
4-5-14: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
4-5-15: Prohibited Acts
4-5-16: Penalty
4-5-1: PAWNBROKER DEFINED:
Every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who makes it a
business or conducts or operates a business, to take or receive, by way of
pledge, pawn, exchange or hypothecation, any goods, wares or merchandise, or
any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money
lent thereon, including the payment of interest on the money lent; or who makes
it a business of receiving or purchasing personal property or other valuables
for the purpose of selling the same back again at a stipulated price; or makes
it a business of lending money secured by a chattel mortgage, uniform commerce
code financing statement or personal property while keeping possession of the
item of property placed as security; for all intents and purposes under this
chapter is hereby defined as a "pawnbroker" and shall be governed by the terms
of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-05-01)
4-5-2: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be applicable to the principals of any entity performing any
activity regulated by this chapter and to their agents and employees. Every
pawnbroker regulated hereunder shall be liable for all the penalties provided
herein for violation of any provision of this chapter, whether such violation
be committed by himself or his agent, clerk or employee. (2003 Code § 5-05-02)
4-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a pawnbroker unless a valid license therefor has been issued as
herein provided and said license is in full force and effect.
   B.   Application For License: An application for such license shall be made
to the city clerk in such form and manner as the city clerk may prescribe. Such
application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the
names and addresses of each partner, and if a corporation or association, the
names and addresses of the principal stockholders, and the name and residence
of the operating manager of the business.
      2.   Whether the applicant has had a similar license revoked by the city
or any other city in this state or of the United States, or any state of the
United States, within the past five (5) years.
      3.   Whether the applicant or any principal or partner has been convicted
of any felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations, the nature
of the offense, and the date, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
      4.   The name and address of each employee of the business and whether
that employee has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanors, other than
minor traffic violations, the nature of the offense, and the date, and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor. Upon change of employees, the above
information shall be forwarded to the city clerk ten (10) days after the hiring
of a new employee.
   C.   Investigation Of Applicant Or Employee: Upon receipt of any application
for a license, the city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of the
applicant. Also, upon receipt of the name of a new employee, the City Clerk
shall cause an investigation to be made of the employee. Such investigation
shall be completed within thirty (30) days.
   D.   License Issuance Restricted: No person or entity shall be issued a
license to engage in the business of a pawnbroker when such pawnbroker:
      1.   Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
      2.   Is not a bona fide owner of such business;
      3.   Has had a similar license revoked by this City or any other city of
this State, or of the United States, within five (5) years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application;
      4.   Has been convicted of any felony, or has been convicted of any other
crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude within the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
      5.   Has misrepresented or made a false or fraudulent statement of
material or relevant facts contained in the application; or
      6.   Has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise.
   E.   Qualifications: An affirmative showing with respect to the
qualifications herein specified shall be required to be made with respect to
each applicant, and to each partner of a partnership applicant and to each
officer, director or member of the governing board of a corporation or
association and with regard to each employee.
   F.   License Issuance; Term: Upon completion of the investigation, the City
Clerk shall issue, subject to City Council approval, and approval of the Chief
of Police, and upon payment of the prescribed license fee, a license which
shall expire at the end of the calendar year, unless sooner revoked or
surrendered.
   G.   Notification Of License Denial; Hearing: The City Clerk shall notify
the applicant if his license is disapproved, the reasons therefor and advise
him of the appeal procedure.
   H.   License Nontransferable: Licenses shall not be transferable, either as
to person or place.
   I.   Posting Of License: The license issued hereunder shall be posted
conspicuously in each place of business named therein. (2003 Code § 5-05-03)
4-5-4: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The City Clerk shall collect, before the issuance of any license or renewal
thereof, an annual license fee as established by resolution of the City
Council. (2003 Code § 5-05-04)
4-5-5: RECORDS:
   A.   Declaration Of Purpose: The City of Blackfoot ("City"), located in
Bingham County, Idaho, hereby finds and declares that the pawn of metals, wire,
and other precious items easily liquidated for cash by those who are not the
rightful owners of such property has become a serious problem within the City.
The City also finds that recovery of the lost or stolen property becomes more
difficult the longer the property is missing and that local pawnbrokers and
secondhand precious metal dealers currently do not have any way to know whether
property that is sold to them is the substance of a theft.
Therefore, the City hereby finds that the use of the electronic database of
lost and stolen property known as "LeadsOnline" will provide assistance to both
the person who has been the victim of a theft and the pawnbroker/secondhand
dealer who has been the victim of paying money for stolen property by providing
a place for the reporting of lost and stolen property. (Ord. 2115, 4-2-2013)
   B.   Records To Be Kept And Filed: All pawnbrokers and secondhand precious
metal dealers shall keep and file with the Blackfoot Police Department, a
digital copy of the following described records. All digital records shall be
filed via internet at a website determined by the Blackfoot Police Department
using software as may be determined by the Blackfoot Police Department. Such
digital records shall be filed within seventy two (72) hours after the time and
date of the transaction. The digital records required for filing shall consist
of the following:
      1.   An accurate description of all precious metals and personal property
purchased, acquired or received.
      2.   The name, residence, driver's license number or social security
number of the person from whom any precious metals or personal property is
purchased, acquired or received.
      3.   The date and place of the purchase, acquisition or reception.
      4.   The date when such property is disposed of and the name and address
of the person receiving the same.
      5.   The serial number of any property received or sold, if that property
contains a serial number.
      6.   Any other records required to be kept under Idaho law. (Ord. 2172,
10-2-2018)
   C.   Violation: Unless otherwise indicated herein, any person who pleads
guilty or is found guilty of violating any provision herein, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a County Jail not exceeding six
(6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
both. (Ord. 2115, 4-2-2013)
4-5-6: MINORS AND INTOXICATED PERSONS:
No pawnbroker shall:
   A.   Minors: Buy items of value from or loan money on property to any person
under eighteen (18) years of age. This provision shall not prevent sales to any
person regardless of age.
   B.   Intoxicated Persons: Have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a
person who is under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs such that
impairs his business judgment. (2003 Code § 5-05-06)
4-5-7: SALES:
No personal property purchased by a pawnbroker at his place of business shall
be sold or removed from such place of business for a period of at least seven
(7) days after being so purchased without written consent of the Chief of
Police. Excluded from this restriction are transactions in gold and silver
bullion or coins. (2003 Code § 5-05-07)
4-5-8: FORFEITURES:
Every pawnbroker shall allow a period of thirty (30) days for a pledger to
repay the loan before the property pledged shall become forfeitable. Upon
payment by the pledger of the service charge incurred in connection with the
loan for the first thirty (30) days, the pawnbroker shall automatically extend
the loan repayment period another thirty (30) days. (2003 Code § 5-05-08)
4-5-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Legal hours for "pawnbrokers", as defined in section
4-5-1 of this chapter, may be between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day, unless special permission is obtained
from the Chief of Police. (2003 Code § 5-05-09)
4-5-10: REPORT TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police or other officers of the Police Department may, at their
discretion, require a written report of said business transactions, and during
the business hours of every day may conduct a personal examination of any
articles pledged or sold, or inspect the books or records of such pawnbroker
showing the articles or things purchased or pawned. (2003 Code § 5-05-10)
4-5-11: NOTICE FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Whenever the Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department shall
notify any pawnbroker in writing not to sell any property deposited or
purchased by him or permit the same to be redeemed, such property shall not be
sold or permitted to be redeemed for a period of sixty (60) days from the date
of such notice, but such notice may be renewed by written request for an
additional sixty (60) day period or periods. Further, a notice may be
terminated at any time in writing by the Chief of Police. (2003 Code § 5-05-11)
4-5-12: STOLEN PROPERTY; RETURN TO TRUE OWNER:
   A.   Return Of Stolen Property: Any article pledged or sold to a pawnbroker
which is subsequently determined by a law enforcement agency to have been
stolen shall be transferred to the custody of such agency upon the agency's
written request, or, at the direction of the agency, shall be returned by the
pawnbroker to the true owner. The true owner shall not be liable to the
pawnbroker for any amounts expended by the pawnbroker with respect to an
article deemed stolen. The pawnbroker shall not be required to return stolen
property to the true owner until:
      1.   He receives written notice from the law enforcement agency
authorizing the release of the property to the true owner and specifying the
name, address and social security number of the true owner;
      2.   The true owner, in person, requests the return of the property,
executes a receipt therefor, and presents proper identification showing his
name, address, social security number and signature.
   B.   Disagreement Of Ownership: If a disagreement exists concerning the
ownership of property, the item shall be held by the police department for
thirty (30) days in order to allow the pawnbroker to seek judicial
determination of ownership. If such action is not filed within thirty (30)
days, the item will be returned by the police department to the recorded owner.
   C.   Documentation By Pawnbroker: Upon the return of stolen property to the
true owner, either by the pawnbroker or law enforcement agency, the pawnbroker
shall complete such documentation as may be necessary or required to effect the
transfer of the property, including such documents pertaining to the
registration of firearms as may be required by local, state or federal
authorities. Upon return of an item of property to a true owner, said owner
shall agree in writing to pursue a course of criminal prosecution which could
result in restitution for any victimized party. (2003 Code § 5-05-12)
4-5-13: APPEAL FROM DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Time Limit For Appeal: Within five (5) days, excluding weekends and
legal holidays, from refusal of the city clerk to issue or renew a license
under this chapter, the applicant for a license may appeal to the city council
for the purpose of having the city council review the action of the city clerk.
   B.   Appeal In Writing: The appeal by the licensee or the applicant whose
license has been refused must be in writing and shall set forth the reason why
such license should not be refused.
   C.   Hearing Before Council: The city council shall hear the appeal within
thirty (30) days, excluding weekends and legal holidays, after the filing
thereof, and shall render its decision within twenty (20) days, excluding
weekends and legal holidays, after said hearing. The decision of the majority
of the city council may be appealed to the seventh judicial district court
pursuant to the Idaho administrative procedures act. (2003 Code § 5-05-13)
4-5-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Causes For Revocation: The city council shall have the power to revoke
or suspend any license granted in accordance with this chapter for any of the
following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of a pawnbroker;
      3.   Any other violation of this chapter;
      4.   The hiring of any person who has been convicted of a felony, or has
been convicted of any other crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving
moral turpitude within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of
being employed; or
      5.   Conviction of any felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, theft,
dishonesty or receiving or possessing stolen property, or any other crime
involving moral turpitude.
   B.   Hearing: Prior to any revocation or suspension, the licensee shall be
granted the opportunity for a public hearing before the city council, which
hearing shall be held not later than twenty (20) days after written notice to
the licensee of intent to revoke or suspend. Such notice shall specify the
date, time and place of hearing and shall state the proposed basis for the
suspension or revocation and shall be delivered to the licensee personally or
mailed to the licensee at the address set forth in the license application. If,
after such public hearing, the city council determines that one or more of the
grounds for revocation exists, it may revoke the license.
   C.   Appeal: The decision of the city council may be appealed to the
district court pursuant to the Idaho administrative procedures act. (2003 Code
§ 5-05-14)
4-5-15: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Actions Of Pawnbroker, Agent Or Employee: It shall be unlawful for any
pawnbroker or any clerk, agent or employee of a pawnbroker to:
      1.   Acquire, by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, goods bearing
evidence of a serial number which has been tampered with, or scratched or
obliterated in any matter, unless such person immediately contacts the police
department;
      2.   Accept, buy or exchange any articles prior to examining the
identifying credentials of the person selling or exchanging said articles;
      3.   Fail to maintain the records required under section
4-5-5 of this chapter, or fail to maintain such record as to any item of which
record is required to be maintained under said section
4-5-5 of this chapter, or fail to make an entry of any material matter in the
record of any transaction;
      4.   Make any false entry in the record required by section
4-5-5 of this chapter;
      5.   Obliterate or destroy the record required by section
4-5-5 of this chapter; provided, however, that such records may be destroyed at
the expiration of the one year retention period prescribed in section
4-5-5 of this chapter;
      6.   Refuse to allow any law enforcement officer to inspect the record
required by section
4-5-5 of this chapter or any articles in his possession during normal business
hours;
      7.   Report any material matter falsely to a law enforcement officer;
      8.   Acquire by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, any articles from
any person under eighteen (18) years of age, without the express written
consent of his or her parent or guardian or unless said minor is the head of a
family;
      9.   Fail to report forthwith to the police department the receipt of any
property which the pawnbroker has good cause to believe has been lost or
stolen, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and
the name of the person from whom the property was received; or
      10.   Hire or employ any person who has been convicted of any felony, or
has been convicted of any other crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving
moral turpitude within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
filing of the application.
   B.   False Information: It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false
name, a fictitious address, or any address other than the true address, or to
furnish any false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to
the information required by section
4-5-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Goods Under Contract: It shall be unlawful for any person to pledge or
sell any goods, chattels or effects, or any personal property leased or let to
him by any instrument in writing under a contract or purchase not yet
fulfilled. (2003 Code § 5-05-15)
4-5-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(2003 Code § 5-05-16; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 6
SECONDHAND STORES AND JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Secondhand And Junk Dealers Defined
4-6-2: Fee For License; Term
4-6-3: Each License To Designate Place Of Business
4-6-4: Purchasing From Minors
4-6-5: Police And Peace Officers To Inspect Articles And Things
4-6-6: Record Of Purchases Required
4-6-1: SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS DEFINED:
Every person who shall deal in secondhand furniture or secondhand household
goods, or who shall engage in the purchase of any used, old or discarded
articles or things, shall be termed a "secondhand dealer" and his place of
business shall be known as a secondhand store or junk store. (2003 Code § 5-03-
01)
4-6-2: FEE FOR LICENSE; TERM:
Every person who shall engage in the business of running and operating a
secondhand store or junk store, shall pay an annual license in the sum to be
set by the city council. Any permit granted shall be effective only until
December 31 next following. There shall be no prorating of fees. (2003 Code §
5-03-02)
4-6-3: EACH LICENSE TO DESIGNATE PLACE OF BUSINESS:
Every license granted to any secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall designate
the house or place, together with the street and number, in which the person
receiving the license shall be authorized to carry on such business. In case
any licensee licensed as such shall desire to move his store or place of
business from the place designated in his license to another location, he shall
give notice to the city clerk, who will endorse on the license held by the
licensee. (2003 Code § 5-03-03; amd. 2012 Code)
4-6-4: PURCHASING FROM MINORS:
No secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall purchase any goods or articles
whatsoever, from any minor without first advising the chief of police and
giving him an opportunity to inspect the goods offered for sale before the
purchase. (2003 Code § 5-03-04)
4-6-5: POLICE AND PEACE OFFICERS TO INSPECT ARTICLES AND THINGS:
Every secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall, during reasonable hours, and upon
request of any police or peace officer, permit such officer to examine and
inspect any merchandise, article or thing in stock in his place of business.
(2003 Code § 5-03-05)
4-6-6: RECORD OF PURCHASES REQUIRED:
Every secondhand dealer and junk dealer shall keep a book in which shall be
written in the English language, the time of the purchase of any article or
thing, a description of the article, and the name and address or the name and
description of the person from whom such purchase was made, and the said book,
as well as every article or thing, shall at all reasonable hours be open for
police inspection. (2003 Code § 5-03-06)
CHAPTER 7
ESCORT AND ESCORT BUREAUS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: License Required; Fee; Exceptions
4-7-3: Application Requirements
4-7-4: Qualifications For License; Employment
4-7-5: Notification Of Personnel Changes
4-7-6: Prohibited Acts Of Escort Bureau Licensee
4-7-7: Appointment Book; Notice Of Escort At Other Location
4-7-8: Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Conditions
4-7-9: Penalty
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words or
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
APPLICANT: The person making application for a license or the renewal of a
license to either:
   A.   Maintain and operate an "escort bureau" as defined in this section; or
   B.   Engage as an "escort", as defined in this section.
EMPLOY: To retain the services of an escort or function as such under direction
of an escort bureau. A bureau shall be deemed to "employ" all escorts
functioning and/or dispatched at their direction regardless of the financial
arrangements between the parties as to remuneration for escort services
provided.
EMPLOYEE: Any person functioning and/or dispatched as an escort at the
direction of an escort bureau, regardless of the financial arrangements between
the bureau and the escort as to remuneration for escort services provided.
ESCORT: A. Any person who, for hire or reward, accompanies others to or about
social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement.
   B.   Any person who, for hire or reward, consorts with others about any
place of public resort or within any private quarters.
ESCORT BUREAU: Any business or agency which, for a fee, commission, hire,
reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
LICENSE OFFICER: City clerk.
LICENSEE: A person having a city license in full force and effect issued
hereunder to either:
   A.   Maintain and operate an "escort bureau", as defined in this section; or
   B.   Engage as an "escort", as defined in this section.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind. (2003 Code § 5-07-01)
4-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Business License Required; Fee; Investigation: Every person conducting,
managing or carrying on any escort bureau shall first procure a license and pay
an annual license fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council. A provisional license may be issued pending completion of the required
investigation.
   B.   Escort License; Fee; Investigation: Every person hired for the purpose
of accompanying others to social affairs, entertainment, places of amusement or
at any place of public resort, or within any private quarters, shall first
procure a license and pay an annual fee in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council. A provisional license may be issued pending
completion of the required investigation. (2003 Code § 5-07-02; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   License And Identification Available For Inspection: Every escort shall
have in their possession while engaged in any act as an escort, including, but
not limited to, travel to and from appointments, their city license issued
under this chapter and other identification with photograph; both of which
shall be provided for inspection upon request by any customer or by any law
enforcement officer.
   D.   Exceptions:
      1.   This chapter shall not apply to the lawful business of any
employment office or employment agency licensed under state law which does not
conduct an escort bureau.
      2.   This chapter shall not apply to city licensees acting pursuant to
the applicable city code licensing requirements.
      3.   This chapter shall not apply to any persons acting under
authorization of any public and governmental agencies or political subdivisions
thereof. (2003 Code § 5-07-02)
4-7-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each applicant for a license herein is required to provide the following
information upon an application, which shall contain the following:
   A.   An applicant who was not licensed by this chapter for the year
immediately preceding the current application shall be required to be
fingerprinted by an appropriate agency to be designated by the licensing
officer.
   B.   All residential addresses during the past five (5) years.
   C.   The name and address of each business where the applicant was employed,
or which the applicant owned during the past five (5) years.
   D.   Whether the applicant has had any business license denied, revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the date and place of such action.
   E.   Any conviction or forfeiture of bond, upon any assault, larceny, sexual
offense, burglary, or any criminal violation or municipal ordinance violation
(except traffic violations) during the past five (5) years.
   F.   Identification sufficient to prove that the applicant is at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
   G.   If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of
incorporation shall be submitted, together with the name and residence address
of each officer and director, and of each stockholder owning more than ten
percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a
partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name and residence address of
each of the partners, including limited partners. Said persons shall be
construed as joint applicants for an escort bureau license.
   H.   The names and addresses of all persons employed or intended to be
employed by the applicant and any other person with a financial interest in the
escort bureau.
   I.   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit.
   J.   One photograph of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the
date of application at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2"). If the
applicant is a corporation or a partnership, one photograph at least two inches
by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each officer and director and every
shareholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of said
corporation, or if a partnership a two inches by two inches (2" x 2")
photograph of each partner, including a limited partner in said partnership.
(2003 Code § 5-07-03)
4-7-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE; EMPLOYMENT:
No person shall hold a license who:
   A.   Has been convicted within the preceding five (5) years of:
      1.   Any felony or crime which under the laws of this state would be a
felony.
      2.   Larceny in any degree.
      3.   An offense involving sexual misconduct, pandering or prostitution.
      4.   Any violation of this chapter or a similar law of another city in
Idaho or any other state.
   B.   Is younger than eighteen (18) years of age.
   C.   Has made a material misrepresentation of fact on the application for
license.
   D.   Has had a similar escort license, escort bureau license or other city
license revoked within the last five (5) years. (2003 Code § 5-07-04)
4-7-5: NOTIFICATION OF PERSONNEL CHANGES:
Every escort bureau shall, within twenty four (24) hours, notify the license
authority of every change in personnel of escorts employed by the escort
bureau. (2003 Code § 5-07-05)
4-7-6: PROHIBITED ACTS OF ESCORT BUREAU LICENSEE:
In addition to maintaining all conditions and qualifications of a licensee for
an escort bureau license, said licensee shall not:
   A.   Hire Unlicensed Escort: Hire or employ any escort who is not licensed.
   B.   Minors:
      1.   Employment: Employ as an escort any person under eighteen (18) years
of age.
      2.   Furnish Escort To Or Accept Employment From: Furnish any escort to,
or accept employment from, any patron, customer or person to be escorted who is
under eighteen (18) years of age, except at the special instance and request of
the parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person upon whose
behalf the escort service is engaged. (2003 Code § 5-07-06)
4-7-7: APPOINTMENT BOOK; NOTICE OF ESCORT AT OTHER LOCATION:
   A.   Appointment Book Required: Every person who operates an escort bureau
or practices or provides as an escort shall at all times keep an appointment
book in which the name, address and telephone number of each and every patron
shall be entered, together with the time and date and place of service, the
service to be provided and the name of the escort employed, furnished or
arranged for, prior to the service being rendered.
   B.   Inspection By Police: The appointment book shall be available at all
times for inspection by the police chief or his authorized representatives.
   C.   Escort Service Provided At Hotel Or Motel; Notice: Every person who
practices or provides any escort service to any location, including, but not
limited to, any motel or hotel, must first give notice of his or her presence
on the premises at that location and fully identify himself or herself, the
escort bureau, and the patron upon whom the person intends to practice or
provide an escort to the owner, manager or person in charge of that location
before rendering any services. This provision shall be deemed complied with
where the location is a motel or hotel by giving such notice and identification
to the person in charge of the registration desk of such motel or hotel. A
record of such appointment, or notice given and to whom said notice was given,
shall also be kept in the appointment book as hereinabove specified. (2003 Code
§ 5-07-07)
4-7-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS:
In addition to the failure to maintain qualifications and conditions of
licensing specified in section
4-7-4 of this chapter, the license to conduct an escort bureau or to be an
escort may be suspended or revoked if the city council finds:
   A.   The licensee has committed, or caused, permitted, encouraged or
condoned the commission of any lewd or immoral act or any act of prostitution.
   B.   The licensee has conducted, in whole or in part, a subterfuge to
facilitate or to conceal the conduct of any unlawful or immoral business or
practice.
   C.   The licensee has failed to comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
   D.   The licensee has been convicted of any violation of this chapter. (2003
Code § 5-07-08)
4-7-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(2003 Code § 5-07-09; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
SECTION:
4-8-1: Definitions
4-8-2: Persons Subject To License
4-8-3: Licensing Focus
4-8-4: License Required; Alcohol License Prohibited, Other Prohibitions
4-8-5: License Classifications
4-8-6: Application For License
4-8-7: Control By City Clerk
4-8-8: Investigation By City Officials And Other Agencies
4-8-9: Issuance Of License
4-8-10: Further Investigation By City Council
4-8-11: Fees For License
4-8-12: Revocation Of License
4-8-13: Prior Location And License Lapse
4-8-14: Penalty
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:
ADULT ARCADE MACHINES: Machines which are used by an individual to view films,
videos, or segments of films, which distinguish, characterize or emphasize
matters depicting, describing or relating to activities of a sexual nature for
the purposes of adult entertainment.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult store, adult theater, adult entertainment
establishment or adult business, which also includes any business that operates
adult arcade machines on its premises.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business, or commercial
establishment, wherein the entertainment or activity therein consists of
substantially nude persons dancing with or without music, or engaged in
movements of a sexual nature wherein the patron is directly or indirectly
charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view the entertainment
or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie, bikinis
or similarly styled garments, or where the patron, directly or indirectly, is
charged a fee to engage in personal contact by employees, devices or equipment,
or by personnel provided by the establishment.
   A.   An establishment which has seminude dancing or strip tease
performances, whether these occur regularly or occasionally.
   B.   "Adult dancing" includes, but is not limited to: erotic, exotic,
striptease, bikini or lingerie and shall mean and relate to any performance,
preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition performed before an
audience depicting, describing or relating to activities of a sexual nature for
the purposes of adult entertainment.
   C.   "Substantially nude", as used in this definition, shall mean dressed in
a manner so as not to display any portion of the female breast below the top of
the areola, or displaying any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft
of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. This definition of "adult entertainment
establishment" is to include, but not be limited to, bathhouses, massage
parlors, lingerie, modeling studios, or related or similar activities.
   D.   Establishments which have as their sole purpose the improvement of
health and physical fitness through special equipment and facilities, rather
than entertainment, as herein above described, are specifically excluded.
ADULT STORE: A. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion
of its stock or trade, books, magazines or films which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
adult entertainment;
   B.   An establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material; or
   C.   An establishment which sells or displays for sale devices designed to
stimulate sexual arousal by contact with the skin or bodily orifices.
ADULT THEATER: An establishment, either enclosed or in the open air, used for
presenting to an audience through film or live performance material
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to activities of a sexual nature for the purposes of adult
entertainment.
HOLDING COMPANY:
   A.   Any corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business
organization, not a natural person, which, directly or indirectly:
      1.   Owns;
      2.   Has the power or right to control; or
      3.   Holds with the power to vote, all or any part of the outstanding
voting securities of a corporation which holds or applies for a license
required by this chapter.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, in addition to any other reasonable
meaning of the words used, a holding company "indirectly" has, holds or owns
any power, right or security mentioned in subsection A of this definition if it
does so through any subsidiaries, however many such subsidiaries may intervene
between the holding company and the corporate licensee or applicant.
INTERMEDIARY COMPANY: Any corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form
of business organization other than a natural person which:
   A.   Is a holding company with respect to a corporation which holds or
applies for a license required by this chapter.
   B.   Is a subsidiary with respect to any holding company.
SUBSIDIARY:
   A.   Any corporation, all or any part of whose outstanding equity securities
are:
      1.   Owned;
      2.   Subject to a power or right of control; or
      3.   Held with power to vote, by a holding company or intermediary
company; or
   B.   Any firm, partnership, trust or other form of business organization,
not a natural person, all or any interest in which is:
      1.   Owned;
      2.   Subject to a power or right of control; or
      3.   Held with power to vote, by a holding company or intermediary
company. (2003 Code § 5-10-01)
4-8-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this chapter a license is required for the maintenance, operation
or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to
the requirement, if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner he
holds himself out as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the city. (2003 Code § 5-10-02)
4-8-3: LICENSING FOCUS:
This chapter is not designed to define, nor regulate, the sale, loan,
distribution, dissemination, presentation or exhibition of material or live
conduct which is obscene. This chapter is designed to license establishments
that provide adult entertainment or themes of a distinct sexual nature. (2003
Code § 5-10-03)
4-8-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; ALCOHOL LICENSE PROHIBITED, OTHER PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city, to
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of employees and patrons of
adult businesses and adult establishments, and to protect children from being
inadvertently exposed to adult material.
   B.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within
the city limits any adult store, adult theater, adult arcade machine business,
or adult entertainment establishment, without first obtaining an appropriately
classified license to do so as set forth in section
4-8-5 of this chapter. No license shall be issued to any adult store, adult
theater, adult arcade machine business, or adult entertainment establishment
where beer, wine or liquor are allowed on the premises during any hour of
operation. (2003 Code § 5-10-04; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Alcohol License Prohibited: No beer, wine or liquor license shall be
issued to any adult theater, adult store, adult arcade business or adult
entertainment establishment business as described above.
   D.   Other Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful to allow beer, wine or liquor
on the premises of any adult theater, adult store, adult arcade business or
adult entertainment establishment business during any hour of operation or when
any patron, customer, client, visitor, or any person other than the business
owner is present. No adult establishment of any class, as defined in section
4-8-5 of this chapter, or as described above, shall be licensed or allowed
within one thousand feet (1,000') of any store, bar, tavern or business that
sells, vends, serves, dispenses or distributes any alcoholic beverages,
including, but not limited to, beer, wine and liquor, or within one thousand
five hundred feet (1,500') of any school, preschool, daycare facility, public
park, playground or other institution, either public or private, where children
under the age of eighteen (18) are taught, instructed or trained. (2003 Code §
5-10-04)
4-8-5: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
   A.   Class A: Adult store which does not admit persons eighteen (18) years
or younger.
   B.   Class B: Adult store which admits customers eighteen (18) years or
younger to purchase publications or items not relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, but which has a portion of its
premises devoted to the sale or display of such publications, films or sexual
devices.
   C.   Class C: Adult theater.
   D.   Class D: Adult arcade machines.
   E.   Class E: Any adult entertainment establishment which may also include
the elements of class A, C and D, but not class B. (2003 Code § 5-10-05)
4-8-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license to operate one of the establishments described in
section
4-8-5 of this chapter shall be made to the city clerk in such form and manner
as prescribed by the city council, accompanied by the annual fee hereinafter
prescribed, but the application shall contain at least the following:
   A.   The name and residence address of the applicant.
   B.   The name and address of each employee.
   C.   If applicant is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of each
of the officers, directors and managers of said corporation and of each
stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation
and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the
proposed establishment.
   D.   If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each of the
partners, including any limited partners and the address of the partnership
itself, if different from the address proposed for the establishment.
   E.   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18)
years.
   F.   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, including the
names, dates of, location and nature of same.
   G.   The number of adult arcade machines to be installed, if any, and the
name, address and employer of the owner of said machines. If the owner is a
corporation, the names and resident addresses of each of the officers,
directors and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more
than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation and the address of the
corporation itself, if different from the address of the proposed
establishment.
   H.   The class of license applied for and a statement why the proposed
establishment falls within the requested classification.
   I.   If the applicant is seeking a class B adult store license, a
description of the manner in which minors will be prevented from viewing
publications and films of specified sexual activities or sexual anatomical
areas.
   J.   If a class A adult store license is being requested, a statement
whether the applicant will display for sale or sell any device designed to be
used to stimulate sexual arousal or arousal by contact with the human skin or
bodily orifices.
   K.   A diagram of the floor plan and number of square feet and on premises
parking spaces.
   L.   If the applicant is seeking a class C adult theater license, a
statement whether the entertainment will be live or on film. If live, a
statement as to the nature of the live entertainment, e.g., burlesque, dance,
musical, drama, etc.
   M.   If a class E adult entertainment license is sought, a statement of the
type and nature of entertainment, whether class A items are to be sold or
offered for sale, and if adult arcade machines, including the number of, will
be available for patronage.
   N.   The date on which the applicant intends to open for business.
   O.   The type and nature of activity desired to be licensed and whether the
type of activity shall at any time require the total exclusion of minors from
the premises.
   P.   A legal description of the real property on which the premises is to be
located, the name and address of the record owner; the name and address of each
lienholder; the name and address of each party to a valid and subsisting
contract of sale, deed of trust or other agreement, the subject of which is the
aforesaid real property. If any of the persons sought to be identified by this
section is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of the officers,
directors and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more
than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation and the address of the
corporation itself, if different from the address of the proposed
establishment.
   Q.   If any of the information supplied pursuant to this section becomes
outdated by virtue of changes in the operation of the business or otherwise
needs to be supplemented, the licensee shall provide the city clerk with the
modified or supplemental data within ten (10) days of the change or addition
being effective.
   R.   As to subsections C, G and P of this section, if the owner or applicant
corporation is an "intermediary company", as defined in section
4-8-1 of this chapter, the identity of each related "holding company" or
"subsidiary", as those terms are defined in section
4-8-1 of this chapter. In providing the identity of each such corporation, the
applicant shall furnish the names and addresses of each of the officers,
directors and managers and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent
(10%) of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation.
(2003 Code § 5-10-06)
4-8-7: CONTROL BY CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall, within three (3) working days of a receipt of an
application for license required by this chapter, submit a complete copy of the
application to the planning and zoning commission, building inspector, Central
district health department of the state, fire inspector for the city, city
attorney, city engineer, and the chief of police. (2003 Code § 5-10-07)
4-8-8: INVESTIGATION BY CITY OFFICIALS AND OTHER AGENCIES:
On receipt of an application for licensing from the city clerk as required by
this chapter, respective city officials and other governmental agencies shall
commence investigations as to whether the physical plant of the proposed
establishment is in conformity with the state law and city ordinances within
ten (10) days of receiving the license application and state whether the
proposed establishment is in compliance with the applicable city ordinances,
state laws and regulations. It shall further be the duty of each respective
official agency, should a license subsequently be granted to the applicant, to
examine and inspect such place licensed on a regular basis to determine
continuing conformity to the applicable laws and regulations. If, during such
routine inspection, a discrepancy is noted, the official noting such
discrepancy shall so advise the licensee in writing. The licensee shall have
ten (10) days within which to correct the discrepancy. Reasonable extensions of
time will be granted the licensee if the discrepancy cannot be eliminated
within a ten (10) day period. (2003 Code § 5-10-08; amd. 2012 Code)
4-8-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Submission Of Application And Report To Council: When the city clerk
has received a report and recommendation from each of the officials or agencies
designated in section
4-8-6 of this chapter, and not later than twenty (20) days from the filing of
the application, the city clerk shall submit the license application and
official reports to the city council for inclusion in the council agenda.
   B.   Council Action: The city council shall act upon the application at the
next regular scheduled meeting after submission of the application by the city
clerk. If each of the designated officials or agencies has determined that the
proposed business establishment is in conformity with all applicable city and
state laws, and if it appears that there are no material misrepresentations or
fraud in the application or in connection with the investigation by the city
officials or other governmental agencies, the city council shall grant a
license to the applicant. (2003 Code § 5-10-09)
4-8-10: FURTHER INVESTIGATION BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council, prior to the issuance of any license requested by this
chapter and after review of the submitted application, may undertake further
investigation if it has reasonable cause to believe that the applicant has or
is attempting to perpetrate a fraud or material misrepresentation on the city.
Such further investigation may be completed and written findings issued at or
prior to the next regular meeting following the meeting at which such
application was initially considered. Upon a finding by the city council that
the material misrepresentation or fraud has been perpetrated either in the
application or in connection with the investigation by city officials or other
governmental agencies, said application may be denied by the city council.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any investigation into the
substantive content of the publications or films to be displayed or sold by the
applicant. (2003 Code § 5-10-10)
4-8-11: FEES FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Fees Established: The annual license fees, in such amounts as
established by resolution of the city council, must be paid to the city at the
time the license application is submitted. (2003 Code § 5-10-11; amd. 2012
Code)
   B.   Renewals: The request for renewal of licenses must be made on forms
supplied by the city clerk and such requests must be submitted by December 1
for renewal for the next calendar year. Each renewal application must be
accompanied by the annual fee set forth in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Proration Of Fee: Where an application for a new license is made after
January 1, the applicable fee shall be apportioned in accordance with the
number of days remaining in the calendar year. (2003 Code § 5-10-11)
4-8-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Scope And Authority: The licensee shall be responsible for the
operation of the licensed premises in conformity with the ordinances of the
city and the state. Upon a conviction of the licensee, or the agent or employee
of the licensee, of violating any law or ordinance, including this chapter,
intended to protect the health, welfare or safety of individuals in this state
and which violation occurs in the course of the main business activity licensed
under this chapter, and not incidental thereto, the city council may revoke all
licenses held by the licensee under this chapter for a period up to and
including eighteen (18) months from the date of conviction. Upon expiration of
the period of revocation, the applicant will be eligible to reapply for a
license according to the procedures and requirements of this chapter. (2003
Code § 5-10-13)
   B.   Hearing: Any revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not
occur until a hearing is held before the city council. Twenty (20) days'
written notice of the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the
grounds for such revocation sufficient to inform the licensee and enable him to
respond shall be given. The licensee shall have the right to appear at said
hearing in person or by counsel to present evidence and argument on the
licensee's behalf and cross examine witnesses.
   C.   Council Ruling: The city council shall make a ruling based on the
evidence presented to it at the hearing. Thereafter, the licensee shall be
informed in writing of the city council's decision. If the city council, by
majority vote, favors revocation, such revocation shall take effect when
personal service of the written decision is made upon the licensee or an agent
or employee of said licensee. (2003 Code § 5-10-14)
4-8-13: PRIOR LOCATION AND LICENSE LAPSE:
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way affect the rights of present adult
businesses to continue their operation so long as they adhere to the provisions
of this chapter, including submission of properly completed applications,
within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof and otherwise maintain a
current license. Once an existing operation obtains a classified license, any
subsequent change in classification shall be treated as a new use and must
qualify under the provisions of this chapter. If there is a failure to timely
renew a license, any subsequent application must satisfy all the requirements
of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-10-15)
4-8-14: PENALTY:
It shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code, for an applicant or licensee to make a material misrepresentation
on his application, to perpetrate a fraud on any investigative official or
agency, or to operate a business licensed under this chapter in contravention
to the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. (2003 Code § 5-10-12;
amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 9
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES
SECTION:
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: Licenses Required; Exemptions
4-9-3: Application For License; Payment Of Fee
4-9-4: Qualifications
4-9-5: Investigation
4-9-6: Standards For Issuance
4-9-7: Bond And Insurance Required
4-9-8: Fees For License; Expiration; Form
4-9-9: Uniforms And Emblems
4-9-10: Unlawful Display Of License
4-9-11: Authority Restricted
4-9-12: Penalty
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT: The person making application for a license or the renewal of a
license for:
   A.   Private patrol agent; or
   B.   Private patrol or private security service or system.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city clerk.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association
or joint stock association.
PRIVATE OR PATROL SERVICE OR SYSTEM: Any service or system which purports to
furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration, or otherwise, any watchman or
guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any district in the city, or to
guard or watch any property, or which employs any person to perform any type of
duty to guard, protect or maintain peace and order at any public function,
dance hall, theater, tavern or lounge, or any other place of public amusement
or entertainment open to or frequented by the general public.
PRIVATE PATROL AGENT: Any person employed by the service or who performs
individually the functions of a private patrol or private security service.
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or
does furnish, for a consideration, or otherwise, any employee or agent to
protect any property by means other than physical observation of property.
(2003 Code § 5-08-01)
4-9-2: LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Private Patrol Or Private Security System: It shall be unlawful for any
person to conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or
maintained, or to participate in the conduct, operation or maintenance of, a
private patrol or private security system unless a valid license therefor has
been issued as provided for in this chapter and which is in full force and
effect.
   B.   Private Patrol Agent: It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to
offer to act, as a private patrol agent within the city, unless a valid license
therefor has been issued as provided for in this chapter and which is in full
force and effect.
   C.   Employment Of Licensed Agent: It shall be unlawful for any private
patrol or security service to employ or hire the services of a private patrol
agent until and unless said private patrol agent has been duly licensed as
required by this chapter.
   D.   Exception; Police Officers: This chapter shall not apply to or include
regularly appointed police officers of the city or to any regularly appointed
police officer or law enforcement agent of the United States and of this state,
or any political subdivision thereof, while acting as their agent.
   E.   Owner/Operator Acting As Agent: Any owner/operator of a validly
licensed private patrol or security service or system may act as a private
patrol agent for their private patrol or security service or system without
additional bond or fee and be issued a license accordingly. (2003 Code § 5-08-
02)
4-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; PAYMENT OF FEE:
   A.   Application Made To Licensing Officer: An application for a license,
whether for private patrol or security service or system or private patrol
agent, shall be made to the licensing officer. Applications for such licenses
may be made by mail.
   B.   Payment Of Application Fee: At the time of filing an application, an
application fee shall be paid to the city clerk pursuant to fee schedule. (2003
Code § 5-08-03)
4-9-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be issued a license who:
   A.   Is not over eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   Has been convicted, paid any fine, placed on probation, received a
deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, suffered the forfeiture of a
bond for failure to appear or complete any sentence of confinement for any
felony or misdemeanor within three (3) years prior to the date of making
application; provided, that offenses regulating the operation and licensing of
vehicles and fish and game laws, other than driving while under the influence
of intoxicating beverages and reckless driving, shall not be grounds for
disqualification. (2003 Code § 5-08-04)
4-9-5: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Investigation Of Application And Applicant: The licensing officer shall
examine all applications filed and shall make, or cause to be made, such
further investigation of the application and applicant as he shall deem
necessary.
   B.   Fingerprinting Required: An applicant who was not licensed by this
chapter for the year immediately preceding the current application shall be
required to be fingerprinted by an appropriate agency to be designated by the
licensing officer. Cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be
borne by the applicant. (2003 Code § 5-08-05)
4-9-6: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The licensing officer shall approve the issuance of a license provided for in
this chapter whenever he shall find that the applicant has complied with the
provisions of this chapter and is otherwise qualified. A provisional license
may be issued pending completion of the required investigation. (2003 Code § 5-
08-06)
4-9-7: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license shall be issued to any applicant:
   A.   Bond: The applicant shall be required to give a fiduciary bond running
to the city in the sum of:
      1.   Private patrol or security service, ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
      2.   Private patrol agent, two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   Insurance: General and personal liability insurance for bodily injury,
sickness, disease or death sustained by persons and arising out of assault,
battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of
process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with
property and contract rights. The minimum limits for such insurance shall be
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the result of any one
occurrence or accident regardless of the number of persons injured or the
number of claimants. (2003 Code § 5-08-07)
4-9-8: FEES FOR LICENSE; EXPIRATION; FORM:
   A.   Fees: The city license officer shall collect annual license fees, in
such amounts as established by resolution of the city council, before the
acceptance of an application. (2003 Code § 5-08-08; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   License Expiration: All licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire each year. Any person holding a license under the
provisions of this chapter must renew such license for the following succeeding
year by payment to the city clerk, the license fees required by this chapter on
or before December 31.
   C.   License Form: The license for a private agent shall be in the form of a
card which shall contain the words "Private Patrol Agent"; and shall also bear
numerals designating the year in which such license is in force and effect.
(2003 Code § 5-08-08)
4-9-9: UNIFORMS AND EMBLEMS:
   A.   Similarity To City Police Uniforms Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any private patrol or security service, or for any private patrol agent, to use
or authorize the use of any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems or shoulder
patches having a color, design and/or shape such as makes any of them
individually, or some or all of them in the aggregate, appear indistinguishable
from any uniform, uniform emblems and/or shoulder patches of the police
department.
   B.   Identifying Tape Required: It shall be unlawful for any private patrol
service to omit the use of a tape which has stitched thereon words such as
"private patrol or security service", "private patrol system", or "bonded
police" to be affixed to the left breast of the uniform or clothing worn by a
private patrol agent.
   C.   Approval Required: Every private patrol or security service and private
patrol agent, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall obtain approval
and authorization of any color, design or shape of any uniform, clothing,
uniform emblems, badges and/or shoulder patches, to be utilized by such
licensee. Application for such approval shall be made to the police department
and approval and authorization, if any, shall be given in writing by the
department and shall be attached to the application for license required by
this chapter and shall describe the color, design and shape of the uniform,
patches, badges and/or emblems, as the case may be. (2003 Code § 5-08-09)
4-9-10: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or display any license required or
provided for by this chapter unless such person is duly licensed therefor.
(2003 Code § 5-08-10)
4-9-11: AUTHORITY RESTRICTED:
The granting or issuance of any license under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be construed in any manner as granting or providing any additional or
further power of arrest than that granted under the provisions of the statutes
of the state, and the provisions of this code, nor shall the provisions of this
chapter be construed in any manner as authority or power to carry weapons
contrary to the statutes of the state. (2003 Code § 5-08-11)
4-9-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue,
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(2003 Code § 5-08-12; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Findings And Declaration
4-10-2: Definitions
4-10-3: Approval Required
4-10-4: Time To File Permit Application; Fees
4-10-5: Contents Of Application
4-10-6: Approval Standards
4-10-7: Conditions For Granting Permit
4-10-8: Grounds For Denial Of Permit
4-10-9: Resource Allocation
4-10-10: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
4-10-11: Appeal Of Denial, Conditions, Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
4-10-12: Council Action On Appeal
4-10-13: Exemptions
4-10-14: Penalty
4-10-1: FINDINGS AND DECLARATION:
The city council finds and declares that special events that draw a significant
number of participants require the city to expend funds to provide additional
staffing and equipment to maintain peace and order and to protect the public
health and safety. The city council has determined that the additional costs
associated with these special events should not be borne solely by the
taxpayers of the city, but rather, the sponsors of the events should
participate in the covering the additional costs. (2003 Code § 5-12)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICANT: The person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association or entity applying for a special event permit.
ATTENDEE: People participating in or attending a special event.
PERMIT: Written authorization to conduct a special event, as required by this
chapter.
SECURITY PLAN: A comprehensive written plan to be proposed by the organizer of
a special event, which shall include the following:
   A.   Anticipated times of attendee movement;
   B.   Numbers, types and duties of law enforcement, professional security,
and volunteer personnel which may be required;
   C.   Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress routes for all event
locations;
   D.   Available parking space estimates and locations;
   E.   Shuttle types, routes, and schedules;
   F.   Traffic control points and warning devices;
   G.   Emergency vehicle access routes, anticipated routes of movements on
public rights of way;
   H.   Placement of traffic direction and parking personnel;
   I.   A plan for the control of the service of alcoholic beverages; and
   J.   Other applicable preparations for the maintenance of public health and
safety due to individual or unique considerations about the event.
SOUND AMPLIFYING SYSTEM: Any system or electrical hookup or connection,
loudspeaker or electronic system, equipment, apparatus, device, instrument, or
machine designed for or intended to be used for the purpose of amplifying or
producing sound or increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone,
vibration or sound wave.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any organized nonroutine activity on public or private property
that may significantly impact or affect neighboring property owners, residents
and businesses and that may reasonably be expected to attract more than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) attendees and/or which may require more parking
spaces than the sponsor's property can accommodate.
SPONSOR: The applicant, or the person, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, or other entity owning, leasing, or otherwise
controlling real property upon which a special event is to be located. (2003
Code § 5-12-01)
4-10-3: APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall produce, direct, conduct, manage,
institute, or carry on any special event without first obtaining the
appropriate permits from the city. No person shall promote, advertise,
encourage, or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a
special event for which no permit has been issued, or for which such permit has
been suspended or revoked.
   B.   Issuing Official: Approval of a special event may be issued only by the
mayor of the city.
   C.   Constitutional Rights: For any special event involving the exercise of
rights protected by the first and fourteenth amendments of the United States
constitution, or article 1, section 4, 9 or 10 of the constitution of the state
of Idaho, the application shall be processed promptly, without charging a fee
for political or religious activities, without imposing terms or conditions
that infringe constitutional freedoms, and in a manner that respects the
liberties of the applicants and the public. Events involving commercial
activity are presumed to be of a commercial nature and subject to the
provisions of this chapter, except when such commercial activity conveys a
constitutionally protected communication. (2003 Code § 5-12-02)
4-10-4: TIME TO FILE PERMIT APPLICATION; FEES:
An application for a permit for a special event shall be filed with the city
clerk not less than forty five (45) days before the date proposed for holding a
special event. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council shall accompany the application. For good cause, the city clerk may
accept applications within the forty five (45) day period; provided, the
applicant shall be required to pay, in addition to the application fee, the
estimated costs, if any, of city staff time incurred for special meetings.
(2003 Code § 5-12-03; amd. 2012 Code)
4-10-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
Application for a special event permit shall be made on forms provided by the
city clerk. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain
the following:
   A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, and if the
same be a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same be a
partnership, limited liability company, association, or organization, the name
or names of the person or persons who shall be responsible for the event. This
information may be used by the city clerk to conduct a criminal background
check.
   B.   A description of the special event proposed to be held, estimates of:
1) the number of persons participating in the event; 2) the number of
spectators and vehicles anticipated; 3) the number and type of participating
vendors anticipated, the purpose of the event, the date, hours, and location
where the event is proposed to be held, and the admission fee, if any, to be
charged.
   C.   Verification of conformance to department of health and/or adopted
building codes in regard to sanitary facilities.
   D.   A description of the equipment to be used, if any, including the number
and types of vehicles, the number and types of sound amplifying systems,
whether mounted, portable, or stationary, the time and area of operation of the
sound amplifying systems, the number and type of special units such as musical
groups, animal petting zoos, or shows and the like.
   E.   An agreement that the city shall be compensated for any damage to
public property, and that the public property shall be cleaned and restored to
the condition in which it was found prior to the holding of the special event.
   F.   "Security plan", as defined in section
4-10-2 of this chapter.
   G.   Verification of conformance to fire codes.
   H.   A detailed drawing or schematic of the staging area and the entire
event grounds, showing emergency lanes for responding vehicles, the exits for
the public, emergency lighting locations (if required), fire extinguisher
locations, and emergency medical service locations (if required). (2003 Code §
5-12-04; amd. 2012 Code)
4-10-6: APPROVAL STANDARDS:
Generally, special events permits will be approved if the applicant meets the
following criteria:
   A.   The proposed special event will not pose an unreasonable safety or
traffic impact or impede in any substantial way public safety services or the
distribution of those services in emergency response situations.
   B.   The proposed special event will not have a significant adverse
environmental impact or in any substantial way constitute a disturbance of the
peace of the community or unduly endanger the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
   C.   The proposed special event will not cause damage to any property,
either public or private.
   D.   The proposed special event will not leave city services overextended
beyond normal working conditions; provided, if the city feels that the special
event will create a hardship on city services, the special event may be
rescheduled or canceled.
   E.   The applicant has not violated conditions of approval for previous
special events. (This item may be enforced or waived at the city's discretion,
depending upon the severity and number of infractions.) (2003 Code § 5-12-05)
4-10-7: CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING PERMIT:
As a condition to granting a special event permit:
   A.   May Be Imposed: Reasonable conditions may be imposed concerning the
time, duration and place of such event; the area and manner of conducting such
an event; the maximum number of participants or spectators; the regulation of
traffic, if required, including the number and type of vehicles and the number
and placement of signs and barricades to be provided by the applicant, together
with a plan of removal of such signs and barricades to be attached to the
application; reasonable sound levels; the number of privately hired licensed
security personnel or additional police escorts or employees, agents, or
volunteers needed for safe and efficient operation; whether alcoholic beverages
may be consumed, sold, or permitted at the event site as otherwise authorized
by law; and such other requirements as the city may find reasonable and
necessary for the protection of persons and property.
   B.   Costs Estimated; Security:
      1.   The applicant shall be required to compensate the city for its
actual costs incurred for increased fire or police protection, street or bike
path cleaning or other extraordinary city services. Such costs shall be
estimated in advance of the special event by the city clerk based upon the
information in the application and upon consultation with the chiefs of police
and fire. The applicant shall provide financial assurance to the city that the
costs will be paid within twenty (20) days after invoice. Financial assurance
shall be given by depositing with the city cash in an amount of one hundred
twenty five percent (125%) of the city anticipated expenses.
      2.   Such cash deposit shall be delivered to the city no later than forty
eight (48) hours before commencement of the special event.
   C.   Agreements And Insurance Requirements: Prior to the issuance of a
permit, the applicant shall file with the city clerk the following:
      1.   An executed written agreement, as provided for in the application,
to compensate the city for: a) loss or damage to public property; b) cleanup
and removal of debris; and c) additional costs associated with city provided
services such as personnel, equipment, supplies, utilities and facilities.
      2.   A hold harmless agreement, executed by the applicant, indemnifying
the city for any and all claims for personal injury, damages or losses
resulting or arising from the special event not caused by the gross negligence
of the city.
      3.   A liability insurance policy in an amount not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate naming the city as an additional named
insured and providing for adequate notice of cancellation if the policy is
canceled prior to the special event.
   D.   Cooperation And Compliance: The applicant shall cooperate with city
authorities and personnel, and do all things required by the city to ensure
that the attendees and sponsor abide by all rules and regulations of the city
and all applicable local, state and federal laws. (2003 Code § 5-12-06)
   E.   Monitoring By City Officials; Revocation Of Permit: The applicant
agrees that the city, through the city clerk, police department, and fire
department have the authority to monitor the special event at any time during
and in preparation of the event to ensure the conditions for the permit are met
by the applicant, sponsor and attendees. Applicant agrees the city may revoke
the permit or close down the event at any time that it is determined that the
public health, safety or welfare is in jeopardy. If the event is ordered to be
closed down by the city, the attendees, sponsor, and others at the special
event shall be ordered to disperse. Refusal of any person to disperse upon
order of a law enforcement officer acting under the authority of this section
is a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. (2003 Code § 5-12-06; amd. 2012 Code)
4-10-8: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The city shall not issue a permit if, upon review of the application, any of
the below is found to exist. The city clerk shall notify the applicant within
five (5) days, in writing, specifically stating all reasons for denial of the
permit:
   A.   The application is not on the form provided or does not contain the
required information;
   B.   The applicant has made a false or misleading statement of material fact
in the application for a permit;
   C.   The building, structure, equipment or location of such special event
does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, fire, building, safety
and welfare requirements of the city;
   D.   The special event or its location is such as to interfere with or
unreasonably obstruct the free flow of vehicular traffic or other means of
travel on any public street or with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks, except
where use of such is sought and granted as part of the application for the
special event permit;
   E.   Proof of insurance, executed written agreement for compensation, hold
harmless agreement, financial assurance, or prepayment of the sum described in
section
4-10-7 of this chapter, has not been delivered to the city;
   F.   The conduct of the special event or any portion thereof will be
contrary to law;
   G.   The conduct of the special event or any portion thereof will
unreasonably interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, or welfare of the city;
   H.   An applicant has had a special event permit denied for good cause
within one year prior to the application, and can show no material change in
the circumstances since such denial;
   I.   The applicant refuses to agree to, abide by, or comply with any of the
conditions and regulations attached to such permit; or such special event will
interfere or conflict with another event for which a permit has already been
issued; or will interfere or conflict with another scheduled event which takes
precedence by virtue of section
4-10-9 of this chapter;
   J.   In the city's discretion, the city has insufficient police and fire
personnel available for monitoring the special event. (2003 Code § 5-12-07)
4-10-9: RESOURCE ALLOCATION:
The city has limited resources in terms of fire and police personnel to
adequately monitor and regulate special events. Accordingly, an applicant's
special event which has annually been conducted in the city over the preceding
five (5) year period shall have priority over another applicant's event with
less or no history in the city, for purposes of date, time and location
preference. Otherwise, first in time to file an application shall have priority
as to choice of date, time and location of the proposed event. (2003 Code § 5-
12-08)
4-10-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any special event permit may be summarily suspended or revoked at any time by
the mayor or chiefs of police or fire in consultation with the mayor when
because of disaster, emergency or other change of circumstances it is
determined that the special event will unreasonably interfere with the public
peace, health, safety and welfare, or if it is determined that the applicant
has not fully complied with the terms and conditions of the city as described
in the permit or conditions of approval. (2003 Code § 5-12-09)
4-10-11: APPEAL OF DENIAL, CONDITIONS, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Notice of an appeal from the denial, imposition of conditions, suspension or
revocation of a permit shall be filed within five (5) days after service of
notification of denial, imposition of conditions, suspension or revocation of
permit. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth fully the
grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be filed with the city clerk,
who shall forward copies to the mayor and city council. The city clerk shall
submit to the mayor and city council a report indicating the findings and
reasons for denying, restricting, suspending or revoking the special event
permit. (2003 Code § 5-12-10)
4-10-12: COUNCIL ACTION ON APPEAL:
   A.   Time Limit; Consideration: Within fifteen (15) days after the filing of
the notice of appeal with the city clerk or at the next regular meeting of the
city council, the city council shall consider the appeal. Written notice of the
time and place the city council will consider the appeal shall be mailed by the
city clerk to the appellant at least five (5) days before the date set for
hearing unless the appellant shall waive this notice in writing. Appearance at
the hearing by the appellant shall be waiver of notice in any event.
   B.   Decision Of City Council: In any appeal, the city council shall
consider the application, the report submitted by the city clerk, and other
pertinent information presented, and may grant or deny the permit subject to
the conditions, terms, and regulations set forth in this chapter. The decision
of the city council shall be final.
   C.   Notification Of Decision: The city clerk shall notify the appellant in
writing of the decision of city council by placing the written notification in
the United States mail, at the address provided in the application. (2003 Code
§ 5-12-11)
4-10-13: EXEMPTIONS:
The following events are exempt from the application filing provisions (
4-10-4 and
4-10-5) of this chapter, but shall still be bound to all other conditions and
obligations of this chapter as determined by city council:
   A.   Events sponsored or cosponsored by the city.
   B.   The Eastern Idaho State Fair.
   C.   The annual parade.
   D.   Other governmental sponsored or cosponsored events as determined by the
city council.
(2003 Code § 5-12-12; amd. Ord. 2237, 5-2-2023)
4-10-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or condition of any permit
issued hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction or plea
of guilty thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (2003 Code
§ 5-12-13; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 11
TAXICABS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Definitions
4-11-2: Driver Required To Convey
4-11-3: City Council Authorized To License And Control
4-11-4: Limitations On Licenses; Transferability
4-11-5: Application For License
4-11-6: Name And Number Required
4-11-7: Inspection
4-11-8: License Card
4-11-9: Fees
4-11-10: Driver's License
4-11-11: Photograph Of Driver
4-11-12: Form And Term Of Driver's License
4-11-13: Renewal Of Driver's License
4-11-14: Fee For Driver's License
4-11-15: Suspension And Revocation
4-11-16: Designation Of Taxicab Stands; Rules And Regulations
4-11-17: Double Parking; Soliciting Prohibited
4-11-18: Insurance Required
4-11-19: Proof Of Bona Fide Use
4-11-20: Meters Required
4-11-21: Computation Of Charges
4-11-22: Fare Rates
4-11-23: Right To Refuse Employment And Multiple Passengers
4-11-24: Limitation On Fare Charge
4-11-25: Manner Of Institution; Revocation Of License
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CORPORATION, PERSON, INDIVIDUAL OR ASSOCIATION: Include a corporation,
individuals, association, joint stock company and copartnership.
OPERATION: The conducting of a general taxicab business.
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle used for purpose of transporting persons for hire;
providing, that "taxicab", as herein stated and herein defined, shall not
include school buses or other motor vehicles used exclusively for the
transportation of children to and from school, nor a motor bus with a seating
capacity of over seven (7) passengers operated on a regular schedule over
regularly designated streets, nor companies operating for the purpose of
carrying U.S. mail or other U.S. property.
TAXICAB OWNER, OPERATOR OR LICENSEE: That person, firm, copartner, corporation,
individual or association securing a license to operate upon and through the
streets, avenues and alleys. (2003 Code § 5-09-01)
4-11-2: DRIVER REQUIRED TO CONVEY:
No owner or driver of any "taxicab", as defined in section
4-11-1 of this chapter, shall, when not otherwise engaged or occupied in the
performance of his duties as a licensee under the provisions of this chapter,
refuse to convey any person when applied to for that purpose, the proper fee
therefor being tendered; or having undertaken to convey such person shall omit
or neglect to do so; provided, that such passenger is in such condition of
health and cleanliness that his carriage in such vehicle would not be a
violation of any provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-09-02)
4-11-3: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORIZED TO LICENSE AND CONTROL:
The governing body is hereby vested with complete authority to issue licenses
for the operation of taxicabs and to alter, revoke or amend, or suspend the
said license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and to regulate
and limit the method of operation of taxicabs in accordance with this chapter,
and is further vested with full and complete authority and responsibility to
carry into effect all of the provisions of this chapter relative to the
operation of taxicabs. (2003 Code § 5-09-03)
4-11-4: LIMITATIONS ON LICENSES; TRANSFERABILITY:
   A.   Any license now issued and which may hereafter be issued to engage in
the business of operating taxicabs on or over the streets and public ways shall
mean and be construed to be only a license or privilege to use the street and
public ways for the business of operating taxicabs thereon.
   B.   There shall not be issued to the owner of taxicabs by the city clerk or
other authority authorized to issue licenses under the direction of the
governing body a greater number of licenses than one taxicab license for one
taxicab for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) persons of the population of
the city, based on the most recent Unites States official census.
   C.   Such licenses shall be apportioned to the various applicants therefor
as the governing body may determine the public interest requires. (2003 Code §
5-09-04)
   D.   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable, subject to the consent and approval of the governing body;
provided, however, that no license may be issued to another or to any other
persons until such licensee or person has applied for a license and has been
found to be qualified to obtain such license under all of the provisions of
this chapter; provided further, that upon the approval of the transfer of any
license as herein provided, the city clerk shall charge and collect a fee in
such amount as established by resolution of the city council for transferring
said license and issuing the new license card and plate as provided for in this
chapter. (2003 Code § 5-09-04; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license shall be addressed to the governing body, shall be in
writing, verified by the affidavit of the applicant or his or its duly
authorized agent or office, and shall state the following facts: the full name
and address of the applicant; if a partnership, the name and address of each
partner; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and
directors thereof; previous experience he or it has had in such business; the
number of taxicabs desired; the seating capacity of each taxicab, according to
manufacturer's rating; name of manufacturer; the state license number; and the
length of time the said taxicab has been in use; a full and complete statement
of an applicant's financial standing, showing assets and liabilities; a
statement of method of operation; a schedule of fares to be charged by the
applicant and the method of computing the same; and the color scheme of
applicant's cabs. (2003 Code § 5-09-05)
4-11-6: NAME AND NUMBER REQUIRED:
   A.   Every taxicab shall have painted upon each of the rear doors of said
taxicab the name of the owner, or the trade name under which the owner
operates, together with the cab number of each of the vehicles. All the
lettering mentioned in this paragraph shall not be less than two inches (2") in
height.
   B.   No applicant shall adopt or imitate the name or insignia used by
another city licensed taxicab operator in such a manner as to be misleading or
tend to deceive or defraud the public. (2003 Code § 5-09-06)
4-11-7: INSPECTION:
The chief of police shall make or have made by police officers designated by
him such examination and inspection of the vehicles before and after issuing a
license as the chief of police or the city council considers necessary. The
governing body shall refuse a license to, or, if already issued, revoke or
suspend the license of any vehicle found to be unfit or unsuited for public
patronage. The governing body is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection and operation of public
vehicles and their appurtenances, construction and condition or fitness. (2003
Code § 5-09-07)
4-11-8: LICENSE CARD:
The city clerk shall grant a license only after payment of license fees herein
set forth and filing of the bond or security for insurance hereinafter provided
for, by delivering to the owner a card of such size and form as may be
prescribed. That card shall contain the official license number of the vehicle,
the date of issuance, and a statement to the effect that in case of any
complaint, the city clerk shall be notified, giving the license number of the
vehicle. Such card shall be signed by the city clerk and shall be good for one
year, or the remaining fraction of the year through December 31, following its
issuance, unless sooner revoked by the governing body, and shall contain blank
spaces upon which an entry shall be made of the date of every inspection of the
vehicle. (2003 Code § 5-09-08; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-9: FEES:
   A.   Specified: A license fee of an amount as established by resolution of
the city council shall be paid for each and every taxicab, licensed hereunder.
   B.   Term: All licenses granted hereunder shall be from January 1 and ending
December 31 of the same year; provided, however, if application for license is
made after July 1 of any year, the fee for the remainder of the year, to
December 31, shall be in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council. (2003 Code § 5-09-09; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-10: DRIVER'S LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a licensed taxicab
without first complying with the following requirements:
   A.   Be of the age of eighteen (18) years or over and possess and present a
duly issued, valid Idaho chauffeur's license.
   B.   Be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, ear or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him
unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
   C.   Be able to read and write in the English language.
   D.   Be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquors or drugs.
   E.   Produce in letter form, affidavits of his good character from two (2)
reputable citizens who have known him personally during one year next preceding
the date of his application, and a further testimonial in letter form for that
purpose from his last employer unless sufficient reason is given for its
omission.
   F.   Fill out in letter form, a statement giving his full name, residence,
place of residence for one year previous to moving to his present address, age,
color, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of time he has
resided in the city, whether a citizen of the United States, places of previous
employment, whether he has previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur,
and, if so, whether his license has been revoked and for what cause, which
statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed by the police
department as a permanent record.
   G.   Upon the examination by the chief of police of the applicant and upon
all facts disclosed by the requirements hereinabove, the chief of police may
recommend to the governing body that such applicant be granted a taxicab
driver's license or if said chief of police is not satisfied that the applicant
is a suitable and proper person to operate a taxicab upon the streets of the
city, he may reject the applicant his license to so operate. If the applicant
is rejected by the chief of police, the applicant may request a personal
appearance before the governing body to offer evidence why his application
should be considered. A majority vote of the governing body is sufficient to
issue or reject said applicant a license after said hearing. (2003 Code § 5-09-
10)
4-11-11: PHOTOGRAPH OF DRIVER:
Each applicant for a driver's license must file with his application two (2)
recent photographs and fingerprints of himself, of a size which may be easily
attached to his license, one of which shall be attached to the license when
issued, the other shall be filed with the application. The photograph shall be
so attached to the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph
substituted without detection. Each licensed driver shall, upon demand of an
inspector of licenses, a police officer or passenger, exhibit his license and
photograph for inspection. Where the application for a license is denied, the
photograph shall be returned to the applicant. (2003 Code § 5-09-11)
4-11-12: FORM AND TERM OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements there shall be
issued to the applicant a license, which shall be in such form as to contain
the photograph and signature of the licensee and blank spaces upon which a
record may be made of any arrest or of serious complaint against him. Any
licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his
license, shall be punished by the revocation of his license. Driver's licenses
shall be issued as of the date of issuance and shall be valid to and including
December 31 next succeeding, unless sooner revoked. (2003 Code § 5-09-12)
4-11-13: RENEWAL OF DRIVER'S LICENSE:
The police department may renew a driver's license from year to year by
appropriate endorsement thereon. A driver in applying for the renewal of his
license shall make application upon a form to be furnished, entitled
"application for renewal of license", which shall be filled out with the full
name and address of the applicant together with the statement of the date upon
which his original license was granted and number thereof. (2003 Code § 5-09-
13)
4-11-14: FEE FOR DRIVER'S LICENSE:
The license fee, in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council, shall be paid for a taxi driver's license. Each license issued shall
be effective only until December 31 following its issuance. There shall be no
proration of fees. (2003 Code § 5-09-14; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-15: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Driver's licenses shall be revoked upon the conviction of a violation
of any criminal statute relative to the sale, possession or delivery of
intoxicating liquor or controlled substances; drunk or reckless driving; shall
be suspended upon the first offense of speeding and revoked upon the second
offense. If revoked for any cause, no new license shall be granted to such
driver except upon the unanimous vote of the city council. In the event of
conviction as above set forth, an acquittal in a higher court shall
automatically remove such grounds of revocation.
   B.   Driver's licenses may be suspended or revoked at any time by the
governing body for good cause shown upon a hearing thereon, also upon the
entering of a judgment or verdict of guilty of any person holding a driver's
license. Any such suspension or revocation shall be noted on the license,
together with a statement of the reason therefor. A second suspension for the
same reason, or in any case, a third suspension of a driver's license, shall
revoke the license. In all cases involving a suspension, it shall be
discretionary with the city council as to the tenure of the suspension. (2003
Code § 5-09-15)
4-11-16: DESIGNATION OF TAXICAB STANDS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The governing body shall, upon issuing a license, designate taxicab stands and
call boxes, at which stands, cabs so licensed shall be required to stand while
waiting for patronage and is authorized to promulgate and adopt such reasonable
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as
may be necessary or deemed advisable to carry out and enforce its provisions.
(2003 Code § 5-09-16)
4-11-17: DOUBLE PARKING; SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
Two (2) or more taxicabs shall not be permitted to stand side by side on any
street and such taxicabs and the drivers of such taxicabs or the person in
charge thereof shall remain quietly at the taxicab stands when not employed and
shall not move about the streets for the purpose of soliciting patronage, nor
shall such taxicab be left standing at any point or place while unemployed
other than at the stand designated. The drivers of all taxicabs licensed under
the provisions of this chapter are expressly prohibited from indiscriminately
soliciting passengers for hire or from cruising the streets for the purpose of
obtaining patronage for their cars, and solicitation within this prohibition is
hereby defined to consist of moving about the streets soliciting or inviting
business or customers, or calling attention of members of the public to
taxicabs by word of mouth, signals, nods or other signs from the taxicab while
moving or by drawing up to the curb for that purpose, or in any other manner
affirmatively calling attention to service while going to or from its points of
service. Cruising within this prohibition is declared to consist of: Moving
about the streets either indiscriminately or between fixed points for the
purpose of obtaining patronage; provided, however, that taxicabs shall be
permitted to receive or discharge passengers at public places or gatherings,
such as theaters, public buildings, and stands. (2003 Code § 5-09-17)
4-11-18: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued for any taxicab, the owner thereof shall be
required to file with the city clerk a certified copy of policy of insurance
executed by a qualified insurance company, insuring the public against any loss
or damage that may result to any person or persons from the operation of said
taxicab, provided the limited amount of liability in such policy of insurance
specified shall be as follows: property damage, not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00); public liability, per incident, not less than
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). Provided, however, an applicant
for an operator's license may in lieu of furnishing such policy of insurance,
deposit with the city treasurer the sum of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) in cash or in government bonds that may be cashed immediately, to
be approved by the governing body, or a surety bond executed by an authorized
bonding company, to insure the public against any loss or damage caused in the
operation of any taxicab operated by such licensed operation to any property or
to any person or persons other than the taxicab owner or its chauffeur
operator. Also, it is further expressly required that if the amount of said
cash or cash value of said bonds, as so deposited, has been reduced at any time
by payments therefrom for damages to property or persons, then in that event
the taxicab owner and licensed operator hereunder shall replenish the said
amount within five (5) days after such reduction has been made so that the
amount of said cash or cashable bonds shall at all times equal the said three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) so deposited for said purpose. (2003
Code § 5-09-18; amd. 2012 Code)
4-11-19: PROOF OF BONA FIDE USE:
No license for the operation of taxicabs under the provisions of this chapter
shall be granted to any person except upon the satisfactory proof being made
that said vehicle is to be used in actual bona fide taxicab business. The
business of every licensed taxicab under the provisions of this chapter shall
be carried on by the person in whose name the bond or contract of insurance
provided for herein is written and every licensed operator shall display in a
conspicuous place on his cab the name of the person in whose name the license
is issued, and no other name shall appear thereon. (2003 Code § 5-09-19)
4-11-20: METERS REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person owning, operating or controlling a taxicab or
taxicabs to operate the same without installing for the purpose of determining
the fare to be charged, a taximeter; but if a taximeter is used, it shall be of
size and design approved by the city council, and conform to the following
specifications:
   A.   A taximeter is a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge
for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, whether for distance traveled
or for waiting time, or both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by
means of legible figures, which are electrically lighted each time the
taximeter flag is thrown from nonearning to earning position. There shall also
be a similar indicating mechanism to show charges for extra passengers.
   B.   Such meters must register upon visual counters the following items:
      1.   Total miles.
      2.   Paid miles.
      3.   Number of trips.
      4.   Number of extras.
   C.   Each taximeter must be furnished with a tamperproof switch and system
of electrical distribution so that when the taximeter flag is in the vacant or
nonearning position, the vacant sign on the top of the taxicab will be lighted,
and when the meter flag is thrown to an earning position, the fare indicator on
the taximeter will be lighted.
   D.   Each taximeter must be driven direct from the taxicab transmission, or
connected with speedometer driving shaft to the taximeter head itself.
   E.   No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter
which does not conform to these allowable tolerances.
   F.   No taximeter shall be allowed to determine fare until the taximeter
shall have been inspected and found to be accurate.
   G.   No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter while carrying
passengers, or under employment, shall display the taximeter flag affixed to
such taximeter in such position as to denote that such vehicle is not employed,
or in such a position as to denote that he is employed at a rate of fare
different from that to which it is entitled under the provisions of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the driver to call the attention of passengers
to the amount registered and the taximeter flag shall not be changed to
"vacant" position until after the fare is paid. (2003 Code § 5-09-20)
4-11-21: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or driving a taxicab with
taximeter installed to operate or drive such taxicab unless such taximeter is
used in determining the fare to be charged and no other or different fare shall
be charged to a passenger than is recorded on the reading face of said
taximeter for a trip, except that the hourly rate may be used on mutual
agreement of passenger and owner of the taxicab. (2003 Code § 5-09-21)
4-11-22: FARE RATES:
The rates and charges for transporting persons for hire by the operator
licensed under this chapter and title shall be fair and reasonable. The
operator shall file a schedule of its rates and charges with the city clerk
with its application and shall make no adjustments or changes in rates or
charges until sixty (60) days after the filing of a new rates and charges
schedule with the city clerk, at which time such rates and charges shall become
effective, unless disapproved by the city council. A schedule of the authorized
rates and charges shall be legibly printed on a card not less than four inches
by six inches (4" x 6") and conspicuously displayed in each taxicab. (2003 Code
§ 5-09-22)
4-11-23: RIGHT TO REFUSE EMPLOYMENT AND MULTIPLE PASSENGERS:
Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal
fare in advance and may refuse employment unless it be prepaid, but no driver
of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly persons
upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so.
No driver of a taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first
employing the taxicab without the consent of the passenger. In such event, if a
taximeter be used, the first departing passenger shall pay the face amount as
shown on meter. The meter shall then be cleared and the remaining passenger
shall pay for distance thereafter carried. If the taxi be unmetered, the fare
to be charged shall be as follows: The first departing passenger shall pay the
regular fare to his place of departure, and the remaining passenger shall then
pay the regular fare from his point of pick up to point of delivery. (2003 Code
§ 5-09-23)
4-11-24: LIMITATION ON FARE CHARGE:
No person owning, operating or controlling a taxicab shall charge or attempt to
charge any passenger a greater rate of fare than to which he is entitled under
the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 5-09-24)
4-11-25: MANNER OF INSTITUTION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Filing Of Charges Required: Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city council whenever it
shall find that the licensee or any agent, servant or employee of such licensee
has violated the provisions of this chapter, or permitted the same to be
violated; provided, however, no such license shall be revoked or suspended
unless charges in writing shall first have been filed with the city clerk
setting forth with reasonable certainty the nature of such charges against such
licensee.
   B.   Hearing; Notice:
      1.   Upon the filing of charges as aforesaid, the city council shall fix
a time and place for the hearing of said charges, and a copy of the charges as
filed, together with the notice of the time and place of hearing shall be
served upon the licensee at least five (5) days prior to the date fixed by the
city council for the hearing.
      2.   Any notice provided for in this chapter shall be served either by
delivering a copy personally to the licensee, or by leaving a copy with a
person of suitable age and discretion at the place of business of the licensee,
and mailing a copy of the notice to the licensee at his place of business as
set forth in his application for license. At the hearing on said charges, the
licensee shall have the right to appear and defend the charges and, if he so
desires, to be represented by counsel. (2003 Code § 5-09-25)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Nuisance Defined
5-1-2: Rubbish On Streets, Alleys Or Sidewalks
5-1-3: Irrigation Or Overflow Water, Burning On Streets
5-1-4: Obstructions On Sidewalks
5-1-5: Offensive Matter
5-1-6: Refuse In Buildings; Stagnant Water
5-1-7: Abatement Procedures
5-1-1: NUISANCE DEFINED:
Anything which is injurious to health or which is indecent or offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, or unlawfully obstructs
free passage or use in the customary manner of any street, alley or sidewalk or
public park, or injures any street or alley, or disturbs the peace and quiet,
is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (2003 Code § 7-02-01)
5-1-2: RUBBISH ON STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS:
Any person who shall wilfully or negligently throw, dump, store or deposit upon
any sidewalk, street, alley or public place, or any portion thereof, any glass,
nails, tacks, hoops, cans, barbed wire, boards, or any other substance or
material which would be likely to injure any horse, stock, vehicle or person
traveling thereon, or which obstructs or impedes the free passage of
pedestrians or public travel upon such sidewalk, street, alley or public place,
or any portion thereof, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. (2003
Code § 7-02-02)
5-1-3: IRRIGATION OR OVERFLOW WATER, BURNING ON STREETS:
   A.   Irrigation Water Flowing Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any
person to wilfully or negligently allow irrigation water to flow upon the
streets of the city in such a manner that it stands in pools or continuously
flows upon said streets.
   B.   Burning Leaves Or Grass Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any
person to burn leaves, grass or other material upon the streets of the city.
   C.   Overflow Water From Air Conditioners: It shall be unlawful for any
person to allow overflow water from air conditioners to run across or stand
upon the sidewalks or streets of the city. (2003 Code § 7-02-03)
5-1-4: OBSTRUCTIONS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any display signs, merchandise or
other obstructions upon any public sidewalk of the city. (2003 Code § 7-02-04)
5-1-5: OFFENSIVE MATTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon any property, or to allow to
remain upon any property within his or its control any matter which is
offensive to the senses or potentially injurious to health. (2003 Code § 7-02-
05)
5-1-6: REFUSE IN BUILDINGS; STAGNANT WATER:
   A.   Refuse; Stagnant Water Prohibited: No person shall permit or suffer to
be in or accumulate in, or upon any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any
street or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting upon any lot, block, place or
premises, or in any building or shed owned or occupied by him or for which he
may be an agent, within the city limits, any stagnant or impure water, refuse,
vegetable decay or decaying substance, garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer
any yard, lot, place, building or premises to be or to remain in such condition
as to cause or create a noisome or offensive smell, or to pollute or render
unhealthful the atmosphere or the premises or thereby to be, become, cause or
create a public nuisance. (2003 Code § 7-02-06)
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall fail to clean up said premises and to
abate such nuisance and cease to violate subsection A of this section for forty
eight (48) hours after having received notice from the chief of police so to
do, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-3 of this code. (2003 Code § 7-02-07; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1-7: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate:
      1.   Issuance; Contents Of Notice: If it is determined by the city clerk
or his authorized representative that a public nuisance, as herein defined,
exists on any lot, place or area, or upon any street, sidewalk, or public right
of way abutting the same, the city clerk or his representative shall cause a
notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The notice shall be headed "Notice
To Clean Premises", and shall:
         a.   Contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably
sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance;
         b.   Describe the nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify
the same;
         c.   Direct the abatement of the nuisance;
         d.   Specify the penalty provisions as provided herein; and
         e.   Specify the appeal process as provided herein.
      2.   Serving Of Notice: The notice above referenced may be served in the
following ways:
         a.   Personal Service: By personal service on the owner of said lot,
place or area, if owner lives within the city, or by personal service on the
occupant or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can be
identified; or
         b.   Mail: If said owner does not live within the city, by registered
mail to the owner, at the address shown on the last available assessment role,
or as otherwise known; or by personal service on the occupant or person in
charge or control of the property, if such person can be identified; or
         c.   Posting: Should the owner not be known or have an available
address, by posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right
of way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of
two (2) weeks in the official newspaper of the city, and by personal service on
the occupant or person in charge or control of the property, if such person can
be identified. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that
property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and
contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such
newspaper advertisements shall not be considered in computing the appeal
periods provided by this chapter. (2003 Code § 7-02-08)
   B.   Appeal: Within five (5) days from the date of posting, mailing or
personal service of the required notice, the owner or person occupying or
controlling such lot, place or area affected may appeal to the city council.
Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the
regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council, not less than
ten (10) days nor more than twenty six (26) days after receipt of the appeal,
the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal, and the
decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (2003
Code § 7-02-09)
   C.   Time Period For Abatement: It shall be the duty of the owner or person
occupying or controlling any lot, place or area in the city which has been
declared a public nuisance, as provided herein, within five (5) days from the
date of notification, as provided herein, or in case of an appeal to the city
council, within five (5) days from the determination thereof, unless the same
is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated. (2003 Code § 7-02-10)
   D.   Failure To Abate; Legal Action:
      1.   Notice To City Attorney: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or occupant so notified to remove the public nuisance, as herein defined,
within the time specified in this chapter, the city clerk shall notify the city
attorney in writing of the last known legal owner and property description in
general terms.
      2.   Legal Action: The city attorney may cause legal action to be taken
through the magistrate court for action as follows: The owner or person in
control of any lot, place or area within the city who shall permit or allow the
existence of a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, upon any lot or
premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, or the city
attorney, in his discretion, may also take civil action to obtain an order from
said court enjoining the maintenance of said public nuisance, which, such court
order shall include reimbursement to the city of its costs and attorney fees.
(2003 Code § 7-02-11)
   E.   Abatement By City: Upon direction of the city council and at the city
council's discretion, upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or
occupant so notified to remove the public nuisance, as herein defined, within
the time specified in this chapter, the city clerk's office shall proceed with
the work specified in the notice. The cost of the work shall be transmitted to
the city council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levy a special
assessment against the property for such cost that shall be collected with the
real property taxes assessed against said property. (2003 Code § 7-02-12)
CHAPTER 2
LITTERING
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Litter In Public Places
5-2-3: Placement In Receptacle To Prevent Scattering
5-2-4: Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited
5-2-5: Merchants Duty To Keep Sidewalks Clean
5-2-6: Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles
5-2-7: Truck Loads Causing Litter
5-2-8: Litter In Parks
5-2-9: Litter In Lakes And Fountains
5-2-10: Unauthorized Deposit Or Dumping Of Trash, Waste Or Debris Into Bins Or
Other Containers
5-2-11: Litter On Occupied Private Property
5-2-12: Owner To Maintain Premises Free Of Litter
5-2-13: Litter On Vacant Lots
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
DEBRIS: The remains, fragments, pieces or parts of something broken down,
damaged or destroyed.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and junk
and all other waste or discarded materials and substances, including, but not
excluding by enumeration, paper, bottles, glass, nails, tacks, hoops, cans,
wire (barbed or otherwise), building materials (lumber, boards, plasterboard,
mortar, insulation, sheet metal, plumbing materials and fixtures, electrical
materials and fixtures, water and gas materials and fixtures, sand and gravel,
and roofing and siding materials), automobile bodies, including the parts and
components thereof, and tires.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public
area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or
used wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard,
grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or mailbox belonging or pertinent to such
dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, easements
and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body waste),
including garbage, rubbish, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, junk, and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and other similar
materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved solely by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (2003 Code § 6-04-01)
5-2-2: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or
servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift, deposit, place, leave or dump in any
manner any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse, or cause, permit or
allow such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse to be carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements, in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place, river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin
within the corporate limits of the city. (2003 Code § 6-04-02)
5-2-3: PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLE TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse in public
receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner
as to prevent it from being blown, carried, scattered or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property. (2003 Code § 6-04-03)
5-2-4: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee or
servant, to sweep into or deposit or place in any gutter, street or other
public place within the city the accumulation of debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of their premises free from such debris, garbage, litter,
rubbish or refuse. (2003 Code § 6-04-04)
5-2-5: MERCHANTS DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into, or deposit
or place in, any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the
city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of such debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse. (2003 Code § 6-04-05)
5-2-6: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle,
to throw, cast, deposit or place, or permit or cause such to be cast, thrown,
deposited or placed, any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse upon any
street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. Each
owner of a vehicle shall be liable and responsible for the actions and conduct
of the driver or passengers in a vehicle from which vehicle debris, garbage,
litter, rubbish or refuse is thrown, cast, deposited, or placed. The operation
of a vehicle by any person other than the owner and the actions and conduct of
such driver or operator of, and the passengers in, such vehicle shall be
imputed to the owner for all purposes of this section. (2003 Code § 6-04-06)
5-2-7: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his or its agent, employee
or servant, to operate, drive, move or use any truck or other vehicle within
the city to haul or transport any kind of debris, litter, garbage, rubbish or
refuse, unless such truck or vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any of the load or contents thereof or any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or
refuse thereon from spilling or dropping, or from being carried, scattered or
blown by the elements, or in any other way deposited, placed or dumped, upon
any street, alley or other public place. (2003 Code § 6-04-07)
5-2-8: LITTER IN PARKS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave,
deposit, dump or place debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or trash in any park
within the city, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that such
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being
scattered, carried, blown or deposited by the elements upon any part of the
park or upon any street or other public place.
   B.   Removal By Responsible Person: Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of in the manner provided elsewhere by this code. (2003 Code § 6-04-
08)
5-2-9: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place litter in any
fountain, pond, lake, stream, canal, river or any other body of water in any
park or elsewhere within the city. (2003 Code § 6-04-09)
5-2-10: UNAUTHORIZED DEPOSIT OR DUMPING OF TRASH, WASTE OR DEBRIS INTO BINS OR
OTHER CONTAINERS:
This section is intended to address the problem of persons dumping their
household and nonhousehold garbage, refuse and other debris into bins or other
containers owned, leased or paid for by the city or other individuals and
businesses.
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or artificial,
in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sift, deposit,
place, leave or dump in any manner any debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or
refuse into any bin or other container for which such person does not pay for
its collection and removal, or which is not owned or leased by such person,
unless such person is the customer or patron authorized to use the particular
bin or container or has been granted the specific right of use by the proper
owner, lessee, or city. (2003 Code § 6-04-10)
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating subsection A of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-3 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-04-10; amd. 2012 Code)
5-2-11: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse on any occupied private property
within the city, whether owned by such person or not, or cause, permit or allow
such debris, garbage, litter or refuse to be carried, blown, scattered or
deposited by the elements upon any private property, except that the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for the collection and storage in such a manner that such debris,
garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse will be prevented from being carried, blown,
scattered or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property. (2003 Code § 6-04-11)
5-2-12: OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER:
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse;
provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of such
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish and refuse as provided elsewhere in this code.
(2003 Code § 6-04-12)
5-2-13: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, place, leave or dump any
debris, garbage, litter, rubbish or refuse on any open or vacant private
property within the city whether owned by such person or not. (2003 Code § 6-
04-13)
CHAPTER 3
REFUSE REMOVAL AND WEED CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Removal Of Refuse And Rubbish
5-3-2: Failure To Remove; Assessment; Penalty
5-3-1: REMOVAL OF REFUSE AND RUBBISH:
The owner of the premises abutting or adjoining any sidewalk, alley, street, or
right of way in the city hereby is required to remove all refuse and rubbish
from any such sidewalk, alley, street, or right of way, and the owner of
private property within the city shall cut and remove the weeds and grass and
remove the rubbish and eradicate any diseases or pests, eggs, larvae of any
pests injurious to trees, plants, shrubs, or vines, upon and from private
property to the center of any street, right of way or alley along or in front
of such property, including the parking within the curbing abutting such
property, within twenty four (24) hours after such rubbish or refuse
accumulates, or within twenty four (24) hours of the time it is determined that
injurious pests as herein described exist on such property, or within twenty
four (24) hours of receipt of notice from the city to cut and remove such weeds
and grass. Notice shall be deemed to have been given by sending notice by
regular mail to the owner of said property at the address of such person as
shown by the tax assessment rolls of the county. (2003 Code § 8-11-01)
5-3-2: FAILURE TO REMOVE; ASSESSMENT; PENALTY:
In the event of failure of such owner to remove such rubbish from said
sidewalk, alley, street, right of way or premises, or to cut and remove the
weeds and grass and remove the rubbish and eradicate any diseases or pests,
eggs, larvae of any pests injurious to trees, plants, shrubs or vines as
heretofore provided within the time herein provided, then the city may remove
such rubbish or cut and remove such weeds, rubbish and grass, and eradicate
such pests and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the
sidewalk or alley so cleared or treated for eradication and against the private
property as cleaned or cleared, or treated for eradication, such assessment to
be certified by the city clerk to the county assessor, such assessment to be
placed on the assessment roll and collected in the same manner as other
municipal taxes are collected. In addition, any person violating any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction or plea
of guilty thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (2003 Code
§ 8-11-02; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING
SECTION:
5-4-1: Regulations And Prohibitions
5-4-2: Penalty
5-4-1: REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Burn barrels are prohibited within the city limits.
   B.   Any person desiring to engage in open burning within the city limits
must first obtain a permit from the fire department.
   C.   There shall be no burning of tires, petroleum products, pesticide
containers, demolition debris, tar, household trash, carpet, wire, insulation
or treated wood.
   D.   There shall be no burning of standing buildings.
   E.   All fires must be attended at all times and the attendant must possess
fire extinguishing equipment that is in good working condition.
   F.   A burn permit will not be issued if winds are fifteen (15) miles per
hour or greater, or when a "no burn order" has been issued by the state.
   G.   There shall be no burning after sunset. (2003 Code § 3-03-05)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 3-03-05; amd. 2012
Code)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL MISDEMEANOR OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Burglary Alarm Systems
6-1-2: Firearms
6-1-3: Disorderly Conduct
6-1-4: Disorderly Houses
6-1-5: False Reports
6-1-6: Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of Admission Fees
6-1-7: Irrigation Headgates And Boxes To Be Covered
6-1-8: Loitering
6-1-9: Noises Creating Public Disturbance
6-1-10: Alcohol And Intoxication Offenses
6-1-11: Jumping From Bridges Prohibited
6-1-12: Illegal Camping
6-1-1: BURGLARY ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to reduce the number of the
false burglary and robbery alarms, thereby enhancing response time on other
critical calls for service.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases and words, and derivations thereof, shall have the meaning given
herein. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not merely directory.
    ALARM AGENT: Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include
the installation, maintenance, repair, service, response to, or summoning
others to respond to an alarm system. When the alarm system is the sole
responsibility of the user and no contractual agreements with another company
exist for the maintenance of alarm equipment, the user shall be considered the
alarm agent for purposes of this section.
   ALARM COMPANY DIRECTOR: Any person who receives an activation of an alarm or
alarm system as provided by this section and then transmits the information to
the Blackfoot city police department.
   ALARM OFFICER: The chief of police of the city or his designee.
   ALARM SUBSCRIBER: Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or
otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or maintenance
of an alarm system.
   ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical, electrical or other device which is designated
or used for the detection of a trespass, burglary, or robbery within a
building, structure or facility, or for alerting others to a hazard or to the
commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or
which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated and which
is designated to elicit a response from the police department. Alarm systems
include, but are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms
and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register
alarms but are audible, visible or perceptible outside the protected building,
structure or facility are not included within this definition. An alarm system
includes all the necessary equipment designed and installed for the detection
of a trespass, burglary, robbery or other hazard in a single building,
structure or facility, or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful
act within a building, structure or facility.
   AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or
presence on certain premises which generates an audible sound or signal on such
premises when it is activated.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system that automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that
the alarm system is designed to detect.
   EMERGENCY: Any condition for which the alarm was designed and installed, and
which results in a response of police personnel.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, message, transmittal or communication which is
activated from an alarm system and which is responded to by personnel of the
police department for which no emergency situation exists or existed as
determined by the responding personnel. False alarm shall not include alarms
caused by natural occurrences such as hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, or
other extraordinary circumstances determined by the alarm officer to be clearly
beyond the control of the alarm subscriber.
   PENALTY STATUS: That status achieved by more than two (2) false alarms
within the calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, organization
of any kind, or any governmental entity or political subdivision thereof.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Blackfoot city police department.
   C.   Alarm Systems Maintenance:
      1.   Each alarm subscriber shall maintain each alarm system in good
working order, and provide the necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for an alarm subscriber to allow, permit, or
use an alarm system that is not in good working order, or has fallen into
disrepair, or has malfunctioned.
   D.   Maintaining A Public Nuisance Alarm; Penalty Fees:
      1.   More Than Two False Alarms: No person, whether or not an alarm
subscriber, shall maintain, operate, use or attempt to use an alarm system
which generates more than two (2) false alarms in a calendar year. (2003 Code §
6-01-07)
      2.   Penalty Fees: Any alarm system maintained, operated, used, or
attempted to be used in violation of this section shall be deemed a public
nuisance pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-334. In addition to reimbursement or
any other remedy available to the city, the city may impose a penalty fee for
each and every false alarm after the two (2) within the calendar year, as
determined by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 6-01-07; amd. 2012
Code)
      3.   Finding Of Public Nuisance: Where the alarm system is deemed a
public nuisance as provided in this section, the alarm officer shall provide
the alarm subscriber written notice informing the alarm subscriber of the
penalty status and the finding of public nuisance.
      4.   Abatement Of Nuisance:
         a.   The city hereby reserves all remedies provided for in Idaho Code
sections 50-334, 52-202, and 52-205.
         b.   The city shall further reserve all rights and remedies of
collection pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008.
      5.   Review:
         a.   The alarm subscriber may request that the alarm officer review
and reconsider the determination of public nuisance by submitting a written
request to the alarm officer within ten (10) days upon receipt of the notice of
penalty status and nuisance. Failure to submit a written request in compliance
with this section is deemed a waiver of any and all rights to appeal.
         b.   The alarm officer shall review the determination and send the
alarm subscriber his findings as to whether the alarm system is a public
nuisance in writing by certified mailing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
written request of the alarm subscriber. (2003 Code § 6-01-07)
      6.   Appeal: The alarm subscriber may request a hearing before the city
council after filing a notice for hearing in writing to the city clerk no later
than ten (10) days upon mailing of the alarm officer's finding of public
nuisance. Any finding by the city council is appealable to the district court
of the seventh judicial district provided filing and fees are submitted in
accordance with state law.
   E.   Compliance:
      1.   An alarm subscriber who has notice of his/her alarm system being
deemed a public nuisance shall be assessed a penalty fee in accordance with the
fee schedule established by resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 6-01-
07; amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   An alarm subscriber who has notice of the assessed penalty or for
any amount due in reimbursement, shall remit within fifteen (15) days the
amounts due to the city.
   F.   Prohibited Alarm Systems: No person shall use or operate an automatic
dialing device or any device programmed to initiate and deliver a message or
signal to any telephone number belonging to the city.
   G.   Violations:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any "alarm system", as
defined in subsection B of this section, for any purpose other than reporting
such trespasses, burglaries, robberies, or other crimes involving potential
serious bodily injury or death.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a public
safety alarm system for any purpose other than that for which it is installed,
or for any purpose other than detecting and reporting a trespass, burglary,
robbery or other permitted purpose.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any alarm agent, alarm subscriber or other
person to install, operate or use any "alarm system", as defined in subsection
B of this section, which malfunctions due to improper installation or operation
and that results in the generation of false alarms. (2003 Code § 6-01-07)
   H.   Uniform Fire Code Not Affected: Nothing in this provision shall be
construed as modifying or nullifying adopted fire code. (2003 Code § 6-01-07;
amd. 2012 Code)
   I.   Enforcement: The conviction or punishment of any person for violation
of the provisions of this section shall not release such person from paying any
business taxes, charges, fees, license fees or reimbursement for false alarms
due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any fee or
reimbursement for false alarm prevent the criminal prosecution for violation of
any of the provisions of this section. All remedies shall be cumulative and the
use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other
remedy provided by law. (2003 Code § 6-01-07)
   J.   Penalties:
      1.   Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a general misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code.
      2.   Each and every false alarm over two (2) within the calendar year
shall be deemed a separate offense. (2003 Code § 6-01-07; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-2: FIREARMS:
   A.   Definitions: Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this section, the
term "firearms" shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell
or bullets by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the action of
compressed air within it, or by the power of springs, and including what are
commonly known as air rifles or BB guns.
   B.   Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited: Except at a shooting range authorized
in accordance with the applicable zoning ordinance, it shall be unlawful for
any person to discharge firearms of any kind or description within the limits
of the city; provided, however, that this shall not apply to police officers in
the discharge of their duties, nor to persons acting in self-defense against
unlawful deadly physical force.
   C.   Exception To Prohibition Of Discharge Of Firearms: A person may
discharge a firearm if such discharge is for the purpose of slaughtering
animals raised on the property for the purpose of human consumption, or the
property is zoned to allow the slaughter and packaging of meat for human
consumption, and the person discharging the firearm complies with the following
conditions:
      1.   The discharge of the firearm is aimed away from persons, vehicles,
roadways, buildings constructed for human occupancy and other animals;
      2.   The slaughter of the animal is not visible from a public roadway;
and
      3.   The person discharging the firearm provides prior notice to the law
enforcement agency for the city at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
anticipated discharge. (Ord. 2097, 12-7-2010, eff. 12-7-2010)
6-1-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Qualifying Behavior: Any person who shall conduct themselves in a
violent, noisy or riotous manner, and/or who shall use profane, abusive or
obscene language within the presence or hearing of children, or in any way
commits a breach of the peace of another person, and/or who shall conduct
themselves in a manner that endangers the health and safety of another person,
and/or who conducts themselves in any other manner as is specified in this
section, is guilty of a misdemeanor; and a violation of this section shall also
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Accosting other persons in any public place or in any place open to
the public for the purpose of begging or soliciting alms; or
      2.   Occupying, lodging or sleeping in any building, structure or place,
whether public or private, or any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
similar vehicles or equipment without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession or in control thereof;
      3.   Using any motor vehicle, motor home, travel trailer, as a residence
upon any public street (highway) and/or alleyway or upon any other premises
under the ownership and/or control of a government subdivision of the state;
      4.   Loitering or remaining in or about school grounds or buildings,
without having any reason or relationship involving custody of or
responsibility for a pupil or student, school authorized functions, activities
or use;
      5.   Wilfully fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer after being
lawfully ordered to stop by an identified peace officer.
   B.   Misdemeanor: Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(2003 Code § 6-01-10; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-4: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a disorderly house or place of
business, or to allow, permit, or suffer in any house or place or building
kept, used, or occupied by him within the limits of the city any drunkenness,
quarreling, fighting, unlawful games, or riotous or disorderly conduct. (2003
Code § 6-01-11)
6-1-5: FALSE REPORTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   To make or file, or cause to be made or filed, an accident report
knowing the same to be false or misleading, in whole or in part; or
   B.   To make or file, or cause to be made or filed, a theft report of a
motor vehicle or other personal property, knowing the same to be false or
misleading, in whole or in part; or
   C.   To intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of need for police
or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act;
   D.   To make or file any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report
concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within
the city; and
   E.   To furnish in any report required by the ordinances of this city any
false or fictitious address, or any address other than a true address or
intended address, or to furnish in making such report any false, untrue or
misleading information or statement relating to any information required by the
ordinances of this city to be made or furnished. (2003 Code § 6-01-13)
6-1-6: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter without payment of
the proper admission fees to any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of law
enforcement officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place
of public amusement or entertainment. (2003 Code § 6-01-14)
6-1-7: IRRIGATION HEADGATES AND BOXES TO BE COVERED:
   A.   Enclosed headgates and boxes for the diversion of irrigation waters,
with openings at the top, are hereby recognized and declared to be attractive
and dangerous to small children who are likely to play about the same and on
occasion to fall into the water therein contained. (2003 Code § 6-01-16)
   B.   All persons using or maintaining such enclosed headgates and diversion
boxes of sufficient size to admit the body of any child, within the city, are
therefore required to keep the same securely covered and locked to regulate the
irrigation waters thereby controlled. Violation of this provision shall
constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. (2003 Code § 6-01-16; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-8: LOITERING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, remain or repeatedly
enter upon the premises or real property of any business, unless such person is
acting as a customer or patron of the business, is engaging in or attempting to
engage in an enterprise, venture or other lawful activity involving the
business or its employees, or unless the person is upon the property or
premises of the business with the permission of the owner or the owner's agent.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, remain or repeatedly
enter upon the real property of another, unless express or implied permission
has been given by the property owner or the property owner's agent. (2003 Code
§ 6-01-17)
6-1-9: NOISES CREATING PUBLIC DISTURBANCE:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any
person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound
that is a public disturbance noise. The following sounds are determined to be
public disturbance noises:
      1.   Horns Or Sirens: The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of
any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or
as specifically permitted or required by law;
      2.   Repetitive Motor Vehicle Sounds: The creation of frequent,
repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation,
repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off highway
vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to
unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners
or possessors of real property;
      3.   Yelling Or Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on or near the public streets which unreasonably disturb or interfere
with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;
      4.   Noise From Buildings: The creation of frequent, repetitive or
continuous sounds which emanate from any building, structure, apartment or
condominium, which unreasonably interfere with the peace, comfort, and repose
of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from audio equipment,
musical instruments, band sessions or social gatherings;
      5.   Motor Vehicle Sound Systems: Sound from motor vehicle sound systems,
such as tape players, radios and compact disc players, operated at a volume so
as to be audible greater than fifty feet (50') from the vehicle itself;
      6.   Audio Equipment: Sound from audio equipment, such as tape players,
radios, or compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible
greater than fifty feet (50') from the source, and if not operated upon the
property of the operator.
   B.   Exceptions: The foregoing provisions shall not apply to regularly
scheduled events at parks, such as public address systems for baseball games or
park concerts.
   C.   Public Disturbance Noise Time Period: Public disturbance noises shall
not be permitted within the city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., or at any time so as to unreasonably
disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or enjoyment of others. (2003 Code
§ 6-01-19)
   D.   Violation, Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-01-19; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-10: ALCOHOL AND INTOXICATION OFFENSES:
   A.   Open Container: Except as otherwise permitted by statute or ordinance,
it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any open
container of any alcoholic beverage on any street, in any public or private
parking lot, in or upon any public or private motor vehicle or upon any public
or private property open to the public.
   B.   Consumption: Except as otherwise permitted by statute or ordinance, it
shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on or upon
any street, in any public or private parking lot, in or upon any public or
private motor vehicle or upon any public or private property open to the
public.
   C.   Public Intoxication Prohibited: A person is guilty of intoxication if
such person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled
substance, or any substance having the property of releasing toxic vapors, to a
degree that the person may endanger herself or himself or another, in a public
place or in a private place where such person unreasonably disturbs other
persons. (2003 Code § 6-01-21; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-11: JUMPING FROM BRIDGES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to jump from any
bridge or like structure over a watercourse within the city.
   B.   Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. (2003 Code § 6-01-26; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-12: ILLEGAL CAMPING:
   A.   Definitions:
    CAMPING: The use of land to conduct one or more specified activities when,
based upon such use, it reasonably appears in light of all the circumstances
that the participants, in conducting the specified activities, are using the
area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the participants or
the nature of any other activities in which they may be engaging. Camping shall
not include residing in a permanent structure that may be lawfully occupied as
a permanent or temporary residence.
   SPECIFIED ACTIVITIES: Shall include one or more of the following:
      1.   Sleeping or making preparations to sleep, such as laying down
bedding;
      2.   Storing personal belongings, including, but not limited to,
clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks,
kitchen utensils, cookware and similar materials;
      3.   Making any fire for the purposes of warmth, or of cooking;
      4.   Erecting a tent, lean to or other similar temporary structure.
   B.   Private Property: It shall be illegal to engage in camping on private
property without the consent of the property's owner.
   C.   Public Property: It shall be illegal to engage in camping on any public
right of way or public property located within the limits of the city unless
such area has been designated specifically as authorized for camping or
lodging. (Ord. 2072, 7-17-2007)
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. (Ord. 2072, 7-17-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-2-1: Legal Authority
6-2-2: Purpose
6-2-3: Scope
6-2-4: Definitions
6-2-5: Administrative Provisions For Animal Control Agencies; Animal Shelter
6-2-6: Dog Licensing
6-2-7: Dog Regulations
6-2-8: Non-Canine Animals At Large
6-2-9: Limits To Numbers Of Animals; Kennel Licensing
6-2-10: Rabies Vaccination; Quarantine
6-2-11: Dangerous And Potentially Dangerous Dog
6-2-12: Prohibited Animals
6-2-13: Nuisances
6-2-14: Cruelty To Animals
6-2-15: Use Of Animal Traps
6-2-16: Commanding Animal To Attack
6-2-17: Interference With Officials
6-2-18: Driving Or Riding Animals
6-2-19: Animal Endangerment; Confinement In Unattended Vehicle; Immunity From
Civil Liability For Animal Rescue
6-2-20: Impoundment Of Vicious Dogs Pending Court Proceedings; Destruction Of
Unclaimed Animals
6-2-21: Liability Of Parents For Minors Owning Animals
6-2-22: Sale Of Commercially Bred Dogs And Cats In Retail Stores Prohibited
6-2-23: Transfer Of Animals Upon Public Properties Prohibited
6-2-24: Mandatory Spay Or Neuter
6-2-25: Nonliability Of City
6-2-26: Penalty
6-2-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Idaho Code sections 50-302, 50-304, 50-319 and 25-2812 authorize the City to
enact ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations to promote and maintain
the public’s health, welfare and safety in general, and specifically permits
the City to regulate animals-at-large and dangerous dogs within its
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of City’s Animal Code is to promote and ensure the safety and well-
being of both humans and domesticated animals living within the City’s
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-3: SCOPE:
This chapter establishes requirements, procedures, and regulations for the
keeping and caring of domestic animals, including, but not limited to,
licensing, vaccinations, and impoundment of such animals. (Ord. 2231, 12- -
2022)
6-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely
directory. Words used throughout this chapter shall have their plain, ordinary
and common meaning. Words in any gender shall apply to the feminine, masculine
and neuter genders.
                       Any intentional or negligent act, course of conduct, or omission resulting in an
ABUSE (AS TOWARDS AN   animal dying, suffering, or being injured, including but not limited to bruising,
ANIMAL):               bleeding, malnutrition, dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones,
                       subdural hematoma, or soft tissue swelling of the animal.
ANIMAL:                Any organism other than human beings needing food to maintain and sustain its
                       life, which generally has mobility and a developed central nervous system.
                       An organization with which the City may contract and thereby conferred authority
ANIMAL CARE AND        to exercise the powers and duties set forth in this chapter, Title 6, Chapter 2,
CONTROL AGENCY:        and Idaho Code provisions related to animal care and control services within the
                       City’s jurisdiction.
                       An entity that provides animal control or animal shelter services not on the
ANIMAL CARE            City’s behalf and typically outside of the City’s jurisdiction, whose mission and
ORGANIZATION:          practice is in whole or significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in
                       permanent homes or non-profit rescues.
                       To own, keep, or otherwise possess a large number of animals for which the owner
                       is unable to provide the minimal standards of nutrition, sanitation, and
ANIMAL HOARDING:       veterinary care; or to perpetuate or fail to ameliorate conditions that endanger
                       animal and human health and well-being due to overcrowding, lack of sanitation,
                       lack of proper diet, untreated disease, or other deleterious conditions.
ANIMAL SHELTER (or     A facility maintained either by the City or by a third-party under contract with
“HUMANE SHELTER”): the City to provide animal impoundment and humane care to animals within the
                       City’s jurisdiction.
                       Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or a member
AT LARGE:              of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise provided for
                       in this chapter.
AUTHORIZED OFFICER:    A Code Compliance Officer, a Humane Officer, or a Blackfoot City Police Officer.
                       Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than two (2) dogs, or five
BOARDING KENNEL:       (5) cats, or a combination of four (4) such animals, are maintained, harbored,
                       possessed, bred or cared for. A kennel license for such activity is required from
                       the City.
BREEDER:               A person that maintains a dog or cat for the purpose of breeding and selling the
                       offspring for money or other consideration.
                       Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and
                       entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space, or any walls
BUILDING:              in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings, which is designed
                       or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals,
                       chattels or property of any kind.
CAT:                   means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
CHIEF OF POLICE:       The Chief of the Blackfoot Police Department, or his or her designee.
CITY:                  The City of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CITY CLERK:            The City Clerk of the City and designee.
                       A City employee, who is not a law enforcement officer, who is authorized and
CODE COMPLIANCE        empowered to enforce City Code, including but not limited to the provisions of
OFFICER:               this chapter, Title 6, Chapter 2, and Idaho Code provision related animal care
                       and control. This term is interchangeable with “code enforcement officer.”
                       An exhibition, public showing, exposition, fair, animal act, circus, ride, trade
                       show, petting zoo, carnival, parade, race, traveling animal shows, or other
DISPLAY (AN ANIMAL):   undertaking in which live prohibited animals, as set forth in this chapter, are
                       used to perform tricks, give rides, or participate as accompaniments for
                       entertainment, amusement, or benefit of a live audience.
DOG (or “CANINE”): A domesticated canine of either sex regardless whether neutered or spayed.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL:       A dog, cat, or other animal that is tame and kept as a household pet but does not
                       include livestock, other farm animals, wildlife, or prohibited animals.
                       A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing
                       containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to
                       confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the
ENCLOSURE:             owner, such as tethering of the animal. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed
                       and locked and designed with secure sides, and if needed a secure enclosure top
                       and bottom, and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the
                       enclosure.
                       The humane provision of animal impoundment, medical treatment, care, and disposal
HUMANE CARE:           services for animals seized, kept, or removed in conformity with and required by
                       the provisions of this chapter, Title 6, Chapter 2, and Idaho Code provisions
                       related to the welfare and control of animals within the City’s jurisdiction.
                       An employee of the City’s contracted animal care and control agency or animal
                       shelter who is thereby authorized to act as the City’s agent to exercise the
                       powers and duties set forth in this chapter, Title 6, Chapter 2, and Idaho Code
HUMANE OFFICER:        provisions related to animal welfare and control within the City’s jurisdiction
                       subject to and under the supervision and direction of the animal care and/or
                       control agency. Animal Humane Officers are not and shall not be deemed to be City
                       employees.
IMPOUNDED (IMPOUND,    Taken into the custody of the animal shelter.
IMPOUNDMENT):
INDIVIDUAL WITH A      A person who has a disability as defined by the federal Americans with
DISABILITY:            disabilities act, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq., and its implementing regulations
                       effective as of January 1, 2019.
                       To perform any act or omission that a reasonable person with a common knowledge
JUSTIFIED PROVOCATION: of dog behavior would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite or physical attack
                       by an ordinary dog.
LIVESTOCK ANIMALS:     Useful animals ordinarily raised or used on a farm or ranch, including but not
                       limited to, cattle, equine, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, and alpacas.
MISUSE:                The intentional causing of an animal to perform a non-customary task which could
                       be dangerous or harmful to the animal.
MOBILE HOUSING         A vehicle such as a truck, trailer, or railway car used to transport and house
FACILITY:              animals while traveling for display or other performance.
                       Any not-for-profit organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)
                       (3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in
NON-PROFIT RESCUE:     whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent
                       homes. This term does not include an entity that is a breeder or broker or one
                       that obtains animals from a breeder or broker for profit or compensation.
OFFER FOR SALE:        To sell for money, to barter, to auction, to give away, or otherwise to
                       facilitate a transfer of ownership of an animal.
OWNER:                 Any person keeping, harboring, possessing, caring for or having any custodial
                       duties over any animal.
PERSON:                All natural persons, firms, companies, corporations or associations.
PHYSICAL ATTACK:       An act of aggression upon a person by a dog in which there is physical contact
                       between the dog and the person.
POULTRY:               Any and all domesticated fowl, including chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and
                       other similar domesticated birds.
                       Animals such as cattle, sheep, goats, swine, poultry, ratites, equines, domestic
                       Cervidae, Camelidae, and guard and stock dogs, if such animal is used for the
PRODUCTION ANIMAL:     purpose of or in furtherance of producing food or fiber or other commercial
                       activity, or is to be sold for the use by another for such purpose; or
                       alternatively, a furbearing animal kept for the purpose of commercial fur
                       production.
SENIOR CITIZENS:       Any head of household who has attained the age of sixty-five (65) or older.
                       A wound to a person characterized by bruising, laceration, or other physical
SERIOUS INJURY:        damage that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a
                       medical professional without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
                       treatment.
SERVICE ANIMAL:        Any animal defined as a “service dog” by Department of Justice Regulations at 28
                       C.F.R. § 35.104 or any successor or amended regulation.
                       A dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of
                       an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric,
                       intellectual, or other mental disability. Other species of animals, whether wild
                       or domestic, trained or untrained, are not service dogs for purposes of this
                       chapter. The work or tasks performed by the service dog must be directly related
                       to the individual’s disability. Examples of work or tasks include, but are not
                       limited to, assisting individuals who are blind or have low vision with
                       navigation and other tasks, alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing
SERVICE DOG:           to the presence of people or sounds, providing nonviolent protection or rescue
                       work, pulling a wheelchair, assisting an individual during a seizure, alerting
                       individuals to the presence of allergens, retrieving items such as medicine or
                       the telephone, providing physical support and assistance with balance and
                       stability to individuals with mobility disabilities, and helping persons with
                       psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing or interrupting impulsive
                       or destructive behaviors. The crime deterrent effects of an animal’s presence and
                       the provision of emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship do not
                       constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this chapter.
                       A dog being specifically trained to develop social, environmental, and other
SERVICE DOG IN         skills needed for work with or to perform tasks for an individual with a
TRAINING:              disability. Dogs-in-training shall wear a jacket, collar, scarf, or other similar
                       article identifying it as a dog-in-training. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
 
6-2-5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL AGENCIES; ANIMAL
SHELTER:
   A.   Animal Care and Control Agencies: The City may contract with one or
more third-party animal care and control agencies to provide animal control
services on the City’s behalf. Any third-party contracted animal care and
control agency providing animal control services on the City’s behalf is a
separate and independent entity from the City, and its employees are not and
shall not be deemed to be City employees.
   B.   Animal Shelter: The City may contract with one or more third-party
animal shelters to provide humane care on the City’s behalf. Any third-party
contracted animal shelter providing impoundment and humane care services on the
City’s behalf is a separate and independent entity from the City, and its
employees are not and shall not be deemed to be City employees.
   C.   City Internal Services: Nothing in this Chapter precludes the City from
internally providing some or all animal care and control services or animal
shelter services. The City may also contract with one entity to provide both
animal control and animal shelter services.
   D.   Enforcement and Limitations: If the City contracts with an animal care
and control agency or animal shelter, it authorizes such agency or shelter to
employ and appoint Humane Officers to act on the City’s behalf. All Code
Compliance Officers and contracted Humane Officers are authorized to seize,
remove, and keep in an animal shelter any animal in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter, Title 6, Chapter 2, or the Idaho Code provisions related to
animal care and control. Any Code Compliance Officer or Humane Officer,
enforcing the provisions of this chapter, Title 6, Chapter 2, or the Idaho Code
provisions related to animal care and control, shall comply with the same
constitutional and statutory restrictions concerning the execution of police
powers imposed on law enforcement officers who may enforce this chapter or
other criminal laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-6: DOG LICENSING:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   No person shall own, harbor, keep, or possess a dog over the age of
sixteen (16) weeks within the City without first procuring a dog license as
provided by this chapter.
      2.   Exception: Persons visiting in the City with a dog that they own or
are in possession of shall not be required to obtain a City dog license, if the
visit does not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days.
   B.   License Application: The owner or person having charge of any dog over
the age of sixteen (16) weeks residing within the City shall apply for a dog
license from the City Clerk, an Animal Care and Control Agency, or an Animal
Shelter, authorized veterinary clinic or other designated agent.
   C.   General Standards: The general standards and requirements for dog
license applications pursuant to this chapter are as follow:
      1.   All dog license applications and renewals shall be made in the form
and manner prescribed by the City Clerk. Licenses may be issued by such people
or entities as allowed by the City such as veterinarians, city administration,
police department, animal shelter or such other places authorized by the City.
      2.   Proof of spay or neuter shall be submitted with the application for
each for every dog a license is sought. Proof of updated and current rabies
vaccination shall be submitted with the application.
      3.   If a dog being licensed is an unneutered animal (exempt) then an
additional licensing fee may be required.
      4.   Every application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable license fee in an amount established by the City Council and
listed on the City’s most current Fines and Fees Schedule.
      5.   Every application containing untrue or misleading information may be
denied without refund of the application fees or consideration.
   D.   Payment and Term of Dog Licenses: Dog licenses are not transferrable.
Dog owners may choose to prepay licenses for one, two (2) or three (3) years.
All dog licenses are valid for twelve (12), twenty-four (24), or thirty-six
(36) months from date of sale and shall expire automatically at the end of that
period.
   E.   Waiver Of Fees: License fees shall be waived for any service dog
residing at its owner’s property within the City. In order to receive such
waiver, application shall be made by any owner directly to the City Clerk.
   F.   Issuance Of License; Tag; Duplicate Tag: Upon receipt of such
application and payment of fees, the person issuing the license shall issue a
receipt designating the owner’s name and the number of the license, the sex (or
status of spayed or neutered) of the dog and the amount paid by him, together
with a metal tag bearing the number corresponding to that upon receipt. If a
license is lost, the Clerk or Director of the animal shelter or other
designated agent shall, upon application and payment of a fee in such amount as
established by the City Council, issue a duplicate tag. Licenses for the
following year may be purchased within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
date. Upon renewal, a new tag shall not be issued unless requested. If a dog is
licensed as non-spayed or non-neutered, and is spayed or neutered within the
licensed period, the Clerk shall, upon presentation of a veterinarian’s
statement of spaying or neutering, refund the difference in the license fee.
   G.   Imitation License Tags: No person shall allow any dog owned, kept, or
harbored by him or her to wear an expired license tag, a tag issued for a
different dog, or any other counterfeit tag. Expired, counterfeit, or otherwise
illegal dog license tags may be confiscated upon discovery by an authorized
officer.
   H.   Removal of tag from collar: No unauthorized person shall remove from
any dog its collar, harness, or other device to which a license tag is
attached, or to remove such tag therefrom, unless permitted under this Article.
(Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-7: DOG REGULATIONS:
   A.   Bearing Collar and Tag: Every dog shall at all times wear a
substantial, durable collar, to which shall be securely attached the required
license tag.
   B.   Leash Requirements: All dogs must be restrained by a leash in public
except as provided in this chapter. Any person who has a dog restrained on a
leash in a public place must be capable of controlling the dog, and the leash
must be appropriately substantial for the size and strength of the dog.
   C.   Training And Exercise Grounds: The City Council may designate public
park areas or other City public grounds for use as training and exercise
grounds of dogs, subject to the rules and regulations as may be. Dogs within
such designated areas are not required to be controlled by leash, if under the
control of a responsible person by voice, whistle, or other effective command.
   D.   Dog Running At Large Prohibited: Any person who owns, harbors, or has
in his or her control a dog which animal is found at large upon the City’s
streets, alleys, or public places, or upon any other private premises without
the consent of the person in possession of such premises, is responsible for
such animal being at large and is in violation of this section, except:
      1.   When such dog is assisting a security guard or law enforcement
officer engaged in law enforcement duties.
      2.   When such dog is a service dog while performing tasks for its owner
who is an individual with a disability.
      3.   When such dog is within City designated and posted areas for the
off-leash exercise and training.
      4.   When such dog is assisting its owner or custodian in legal hunting,
or the working, herding, or controlling of livestock in a place that such
activity may legally occur.
Any dog found in violation of this section may be impounded. Any violation of
this section is an infraction in an amount established by the City Council and
listed on the City’s most current Fines and Fees Schedule.
   E.   Responsibility To Clean Up After Dog:
      1.    Any person having the care, custody, possession, or control of a
dog shall immediately remove the dog’s feces deposited on any public property
or private property not owned or possessed by the owner or custodian of the
dog, before leaving the immediate vicinity of the deposited feces. The dog’s
feces must be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
      2.   Exceptions: The requirements of this subsection E shall not apply
to:
         a.   Law enforcement officers and their service dogs during the
official performance of their duties and while actively engaged in an emergency
situation;
         b.   Handlers of search and rescue animals during the official
performance of their duties and while actively engaged in an emergency
situation; or
         c.   Individuals with disabilities utilizing service dogs as defined
in this Chapter.
      3.   A violation of this subsection is an infraction punishable by a fine
in an amount established by the City Council and listed on the City’s most
current Fines and Fees Schedule. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-8: NON-CANINE ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   Non-Canine or Non-Feline Animals Not To Be Permitted At Large: It shall
be unlawful for an owner of any non-canine or non-feline domesticated animal,
including, but not limited to poultry, or livestock animal, to permit such
animal to run at large upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the
City, or upon private property without the consent of the owner or person in
possession of such property, or to be at large to the annoyance or injury of
others. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-9: LIMITS TO NUMBERS OF ANIMALS; KENNEL LICENSING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon the
premises of any one household more than two (2) dogs, or five (5) cats, or
combination of four (4) such animals, unless the owner or person in charge
first procures a kennel license as provided in City Code.
   B.    No person shall operate or maintain a kennel within the City unless
the location of the proposed kennel is in accordance with the provisions of the
land use ordinance as embodied in title 11 of this code, as from time to time
amended. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-10: RABIES VACCINATION; QUARANTINE:
   A.   Rabies Vaccination Requirements:
      1.   Vaccination Required: The owner or custodian of any dog or cat
within the City shall vaccinate such animal against rabies within thirty (30)
days of:
         a.   The dog or cat becoming four (4) months of age;
         b.   Acquiring a dog or cat without documented proof of current rabies
vaccination; or
         c.   Bringing a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older into the
City’s limits.
      2.   Revaccination Intervals: The owner or custodian of any dog or cat
within the City that has been vaccinated against rabies is required to
revaccinate such animal within a period of not more than:
         a.   Twelve (12) months after the animal’s initial vaccination, if the
animal was between four (4) months and one (1) year of age at the time of such
vaccination; and
         b.   Thirty-six (36) months after each subsequent vaccination.
      3.   Rabies Vaccination Waiver: Upon physical examination of a dog or
cat, an Idaho licensed veterinarian may provide a written waiver from rabies
vaccination based on an illness or infirmity in such animal, animal, or based
on a positive rabies antibody titer obtained by laboratory testing. A written
waiver must provide an expiration date, not to exceed twelve (12) months. Upon
expiration, the animal must be vaccinated, or it must be physically reexamined
by an Idaho licensed veterinarian, who may issue a new written waiver from
rabies vaccination following the same guidelines set forth herein.
      4.   Approved Vaccination: Only U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
approved rabies vaccinations may be administered to dogs and cats within the
City.
      5.   Certificate of Vaccination: An Idaho licensed veterinarian who
vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies within the City, must immediately issue
a certificate of vaccination signed by the veterinarian to such animal’s owner
or custodian. The certificate of rabies vaccination shall provide the following
information:
         a.   The date of the vaccination;
         b.   The name and address of the vaccinated animal’s owner or
custodian;
         c.   The type of vaccine used, the vaccine manufacturer’s name, and
the vaccine’s serial or lot number; and
         d.   The breed, age, color, sex, and name of the vaccinated dog or
cat.
      6.   Maintaining Vaccination Records: The owner or custodian of a dog or
cat shall maintain copies of the certificates of rabies vaccinations for the
animal and shall produce such records upon request by:
         a.   An Authorized Officer;
         b.   A person who was injured by and potentially exposed to rabies by
such animal;
         c.   A licensed physician who is currently treating a person who was
injured by and potentially exposed to rabies by such animal; or
         d.   Or veterinarian who is currently treating an animal that was
injured by and potentially exposed to rabies by such animal.
   B.   Duty to Report and Confine Suspected Rabid Animals: It shall be
unlawful for an owner or person having charge, custody or control and any
animal, who learns or observes the animal act in a manner that would lead a
reasonable person to suspect the animal is infected with rabies:
      1.    to fail, refuse, or neglect to notify the Animal Shelter at once;
      2.   to fail to securely confine such animal as directed by the Animal
Shelter;
      3.   to fail, refuse, or neglect to allow a licensed veterinarian to
inspect or examine such animal for symptoms of rabies.
   C.   Quarantine of Biting Animals; Suspected Rabies - Procedures:
      1.   An owner or custodian of any animal who learns of or observes such
animal exhibiting rabies symptoms or observes the animal act in a manner that
would lead a reasonable person to suspect the animal is infected with rabies,
shall surrender the animal for quarantine to an animal shelter or licensed
veterinarian.
      2.   An owner or custodian of any animal that has bitten a human in which
the skin was broken shall surrender such animal for quarantined confinement to
an animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian.
      3.   An owner or custodian of any animal which comes into contact with a
known rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined in a place and
manner, and for a period of time, designated by the Director of the Animal
Shelter.
      4.   Quarantine period: Any animal quarantined for biting or under
suspicion of rabies infection shall be confined and observed by a licensed
veterinarian for a period of no less than ten (days) and not more than fifteen
(15) days from the date the bite was inflicted.
      5.   Alternative quarantine procedure: Upon the owner’s request, and at
the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee, the quarantine of an
animal may be conducted at a licensed boarding kennel or upon the premises of
the owner or custodian of the animal. During the period of quarantine, the
animal must be securely confined and isolated from contact with humans and
other animals. Within forty-eight (48) hours of the conclusion of the
quarantine period, and at the owner’s or custodian’s expense, shall have the
animal examined by a licensed veterinarian, the Animal Shelter, or a Humane
Officer to determine whether the animal exhibits any symptoms of rabies or has
died. In the case of a veterinary examination, the owner or custodian shall
submit a true and accurate copy of the veterinarian’s examination record to the
Animal Shelter. If the animal dies while in alternative quarantine, the
animal’s owner or custodian shall immediately notify the Animal Shelter and
surrender the carcass for testing if requested by the Animal Shelter.
      6.   Surrender for Destruction of rabid animals: The owner or custodian
of an animal that is determined to be rabid shall surrender the infected animal
to the Animal Shelter, if not already in the Animal Shelter.
      7.   Impoundment; Fees and Costs; and Disposal of Quarantined Animal: Any
animal exhibiting rabies symptoms may be impounded for quarantine, and the
animal’s owner shall be liable for all related fees and costs as set forth in
this chapter. Impounded animals for quarantine are subject to disposal by the
Animal Shelter as set forth in this chapter.
   D.   Contagious Diseased Animals At Large: It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit or allow any animal with a contagious or infectious disease to
run at large upon the public streets, or to be within and upon any public
transportation facility, or any other public building or place within the City,
or to expose such animal in any public building or place, whereby the health,
safety and well being of the public, or any member or members thereof, may be
affected; nor shall such animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner of such animal, except under the supervision of the Animal Shelter
Director. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-11: DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG:
   A.   Dangerous Dog means any dog that:
      1.   Without justified provocation, has inflicted serious injury or kills
a person on public or private property, or
      2.    Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous under this
chapter, or any substantially conforming foreign statute, and thereafter
aggressively bites or physically attacks a person without justified
provocation; or
      3.    Without justified provocation, and while at large, inflicts serious
injury or kills another domesticated animal or livestock animal without
justified provocation; or
      4.   Has been previously found to be a dangerous dog as defined under
Idaho Code Title 25, Chapter 28, or found to be in violation of any
substantially conforming foreign statute; or
      5.   The animal is owned or harbored for the purpose of fighting or has
been trained to fight.
   B.   Potentially Dangerous Dog means any dog that:
      1.   Without justified provocation, bites a person without causing
serious injury; or
      2.   Has been previously found to be an at-risk dog as defined under
Idaho Code Title 25, Chapter 28; or found to be in violation of any
substantially conforming foreign statute.
   C.   Exceptions for Justified Provocation: No dog may be found to be
dangerous or potentially dangerous if at the time an injury or damage was
sustained, the precipitating cause constituted justified provocation. Justified
provocation includes the following:
      1.    The dog was protecting or defending a person within its immediate
vicinity from an attack or assault; or
      2.   The injured person was committing a crime or offense upon the
property of the dog’s owner; or
      3.   The person was at the time, or had in the past, willfully tormented,
abused, or threatened physical abuse upon the dog; or
      4.   The dog was responding to pain, injury, or protecting its offspring
from threat; or
      5.   The dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator
control dog on the property of its owner, and the injured person interfered
with that dog while it was lawfully working, including, but not limited to
public lands; or
      6.   The dog is a service dog individually trained to do work or perform
certain tasks for a person with a disability, and the person interfered with
the dog while it was assisting its owner with a disability; or
      7.   The injured person intervened between two (2) or more dogs mutually
engaged in aggressive behavior or fighting; or
      8.   The domestic animal the dog attacks or kills is a wild fowl.
   D.   Impoundment; Fees and Costs; and Determination Hearing: A dog may be
impounded for being dangerous or potentially dangerous pending a determination
hearing, and the animal’s owner may be liable for the related fees and costs as
set forth in this Chapter. Any action to determination whether a dog is
dangerous or potentially dangerous at hearing must be initiated within twelve
(12) months of the underlying offensive behavior.
   E.   Harboring a Dangerous or Potentially Dangerous Dog: No person shall
own, possess, maintain, or harbor any dog that has been found to be dangerous
or potentially dangerous as described herein within the City, unless the owner
is in full compliance with the registration, licensing, confinement, and
control provisions as provided in any judgment rendered under this chapter.
   F.   Registration, Confinement, Control, and Destruction of Dangerous or
Potentially Dangerous Dogs:
      1.   Registration Requirements: The owner of a dog that is determined to
be dangerous or potentially dangerous under this chapter, or any substantially
conforming foreign statute, shall register and license that animal with the
City within seven (7) business days of the dog either being determined
dangerous or potentially dangerous or moving within the City’s jurisdiction.
Failure to register and license the dog within this time period shall result in
the immediate impoundment of the animal by the City.
      2.   No such dog shall be registered and licensed by the City for any
licensing period, unless and until the owner of such dog meets all the
following registration requirements:
         a.   A dog found to be dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be
permanently identified by means of a microchip or other method used for the
identification of companion animals at the expense of the owner. Microchip
registration shall be reported in a timely manner to the Animal Shelter.
Photographs of the dog may be required by the Animal Shelter. Upon demand, the
dog’s owner shall provide access to the animal for the purpose of verifying
microchip implantation or other identification method to any authorized
officer.
         b.   The premises on which a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is
kept shall be posted with clearly visible signs stating, “Beware of Dog,” and
with a warning symbol or representation that informs children of the presence
of a dog that may be dangerous. The sign shall be constructed of durable,
weatherproof materials and at least twenty-four inches by twenty-four inches
(24"x24") in size. All signs shall be kept clear of obstructions and shall be
clearly visible and readable from at least thirty feet (30') away.
         c.   The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall sign
a statement attesting that the owner acknowledges and agrees to notify the
Animal Control Officer within twelve (12) hours if the dog is at large, has
attacked livestock or another domestic animal, has attacked a human being, has
died, has been sold, or has been given away. If the dog has been sold or given
away, the owner shall also provide the City Clerk with the name, physical
address, and telephone number of the new owner of the animal.
   G.   Confinement and Control:
      1.   All dangerous dogs shall be confined securely indoors or within a
securely fenced yard of at least six feet (6') in height, and with substantial
and locked gates so that the dog cannot escape, and unauthorized persons are
prevented from accidental entry. The determination hearing officer may require
additional measures to physically secure the dog.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any dangerous animal to
be outside of the dwelling of the owner or the secured yard, except for the
following limited reasons:
         a.   To obtain veterinary care for the dog;
         b.   To sell or give away the dog;
         c.   To comply with an order or directions from an authorized officer
regarding the dog;
         d.   To obtain a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog registration
microchip or other identification as required in this chapter;
         e.   To be inspected for liability insurance or surety bond purposes;
         f.   To confine the dog at a temporary boarding facility, provided the
operator of the boarding facility is made fully aware of the dangerous dog
designation and agrees to maintain the dog in a manner that prevents injury to
people or other animals by keeping the dog isolated in a secure enclosure; or
         g.   An owner who does not have access to a private outdoor space, may
petition the City Clerk or the Director of the Animal Shelter in writing, to
allow a special exemption for limited access to the public outdoors for the
dog’s exercise and defecation. The City Clerk or Director of the Animal Shelter
in their discretion, may grant that exemption in writing.
      3.   When off the property of the owner, and not confined in a secure,
locked enclosure, any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be kept upon
a secure leash not exceeding three (3) feet in length and of sufficient
strength to keep the dog under the direct control and supervision of the its
owner. At the determination hearing additional requirements for the control and
containment of the dog may be ordered.
      4.   Any dog found to be dangerous or potentially dangerous may be
ordered to be spayed or neutered at the owner’s expense.
   H.   Enforcement:
      1.   An authorized officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry
is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section,
and any such officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with those provisions set
forth in this chapter.
      2.   In the event that the dog’s owner refuses to surrender the animal to
an authorized officer, the officer may request a law enforcement officer obtain
a search warrant from a Bingham County Magistrate of the Seventh Judicial
District of Idaho, as necessary, to seize the dog upon execution of the
warrant.
   I.   Exempt Entities:
      1.   Subsections C, E, F, G, and H of this section shall not apply to
kennels licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to K-9 owned by any
Police Department or any law enforcement officer which are used in the
performance of law enforcement police work.
   J.   Violations; Penalty:
      1.   Any dangerous dog in violation of any of the following provisions
shall be confiscated by a Humane Officer and destroyed in an expeditious and
humane manner after the expiration of a five (5) business day waiting period:
         a.   A dangerous dog that does not have a valid registration and
license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
         b.   A dangerous dog whose owner does not secure the liability
insurance coverage or surety bond required in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter;
         c.   A dangerous dog that is not maintained on property within a
secure enclosure;
         d.   A dangerous dog that is outside of either the owner’s dwelling or
an enclosure, not covered by the exceptions as provided in this section;
         e.   A dangerous dog that is not microchipped, or otherwise identified
as dangerous as provided in this section;
         f.   A dangerous dog, that when unprovoked, kills, wounds, worries, or
assists in killing or wounding of any livestock or domestic animal belonging to
or in the possession of any person; or
         g.   A dangerous dog, that when unprovoked, attacks, assaults, wounds,
bites, or otherwise injures or kills a human being.
      2.   Enhanced penalties for subsequent violations of the provisions of
(f) and (g) of this subsection shall be imposed in an amount established by the
City Council and listed on the City’s Fee Resolution.
      3.   No fine or identification requirement shall be suspended by any
court of competent jurisdiction.
   K.   Expiration of Potentially Dangerous Dog Designation: In the event a dog
designated as potentially dangerous does not subsequently act in a manner
consistent with the definitions of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal,
and provided that the owner of the animal has complied with all the provisions
of this section for a period of at least two (2) consecutive years, the owner
may petition the Director of the Animal Shelter to lift the imposed
restrictions and requirements placed on the animal.
   L.   Action For Damages; Civil Penalty: If any dangerous dog, without
justified provocation, shall injure or kill any domesticated animal or
livestock belonging to another, or shall without justified provocation, bite or
otherwise physically injure any human while out of or within the enclosure for
such animal, or while on or off the owner’s property of the owner regardless
whether the dog was on a leash or had escaped without the fault of the owner,
such dog’s owner shall be liable to the aggrieved person for all damage
sustained, to be recovered in a civil action, with costs of suit. It is
rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping, or harboring
of a dangerous dog in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be
necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner of the
dangerous dog knew that such dog possessed the propensity to cause such damage
or that the dangerous dog had a vicious nature. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-12: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
   A.   Prohibited Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor,
keep, maintain, or possess within the City any of the following animals:
      1.   Mammals:
         a.   All members of the family Felidae (cat family), except
domesticated cats.
         b.   All members of the family Canidae (dog family), except
domesticated dogs.
         c.   All nonhuman primates.
         d.   All members of the order Insectivora, except hedgehogs.
         e.   All rodents, except domestic rats, mice, guinea pigs, hamsters,
gerbils and squirrels not otherwise restricted by Federal law.
         f.   All marine mammals, including, but not limited to, whales,
dolphins and seals.
         g.   All animals from the order Xenarthra, including giant anteaters,
sloths, tamanduas, armadillos and pangolins.
         h.   All members of the family Procyonidae.
         i.   All members of the family Mustelidae, except domestic ferrets
(Mustela putorious).
         j.   All civets, meerkats and members of the family Vivirridae.
         k.   All marsupials, except Virginia opossum, sugar gliders and
bettongs.
         l.   All members of the family Hyaenidae, including, but not limited
to, hyenas and aardwolves.
         m.   All members of the order Tubulidentata (aardvarks).
         n.   All members of the order Hyracoidae (hyraxes).
         o.   All hoofed animals belonging to the orders Perrisodactyla and
Artiodactyla, except domesticated farm or pack animals.
         p.   All members of the family Elephantidae (elephants).
         q.   All members of the family Chiroptera (bats).
         r.   All members of the family Ursidae (bears).
      2.   Birds:
         a.   Ostriches.
         b.   Cassowaries.
         c.   Penguins of any kind.
         d.   Cranes of any kind.
         e.   Flamingos.
         f.   Hornbills.
         g.   Herons and their relatives from the order Ciconiiformes.
         h.   All birds of prey from the order Falconiformes.
         i.   All owls from the order Strigiformes.
      3.   Reptiles:
         a.   Sea turtles of any kind.
         b.   Aldabra or Galapagos tortoises.
         c.   Komodo dragons.
         d.   All members of the order Crocodilia.
         e.   Wild caught Gila monsters and beaded lizards.
         f.   Elapids (family of venomous snakes) except North American
species, such as coral snakes, that are housed under State guidelines.
         g.   Viperids (family of venomous snakes) except North American
species, including, but not limited to, rattlesnakes, cotton mouths and
copperheads that are housed under State guidelines.
         h.   Tuataras.
         i.   Anacondas.
      4.   Insects: All insects listed as agricultural pests by the USDA and
Idaho Department of Agriculture.
   B.   Threatened Or Endangered Animals: All animals listed as threatened or
endangered on either a State or Federal level and all illegally imported
animals shall be prohibited in the same manner as those listed in subsection A
of this section.
   C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
keeping of prohibited animals by any bona fide, licensed zoo accredited by the
Association of Zoos and Aquariums, any bona fide licensed veterinary hospital
for treatment of illness or injury by licensed veterinarians, bona fide
educational or medical institutions accredited by the Idaho Department of
Education, bona fide rehabilitators permitted by the Idaho Fish and Game
Department, the keeping of raptors by individuals permitted by the Idaho Fish
and Game Department, and those animals permitted by the Idaho Department of
Agriculture.
   D.   The owner or custodian of any prohibited animal kept pursuant to an
exception, shall at all times:
      1.   Keep the animal in a cage, enclosure or other confinement that is
designed, constructed, and maintained to preclude the animal’s escape. The
cage, enclosure, or confinement shall be of sufficient size to allow the animal
reasonable freedom of movement.
      2.   Keep the animal in a manner that will not threaten or annoy any
person of normal sensitivity.
      3.   Employ adequate safeguards to prevent unauthorized access to the
animal and to prevent the escape of the animal.
      4.   Immediately notify the Animal Shelter if the animal escapes and make
every reasonable effort to recapture an animal that escapes.
      5.   Allow the authorized officer to inspect the animal and the property
to determine whether the owner or custodian is complying with this section.
      6.    Allow the Animal Shelter to inspect any permit an agency of the
Federal or State government has issued to the owner or custodian that regulates
the animal.
      7.   Every person keeping a prohibited animal under this section must
house the animal and care for it in a manner that is humane and in accordance
with the particular requirements of the species, to include compliance with all
State and Federal laws that apply to the welfare of animals.
      8.    A person whose property harbors wildlife or is enhanced with any
structure to provide shelter or habitat to native wildlife such as native
birds, bats, reptiles, amphibians, fish, or mammals which through their own
volition enter or reside on any such property without being confined
artificially by the property owner, is not considered to harbor or keep
prohibited animals.
   E.   Prohibited animals may be impounded by the Animal Shelter and the owner
liable for related fees and costs as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2231, 12-
-2022)
6-2-13: NUISANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to fail to exercise proper care and
control of his or her animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance.
Every person shall be guilty of allowing an animal to become a nuisance when
such person permits or allows an animal to violate the following provisions:
   A.   Excessive Noise Nuisances: An animal that barks, bays, cries, howls, or
emits any excessive animal noise audible beyond the boundaries of the property
on which the animal is situated for an extended period of time, day or night,
thereby unreasonably disturbing another person. For purposes of this section
“extended period of time” means either:
      1.   Any barking, baying, crying, howling, or other animal noise emitted
by one or more animals incessantly for thirty (30) minutes with individual
interruptions of less than twenty (20) seconds at a time during the thirty (30)
minute period; or
      2.   Any barking, baying, crying, howling or other animal noise emitted
by one or more animals intermittently for sixty (60) minutes or more within a
twenty-four (24) hour period.
   B.   Exception: This subsection shall not apply to animals that are being
teased or provoked, are maintained on land zoned for agricultural purposes, are
kept at a properly permitted animal shelter established for the care and
placement of unwanted or stray animals, or a properly zoned commercial boarding
kennel.
   C.   Proof of excessive noise nuisances: The owner or custodian of an animal
may be charged with excessive animal noise nuisance when:
      1.   A Humane Officer receives signed complaints alleging an animal noise
nuisance, from at least two (2) unrelated adult witnesses residing in different
residences;
      2.   A Humane Officer receives a signed complaint alleging an animal
noise nuisance from one adult witness who has a video or audio recording of the
alleged violation;
      3.   A Humane Officer receives a signed complaint alleging an animal
noise nuisance from one adult witness and a Humane Officer has witnessed the
alleged presence of the nuisance. The Humane Officer shall not be required to
personally witness an alleged violation for a thirty (30) or sixty (60) minute
period; or
      4.   A Humane Officer personally witnesses the violation and signs a
complaint alleging an animal noise nuisance.
   D.   General Animal Nuisances: A general animal nuisance occurs when:
      1.   An animal threatens passersby;
      2.   An animal chases vehicles, individuals on bicycles, scooters or
similar devices, or pedestrians;
      3.   An animal attacks other animals;
      4.   An animal trespasses upon public or private property in such a
manner as to damage the property;
      5.   An excessive amount of animal feces is permitted to accumulate in
such a manner as to affect the health of a person or which is of such quantity
as to generate odors off the premises of the animal owner; or
      6.   An owner fails to confine a female dog during estrus or proestrus in
a building or secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog cannot come
into contact with male dog, except for planned breeding. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-14: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.    Acts Specified: It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a cruel
manner to any animal within the City. Nothing in this section shall preclude
prosecuting any person for Torturing Companion Animals as set forth in Idaho
Code Title 25, Chapter 35. The phrase “cruel manner” shall include, but is not
limited to, the following specific acts and omissions:
      1.   Any owner of an animal who fails to provide such animal with care
sufficient to preserve the health, safety, and well-being of animal, except for
circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the owner or custodian of the
animal, which includes:
         a.   Good and wholesome food, in a sufficient quantity to allow for
normal growth or maintenance of body weight; or
         b.   Adequate access to potable water in sufficient quantity to
satisfy the animal’s needs; or
         c.   Proper shelter and protection from the weather; or
         d.   Proper veterinary care which a reasonably prudent person would
deem necessary to relieve or to prevent suffering or disease; or
         e.   A clean and wholesome environment in which to live, free from
excessive waste or other contaminants that could affect the animal’s health; or
         f.   Protection from the abuse of other persons; or
         g.   Prevention of severe matting of fur, severe overgrowth of nails
or hooves, that a reasonably prudent person would know would cause pain or
injury.
      2.   Any person who, through act or omission, does any of following
specific acts with an animal:
         a.   Abuses or otherwise mistreats; or
         b.   Beats, maims, mutilates, knowingly or intentionally injures,
wounds, or tortures; or
         c.   Misuses; or
         d.   Overloads, overworks, or overrides; or
         e.   Dumps or abandons; or
         f.   Exposes to unreasonable danger to health or life; or
         g.   Willfully administers any poisonous substance to an animal that
is owned by another, or maliciously places any poisonous substance where it
would be found by an animal, or where it would attract an animal, with the
intent that the animal ingest or absorb such poisonous substance;
         h.   Transport in, on, or upon any vehicle in a manner that is
reckless or dangerous to the animal or public; or
         i.   Displays, as defined in this chapter, prohibited animals; or
         j.   Engages in animal hoarding as defined in this chapter; or
         k.   Exposes the animal for a prolonged period of time in extreme heat
or cold conditions that results in hypothermia, hyperthermia, frostbite, other
injurious condition, or death as diagnosed by a veterinarian.
   B.   Enforcement Restrictions: In cases were production animals are subject
to a violation of this chapter’s cruelty to animal provisions or Idaho Code
sections 25-3504, 25-3505, or 25-3511, the authorized officer, animal care and
control agency, or animal shelter shall not:
      1.   Enforce the cruelty to animal provisions of this chapter or Idaho
Code sections 25-3504, 25-3505, or 25-3511, without first obtaining an
inspection and written determination from an Idaho state Department of
Agriculture investigator in the animal industries division, that a violation of
one or more animal cruelty provisions has occurred or is occurring; or
      2.   Take a production animal from a production animal facility, pasture,
or rangeland for a violation of the animal cruelty provision of this chapter or
Idaho Code sections 25-3504, 25-3505, or 25-3511, without first obtaining an
inspection and written determination from an Idaho state Department of
Agriculture investigator in the animal industries division, that such seizure
is in the best interest of the animal.
   C.   Not to Construe to Interfere with Normal or Legal Practices: No part of
the animal cruelty provisions of this chapter shall be construed as interfering
with or allowing interference with:
      1.   Normal or accepted veterinary practices; or
      2.   The humane slaughter of any animal normally and commonly raised as
food, for production of fiber or equines; or
      3.   Bona fide experiments or research carried out by professionally
recognized private or public research facilities or institutions; or
      4.   The humane destruction of an animal which is diseased or disabled
beyond recovery for any useful purpose, or the humane destruction of animals
for population control; or
      5.   Normal or accepted practices of animal identification and animal
husbandry as established by, but not limited to, guidelines developed and
approved by the appropriate national or state commodity organizations; or
      6.   The killing of any animal, by any person at any time, which may be
found outside of the owned or rented property of the owner or custodian of such
animal and which is found injuring or posing a threat to any person, farm
animal, or property; or
      7.   The killing of an animal that is vicious by an authorized officer or
veterinarian; or
      8.   The killing or destruction of predatory animals, vermin or other
animals or birds which are injuring or posing a threat to farm or privately-
owned animals or property, when such killing or destruction is conducted in
accordance with laws and rules covering such animals; or
      9.   Any other exhibitions, competitions, activities, practices or
procedures normally or commonly considered acceptable.
The practices, procedures and activities described in this section shall not be
construed to be cruel nor shall they be defined as cruelty to animals, nor
shall any person engaged in these practices, procedures or activities be
charged with cruelty to animals.
   D.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-3 of this Code, with the fine amount no less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. It shall be the duty of any police officer,
Humane Officer or other designated City employee to take possession of any
animal for which he has probable cause to believe falls under this section and
deliver such animal to the animal shelter. All costs incurred for the
maintenance of such animal will be paid by the person charged with the offense.
   E.   Forfeiture of Abused Animals: Abused animals may be impounded, subject
to forfeiture, and the owner liable for related fees and costs as set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-15: USE OF ANIMAL TRAPS:
The Humane Officers are hereby authorized to place humane animal traps on
public property or private property upon request and permission of the owner.
Such traps shall only be checked by the Humane Officer at such times as they
determine. No person shall disturb or injure such trap or animal confined
therein. A violation of this section shall be misdemeanor and subject to the
fines set forth in City Code. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-16: COMMANDING ANIMAL TO ATTACK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to command, encourage or aid, by word or
conduct, any animal to bite, chase, attack, or attempt to bite, chase, or
attack, another person or animal, except when attempting to prevent or defend a
person or animal from suffering great bodily harm or death. This section shall
not apply to:
   A.   Dogs used by law enforcement officer while engaged in law enforcement
duties;
   B.   Dogs used by its owner or custodian while engaged in legal hunting
practices, or the working, herding, or controlling of livestock; or
   C.   Dogs used by the City while engaged in the prevention of the
congregation of wild fowl upon City properties. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-17: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully hinder, delay, obstruct, or
interfere with any Authorized Officer in the discharge, or attempt to discharge
the officer’s duties as proscribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-18: DRIVING OR RIDING ANIMALS:
No person shall lead, drive, or ride any pig, sheep, goat, mule, cattle or
other similar animal over, across or upon any sidewalk, parkway or public
parking area, or over or across any public park, except for roadways, trails,
or other areas designated for such use. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-19: ANIMAL ENDANGERMENT; CONFINEMENT IN UNATTENDED VEHICLE; IMMUNITY FROM
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR ANIMAL RESCUE:
   A.   No person shall leave or confine a domestic animal unattended in any
motor vehicle or trailer under conditions that a reasonable person would
believe endangers the health, safety, or well-being of the animal due to heat,
cold, or lack of adequate ventilation.
   B.   Prima Facie Evidence: A rescued animal examined by a licensed
veterinarian and diagnosed with heat stroke, heat exhaustion, hypothermia, or
frostbite shall be deemed prima facia evidence of animal endangerment under
this section.
   C.   Immunity from penalties or damages to motor vehicle or trailer: A
person who enters a motor vehicle or trailer, by force or otherwise, for the
purpose of rescuing a domestic animal is immune from criminal penalties and
civil liability for damages to the motor vehicle or trailer if the person:
      1.   Has a good-faith and reasonable belief, based upon the known
circumstances, that entry into the motor vehicle or trailer is necessary
because a domestic animal is in imminent danger of suffering great bodily harm
or death;
      2.   Determines that the motor vehicle or trailer is locked and there is
no other reasonable method for the domestic animal to be removed from the motor
vehicle or trailer;
      3.   Contacts law enforcement or the “911" emergency service prior to
forcibly entering the motor vehicle or trailer;
      4.   Uses no more force to enter the motor vehicle or trailer than
necessary to remove the domestic animal;
      5.   Remains with the domestic animal in a safe location within
reasonable proximity to the motor vehicle or trailer until an authorized
officer or other emergency responder arrives; and
      6.   Surrenders the animal immediately to the responding an authorized
officer or other emergency responder on the scene.
   D.   Emergency Response: This section does not prevent an authorized officer
or other emergency responder from removing an animal from a motor vehicle or
trailer if the animal’s health, safety, or welfare appears to be in imminent
danger of suffering great bodily harm or death from heat, cold, or lack of
adequate ventilation.
      1.   An authorized officer or other emergency responder who takes
possession of a rescued domestic animal, or who removes a domestic animal from
a motor vehicle or trailer, shall take such animal to the Animal Shelter or a
veterinary hospital for medical treatment and safe-keeping, if the officer
deems it necessary. The owner or custodian of the rescued domestic animal is
responsible for all expenses for the medical treatment, impoundment, and care
of such animal.
      2.   An authorized officer or other emergency responder is authorized to
take all steps that are reasonably necessary for the removal of an endangered
domestic animal from a motor vehicle or trailer, including, but not limited to,
forcibly entering the motor vehicle or trailer, after making a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or custodian.
      3.   An authorized officer or other emergency responder who rescues a
domestic animal from a motor vehicle or trailer, or who receives a rescued
domestic animal on scene from another person, shall leave written notice in a
secure and conspicuous location on or within the motor vehicle, bearing the
officer’s name, office name and address, and the name and address of the
location where the rescued animal can be claimed. The rescued animal may be
claimed by the owner or custodian only after payment of all expenses for the
medical treatment, impoundment, and care of such animal.
   E.   Penalties: Unless the animal suffers great bodily harm or death, a
first conviction for violation of this section is punishable by a civil
infraction as set forth in
1-4-2 of this code. If the animal suffers great bodily harm or death, a
violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as set forth in
1-4-1 of this code. Any subsequent convictions for violation of this section,
regardless of injury to the animal, shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as set
forth in in
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-20: IMPOUNDMENT OF VICIOUS DOGS PENDING COURT PROCEEDINGS; DESTRUCTION OF
UNCLAIMED ANIMALS:
   A.   If the Police Chief, animal control officer, or their designee,
determines that a vicious animal needs to be impounded for the protection of
the public health and safety pending the outcome of any court proceeding, then
the owner or custodian of the animal shall prepay the impound fee and the
anticipated daily cost of care and feeding of the animal. If there is no room
at the animal shelter to care for a vicious animal pending outcome of court
proceedings, the City may impound the animal at a private boarding facility
with the cost of such boarding facility being paid by the owner/custodian of
the animal.
   B.   In the event that the owner or custodian fails or refuses to pay the
fees and costs charged or incurred by the City to keep the animal pending
outcome of court proceedings, the animal control officer shall give written
notice to the owner or custodian of the animal of the City’s intent to destroy
the animal within five (5) days. In such event, the animal shall not be
destroyed if its owner, or other person seeking to claim it, filed with the
City Clerk, during the five (5) day period, a written request that such
destruction be postponed pending review by the City Council. Such written
request shall be accompanied by payment in the amount which would be required
by the time of the meeting in order to claim the animal as provided herein.
   C.   When such request and payment have been made, the animal shall not be
destroyed pending a hearing by the City Council. When the hearing is conducted,
the person making the request must appear and show good cause why he should be
allowed to claim the animal and how he will care for it in order to avoid
further violations of the provisions of this chapter pending outcome of the
court proceeding. Following the hearing, the City Council shall determine
whether the animal should be kept at the animal shelter pending outcome of the
court proceeding and how much fees and costs shall be paid by the owner/
custodian, or whether the animal shall be destroyed for failure of the owner/
custodian to pay the fees and costs.
   D.   If the City Council approves the destruction, the animal shall be
destroyed in a humane fashion and the payment made by the party requesting the
hearing shall be retained by the City to defray its costs of impounding the
animal pending the hearing. If the City Council decides that the animal should
not be destroyed, the animal shall be released from impoundment upon such terms
as the City Council may reasonably impose, and the payment made by the person
requesting the hearing shall be retained as the fee for claiming the animal.
   E.   In lieu of the City impounding a vicious animal pending outcome of the
case, the owner/custodian of the animal may have the animal boarded at a secure
private boarding facility pending outcome of the court proceeding. In such
event, the owner/custodian may not remove the animal from the boarding facility
without the animal control officer’s consent.
   F.   Any animal impounded pursuant to the Chapter, and not reclaimed from
the Animal Shelter by its’ owner within five (5) working days shall become the
property of the city and shall be placed for adoption or euthanized in a humane
manner. The chief of police or animal control officer may refuse to allow for
adoption to any person who has pled guilty or been convicted of a violation of
this chapter. Appeal or denial may be made in writing within three (3) calendar
days to the city council. Specific animals shall not be held at the animal
shelter pending the city council’s decision, but may be adopted by other
persons or euthanized as provided above. The city council shall hear the appeal
at the next regularly scheduled meeting and may either affirm or reverse the
denial. If the denial is reversed, the person may adopt that is available after
the city council’s decision.
   G.   If the name of the owner is readily available through license records,
the animal shelter shall attempt to notify the owner by telephone or mail or by
hand delivery of a notice or by notice attached to the front door of the
residence of the animal’s impoundment, providing the deadline for reclaiming
the animal, the condition under which the animal may be redeemed, including a
detailing of the costs of confinement, and the consequences of failure to
redeem by the deadline. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-21: LIABILITY OF PARENTS FOR MINORS OWNING ANIMALS:
In the event that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of
such minor shall be liable for all injuries, property damage, fines and
impoundment fees caused or incurred by said animal. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-22: SALE OF COMMERCIALLY BRED DOGS AND CATS IN RETAIL STORES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale any
live dog or cat in a retail business within the City, except for dogs and cats
obtained from an animal care and control agency, animal care facility, animal
shelter, or non-profit rescue that does not breed dogs or cats, or obtain dogs
or cats from a person who breeds or resells such animals for payment or
compensations.
   B.   Breeder Exemption: This section shall not prohibit the private breeding
of dogs and cats for direct sales between the breeder and the consumer. (Ord.
2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-23: TRANSFER OF ANIMALS UPON PUBLIC PROPERTIES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer to sell or otherwise
transfer ownership of any animal to another while upon public property,
including but not limited to, parks, streets, alleys, sidewalks, or other
public rights-of-way within the City.
   B.   Exceptions: The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the
following circumstances:
      1.   The transfer of ownership of a production animal as defined in Idaho
Code Title 25, Chapter 35;
      2.   The transfer of ownership through sales conducted by a public body
or public officer acting in his or her official capacity;
      3.   The transfer of ownership takes place at an animal show or
exhibition conducted by and for persons who are regularly engaged in the
practice of breeding animals for show or exhibition;
      4.   The transfer of ownership is conducted by an animal care and control
agency, animal care facility, an animal shelter, or a non-profit rescue. (Ord.
2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-24: MANDATORY SPAY OR NEUTER:
   A.   No personal shall own, harbor or keep within the City limits a dog or
cat over the age of six months, which has not be spayed or neutered unless the
animal is exempt as defined below.
   B.   Any person providing care or sustenance for a dog or cat shall be
deemed the owner for purposes of this subsection and shall comply with the
mandatory spay or neuter requirements herein.
   C.   Animals exempt from this subsection shall include animals being used by
law enforcement agencies, animals approved for kennel licensing, animals
certified by a licensed veterinarian as having a health reason for not being
spayed or neutered, and any animal whose owner is a non-resident traveling
through the city and/or is visiting the city for less than ten (10) days and
has notified animal control that the animal is at large.
   D.   In any instance when an animal is impounded to the Animal Shelter which
is not spayed or neutered, the owner shall be responsible for a fee of $250.00
for retrieval of the animal. If the retrieved animal is spayed or neutered
within ten (10) days of retrieval, the owner will be entitled to a refund of
$200.00 of the retrieval fee. Such fees may be amended from time to time by
resolution of City Council. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-25: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The City shall not in any manner be liable by reason of any act done by the
Animal Shelter, or any of its officers or employees, whether in the performance
of the duties prescribed by this chapter, or otherwise, except as otherwise
stated in the contract between the City and the animal control contractor.
(Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
6-2-26: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person found in violation of provisions of this chapter that are
deemed to be infractions, is subject to the penalty as provided in section
1-4-4 of this Code. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or
complaint for an infraction. Such trials shall be held before the court without
a jury.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found in violation of
the provisions of this chapter that are deemed to be misdemeanors, is subject
to the penalties as provided in section
1-4-3 of this Code. (Ord. 2231, 12- -2022)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Curfew
6-3-2: Runaways
6-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to be or to remain, and it shall be unlawful for
any parent, guardian, or other person having the care and custody of any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years, to permit such person to be or to remain,
in or upon any street, alley, public ground, public place or any place open to
the public or exposed to public use within the corporate limits of the city
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M.
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply to any person who is accompanied by his or her parents, guardian, or
other adult person having the care and custody of him or her, nor to any person
who is in the performance of any errand or duty directed by his or her parents,
guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of him or her, nor
to any person who is actually at the time engaged in legitimate employment for
profit. (2003 Code § 6-03-01)
   C.   Penalty For Parent Or Guardian: Any parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the care and custody of any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years who shall violate the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 6-03-01; amd. 2012 Code)
6-3-2: RUNAWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years,
living or found in the city, to be or to remain a person who has run away from
or is beyond the control of his or her parents, guardians, or other legal
custodian. Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this section
shall have committed a status offense, and shall be punished as provided in
Idaho Code title 20, chapter 5. (2003 Code § 6-03-07)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Dangerous, Agricultural And Wildlife Fireworks
6-4-3: Safe And Sane Fireworks
6-4-4: Public Displays Or Discharge Of Dangerous, Agricultural Or Wildlife
Fireworks
6-4-5: Investigation Of Applicant
6-4-6: Approval, Denial
6-4-7: Discharge Of Fireworks
6-4-8: Insurance; Proof Required
6-4-9: Compliance Required
6-4-10: Exemptions
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AGRICULTURAL AND WILDLIFE FIREWORKS: Includes fireworks designated or used to
prevent damage to crops or unwanted occupancy of areas by animals or birds
through the employment of sound or light, or both, whenever such fireworks are
so classified.
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following:
   A.   Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube
salutes, cherry bombs, mines, ground bombardment, grasshoppers, ground blooms
and other explosive articles of similar nature;
   B.   Blank cartridges;
   C.   Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any
combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
Exception: Ground spinners, chasers, including all devices which dart or travel
about the surface of the ground during discharge shall not exceed twelve inches
(12") or vertical movement at any time.
   D.   Roman candles, including all devices that discharge ball of fire into
the air;
   E.   Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel about
the surface of the ground during discharge;
   F.   Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
   G.   Sparkles more than ten inches (10") in total length or one-fourth inch
(1/4") in diameter.
   H.   All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes,
flash shells, sky battles, parachute shells, mines, dago bombs and similar
devices;
Exception: Parachute shells including all ground to air projectiles that deploy
a parachute and do not carry a flame, ember, spark or any pyrotechnic
discharge. Vertical movement of the projectile shall be restricted to twenty
feet (20').
   I.   All torpedoes which explode by means of friction, or which contain
arsenic, and all other similar fireworks devices including cracker balls;
   J.   Fire balloons or balloons of any type which have burning material of
any kind attached thereto.
FIRE NUISANCE: Any thing or any act which increases, or may cause an increase
of, the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily
recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing,
suppressing or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder, or
may become the cause of any obstruction, delay or a hindrance to, the
prevention or extinguishment of fire.
FIREWORKS: A. Shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy
canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, fire balloons, balloons of a
type which have burning material of any kind attached thereto or which require
fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets,
roman candles, fountains, wheels, dago bombs, sparklers, and other fireworks of
like construction, and any fireworks containing any combustible or explosive
substance for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonations.
   B.   Exempted from this definition are all toy pistols, toy cannons, toy
canes, toy guns and similar devices such as party poppers or party favors in
which paper caps containing not more than twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain
of explosive compound per cap are used and such caps, whether single, roll or
tape type.
FIREWORKS PACKAGE: Includes any case, container or receptacle used for holding
fireworks, which shall be closed or sealed by tape, cordage, or by any other
secure means.
FIREWORKS PERMIT: Shall relate to a permit to be issued by the city for the
purpose of exporting, importing, possessing for the purpose of sale, offering
for sale or selling or buying any of the following categories of fireworks: a)
safe and sane fireworks; b) dangerous fireworks; c) agricultural fireworks; or
d) wildlife fireworks.
PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS: An entertainment feature where the public is
admitted to or permitted to view the display or discharge of "dangerous
fireworks".
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Includes any of the following:
   A.   Cone fountains with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding fifty grams
(50 g) each;
   B.   Cylindrical fountains, whether base, spike or handle, with pyrotechnic
composition not exceeding seventy five grams (75 g) each and inside tube
diameter not exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4");
   C.   Sparklers and "dipped sticks", not more than ten inches (10") in length
or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter, made on steel or iron wire, and suzuki
and morning glories with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding four grams (4 g)
each;
   D.   Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury and pyrotechnic
composition not exceeding two grams (2 g) each;
   E.   Wheels with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding sixty (60) grains for
each driver unit or two hundred forty (240) grains for each complete wheel. The
inside tube diameter of the driver unit shall not exceed one-half inch (1/2");
   F.   Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the
ground during discharge with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding six grams (6
g) and containing no picric or gallic acid.
TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STAND: A structure constructed primarily for the purpose of
selling at retail safe and sane fireworks. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-2: DANGEROUS, AGRICULTURAL AND WILDLIFE FIREWORKS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall have in his possession or under his
control, or sell, buy, dispense, keep or store or permit the keeping, storing
or dispensing of any dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks, unless he
shall have a valid fireworks permit issued by the city, giving him such right.
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee: Any person desiring to sell or buy
dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks, shall make application for such
a permit to the city clerk. Each applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in
the amount specified in section
3-4-1 of this code. In the event no such application is granted by the city,
the fee shall be refunded. Each applicant for such a permit shall provide the
following information:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for which
it was organized;
      3.   Names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
      4.   Location where the applicant will sell or use such fireworks and the
location of any fireworks stored at another site;
      5.   Name under which applicant does business;
      6.   Location of the applicant's principal and permanent place or places
of business;
      7.   Name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the
applicant proposes to purchase fireworks for resale;
      8.   Applicant's state sales tax permit number;
      9.   Statement to the effect that the applicant is acquainted with the
state fireworks law and the provisions of this code controlling the sale and
purchase of dangerous, agricultural and wildlife fireworks;
      10.   Statement under oath that fireworks sold under such permit, if
granted, will be sold only to persons holding valid permits to purchase
fireworks;
      11.   Such other information as the city clerk may require in order that
a proper investigation may be made relative to the issuance of such a permit.
   C.   Permit To Sell Required: No retailer of fireworks in the city shall
import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell any
dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks to any person, or give any such
fireworks to any person, unless the person to whom such transfer of possession
is made has a permit from the city, which permit authorizes the transferee to
purchase and use such fireworks in a public display as authorized by the terms
of said permit, or purchase and use such fireworks for agricultural or wildlife
purposes as described in said permit, and such permit shall specify the type
and quantity of fireworks which may be purchased under said permit, and no
retailer, wholesaler or distributor shall sell, offer to sell, or transfer
possession to such permittee of more fireworks than such permit holder is
allowed to purchase according to the terms of such permit. A violation of the
terms of this provision shall constitute a violation of the chapter and in
addition to the penalty prescribed hereunder, the permit of the retailer and
purchaser shall both be canceled, and no permit for the sale of fireworks for
any such purpose, or permit to purchase any fireworks for any such purpose,
shall thereafter be granted to either the retailer or the purchaser until the
lapse of at least five (5) years from the date of such cancellation.
   D.   Prohibited Acts And Activities:
      1.   No person without having a valid dangerous, agricultural or wildlife
fireworks permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall do any of the following:
         a.   Import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale,
buy or sell any dangerous, agricultural or wildlife fireworks for any use or
purpose whatsoever;
         b.   Make a public display of fireworks at any place;
         c.   Transport fireworks, except as provided for in the state
fireworks law, this chapter and the laws of the United States Of America.
      2.   No retailer, wholesaler or distributor of dangerous, agricultural or
wildlife fireworks, whether or not he has a permit from the city to sell the
same, offer the same for sale, or otherwise dispose of the same, shall publicly
display the same for sale, but said fireworks shall be kept in a separate
enclosure not available to the general public, and such fireworks shall be
exhibited only to a permit holder, and no sale or offer to sell shall be made
to any permit holder in excess of the amount of fireworks the permittee is
entitled to purchase under his permit.
   E.   Records Maintained: Any person securing a permit to sell dangerous,
agricultural or wildlife fireworks, shall maintain for inspection by the fire
chief all invoices relating to the purchase of the same made by such retailer
permittee and, in addition, shall keep a book of entry to be signed by the
purchaser of such fireworks, which book shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Name of the purchaser;
      2.   City fireworks permit number of the purchaser;
      3.   Date of purchase;
      4.   Amount of fireworks purchased, describing in full detail the
quantity sold to the buyer permittee, and type of fireworks purchased;
      5.   Line for signature by the purchaser of such fireworks acknowledging
the purchase by him of such fireworks under such permit number, on such date,
and in such amount. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-3: SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person, without having a valid safe and sane
fireworks permit issued pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in this
chapter, shall import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale,
or sell any safe and sane fireworks for any use or purpose.
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee: Any person desiring to sell safe and sane
fireworks shall make application to the city clerk for a safe and sane
fireworks permit on or before June 1, of the calendar year for which the permit
is sought to be used. Each applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the
amount specified in section
3-4-1 of this code. In the event no safe and sane fireworks permit is issued by
the city, the city clerk shall refund the application fee. Each applicant for a
permit shall file his application with the city clerk, such application to show
the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for
which it was organized;
      3.   The names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
      4.   The location where the applicant will sell fireworks;
      5.   When and where the applicant was organized and established, or if a
natural person, the applicant's age;
      6.   The location of the applicant's principal and permanent place or
places of business;
      7.   Name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the
retailer proposes to purchase fireworks for resale;
      8.   The applicant's state sales tax permit number;
      9.   The manner, method and times, when and how the applicant proposes to
sell safe and sane fireworks;
      10.   Such other information as the city clerk may require in order that
a proper investigation may be made.
   C.   Sales; Restrictions:
      1.   Sale Of Safe And Sane Fireworks: A safe and sane fireworks permit,
issued pursuant to this chapter, authorizes only the sale at retail of safe and
sane fireworks by the applicant at the location of the premises designated in
the permit.
      2.   Limitations On Sale Of Safe And Sane Fireworks: A permit issued
pursuant to this chapter shall authorize sale of fireworks only from the hour
of midnight June 23 and ending at midnight July 5. A separate permit must be
obtained for each location of sale. No permit is transferable, assignable or
renewable.
   D.   Temporary Fireworks Stands: All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks
shall only be permitted to be made from a temporary fireworks stand and shall
be subject to the following provisions:
      1.   No temporary fireworks stand shall be located within twenty five
feet (25') of any other building, nor within one hundred feet (100') of the
premises occupied by any gasoline station, or any place where petroleum
products are stored;
      2.   All lighting circuits and other electrical equipment shall meet the
requirements of the electrical provisions of this code;
      3.   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet;
      4.   Stands shall have an exit door at least thirty inches (30") wide at
either end of the structure and one additional door for each twenty five feet
(25') of rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25'). All doors shall open
outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all
supplies and materials at all times;
      5.   Each stand shall be equipped with at least two (2) fire
extinguishers in usable condition with current inspection tags attached. One of
the extinguishers shall be of a "dry chem" type, of at least ten (10) pound
size, with a minimum fire extinguishing rating of 2A.10BC. One of the
extinguishers shall be a "pressurized water" two and one-half (21/2) gallon
size. Fire extinguishers shall be mounted near the exit doors;
      6.   There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty one (21) years of age
or older, on duty at all times. No person under eighteen (18) years of age
shall be allowed inside the stand at any time, nor shall any person under
eighteen (18) years of age work at or about the premises where safe and sane
fireworks are sold or offered for sale;
      7.   No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside
of any stand when it is not open for business;
      8.   "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed, both inside and
outside the stand. No smoking shall be permitted within the stand, or within
twenty five feet (25') of the stand;
      9.   No stand shall be erected before June 10 of any year. The premises
on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris,
not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of July 6 next following
issuance of the permit;
      10.   No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any
fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist;
      11.   If any fireworks are stored, they shall only be stored at such
places as are approved for storage of fireworks by the fire chief. (2003 Code §
3-03-02; amd. Ord. 2271, 7-1-2025)
6-4-4: PUBLIC DISPLAYS OR DISCHARGE OF DANGEROUS, AGRICULTURAL OR WILDLIFE
FIREWORKS:
   A.   Application For Permit; Fee: Any adult person or other group desiring
to make a public display of fireworks, or use or discharge dangerous,
agricultural or wildlife fireworks, shall first make written application to the
city clerk for the issuance of such a permit allowing such person to purchase
such fireworks, and to use and discharge the same, such application to be
accompanied by a filing fee as specified in section
3-4-1 of this code. In the event no such permit is issued, the filing fee shall
be returned to the applicant. Such application shall show the following
information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   If an organization, the purpose for which applicant is primarily
existing and for which it was organized;
      3.   The names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
      4.   The location where applicant will display said fireworks or use the
same, together with the quantity and description of fireworks applicant desires
to purchase, use and discharge, and the location, description and quantities of
any fireworks stored off site;
      5.   When and where the applicant was organized and established, or if a
natural person, the applicant's age which must be at least twenty one (21)
years;
      6.   The location of the applicant's principal and permanent place or
places of business;
      7.   The name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the
applicant intends to purchase such fireworks;
      8.   The manner, method and times when the applicant proposes to use such
fireworks;
      9.   Such other information as the chief of the fire department may
require in order to make his investigation.
   B.   Term Of Permit: Such permit, if so issued, shall be valid for only the
period of time for which issued. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
The city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made by the fire chief of
each application for a fireworks permit, and the fire chief shall submit a
report of his findings and recommendations for or against the issuance of a
fireworks permit, together with his reasons therefor, to the city council. The
fire chief is to designate the category of permit, if any, he recommends be
issued. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-6: APPROVAL, DENIAL:
The city council shall have the power, in its discretion, to grant or deny the
application for a fireworks permit, and if such a permit is issued, the city
council shall designate the category of fireworks covered by such permit, said
permit to be issued subject to such other reasonable regulations, if any, as
the city council shall prescribe. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-7: DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS:
No person shall discharge any fireworks within fifty feet (50') of any
fireworks stand, or one hundred feet (100') of the premises occupied by any
gasoline station, or any place where petroleum products are stored. The owner
or operator of such stand shall post a sign to this effect in a prominent place
at the front of such stand. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-8: INSURANCE; PROOF REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks permit, and a dangerous,
agricultural or wildlife fireworks permit, shall have filed with the city clerk
prior to the issuance of any permit, a policy of public liability insurance
with coverage of at least fifty thousand dollars/one hundred thousand dollars
($50,000.00/$100,000.00), and a policy of property damage insurance with at
least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or a certificate showing said amount
of insurance. Each policy shall contain a rider therein listing and carrying
the city as an additional insured under said policy. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-9: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply with
all the provisions of the state fireworks laws and this chapter. The violation
of the state fireworks laws or any of the provisions of this chapter by the
permittee, or by any of its agents, employees or officers, shall constitute a
cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for a permit for a
period of five (5) years from the date of conviction for such violation. (2003
Code § 3-03-02)
6-4-10: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not prohibit:
   A.   Any manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer from selling, or any person
from buying or using, blank cartridges for use by persons for bona fide
ceremonial purposes, athletic or sports events, or military ceremonials or
demonstrations, and theatrical or motion picture productions;
   B.   The use of torpedoes, flares or fuses by motor vehicles, railroads or
other transportation agencies for signal purposes of illumination, or for use
in forest protection activities; or
   C.   The assembling, compounding, use and display of fireworks of whatever
nature by any person engaged in the production of motion pictures, theatricals
or operas, when such use and display is a necessary part of the production and
such person possesses a valid permit to purchase, possess, transport or use
dangerous fireworks. (2003 Code § 3-03-02)
CHAPTER 5
EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Applicability
6-5-2: Manufacture Or Storage Prohibited
6-5-3: Permit Required For Transportation
6-5-4: Transportation Regulations
6-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all explosives, except small arms ammunition and
pyrotechnic devices. (2003 Code § 3-03-03)
6-5-2: MANUFACTURE OR STORAGE PROHIBITED:
The manufacture or storage of explosives within the city limits is prohibited.
(2003 Code § 3-03-03)
6-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRANSPORTATION:
A permit shall be obtained from the city clerk to transport any explosive in or
through the city. (2003 Code § 3-03-03)
6-5-4: TRANSPORTATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Passengers For Hire Prohibited: Explosives shall not be transported or
carried on or in any conveyance carrying passengers for hire.
   B.   Signage: Every vehicle, while carrying explosives, shall display upon
an erect pole at the front end of such vehicle and at such height that shall be
visible from all directions, a red flag with the word "Danger" printed, stamped
or sewed thereon, in white letters at least six inches (6") in height, or, in
lieu of such flag, the word "Explosives" must be painted on or attached to the
rear end and each side of such vehicle in letters at least four inches (4") in
height.
   C.   Careless Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a
vehicle containing explosives to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle; to drive,
load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated; to drive the vehicle in a
careless or reckless manner; or to load or unload such vehicle in a careless or
reckless manner.
   D.   Metal Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
carry, or cause to be placed or carried, any metal tool or other similar piece
of metal, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing explosives.
   E.   Explosive Materials Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place or carry or cause to be placed or carried, in the bed or body of a
vehicle containing explosives, any exploders, detonators, blasting caps or
other similar explosive material or carry in or upon any such vehicle any
matches. (2003 Code § 3-03-03)
CHAPTER 6
GRAFFITI
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Removal Required
6-6-3: Abatement Procedure
6-6-4: Payment Of Cost Of Abatement
6-6-5: Penalty
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
GRAFFITI: The writing, defacing, marring, marking, inscribing, scratching,
painting, or affixing of markings on buildings or structures, including, but
not limited to, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, walkways,
sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, signs and utility boxes, except as
otherwise permitted by this code.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying, managing or
having charge of any real property or structure.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A parent, guardian or person having legal responsibility for
a minor. (Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-2: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Graffiti Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, owning,
leasing, renting, occupying, managing or having charge or possession of any
property in the city, to maintain, or allow to be maintained, graffiti on such
property for an unreasonable period of time if such graffiti or any portion of
it is visible to the public, from a public street, sidewalk or from other
properties, public or private.
   B.   Unreasonable Defined: For purposes of this section, "unreasonable"
shall mean the longer of the following periods:
      1.   Seven (7) days from the placement of the graffiti on the premises;
or
      2.   Seven (7) days from notification to the property owner from the city
to remove the graffiti, or any extensions of the removal period granted in
writing by the city.
   C.   Enforcement Applicability: This chapter shall apply and be enforceable
with regard to any property within the city, regardless of zoning district.
(Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Time Limit For Compliance: Private property owners shall remove
graffiti from their property within seven (7) calendar days after notification
to the property owners by the city to remove such graffiti.
   B.   Removal By City: Whenever graffiti exists upon the property owned by
another public agency, or by a private party, the city may remove it at the
expense and with the consent of the property owner. If the removal is conducted
by the city pursuant to consent, a signed consent form shall first be obtained
from the property owner.
   C.   Notice To Property Owners: Notice to private property owners by the
city shall be addressed to the name and address as it appears on the records of
the county. Said notice shall be effected by depositing a copy of the notice in
the U.S. mail, certified with postage fully affixed, or personally delivering a
copy of the notice to the owner of the property. The service is complete at the
time of deposit in the mail or when personal service is effectuated. The
failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of
any legal proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti.
   D.   Failure Of Owner To Remove: In the event the owner fails to remove the
graffiti after notice has been sent, the city may, at its option:
      1.   Declare the structure or property to be a public nuisance;
      2.   Abate the graffiti as a nuisance and charge the property owner by
invoice and enforce same by lien against the property; or
      3.   Prosecute the failure to remove as a violation of this code. (Ord.
2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-4: PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   Amount: The cost of the abatement to be billed to the property owner
shall be the actual cost for city crews or contractors to remove said graffiti,
plus a reasonable administrative fee covering costs of notices, mailings,
copies and administration time, which shall be added to the invoice as part of
any abatement. If volunteers are used, the city may, at its option, bill the
cost of abatement plus administrative fees.
   B.   Restitution: The city or the owner may seek restitution for the entire
cost of removal, including administrative fees, to reimburse the city or owner
for any damage caused by the graffiti or the removal. Said restitution may be
pursued in a separate civil action, or as part of a criminal proceeding against
the perpetrator. Parental liability shall lie from damage or costs incurred by
a minor who defaces or otherwise damages property pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008)
6-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction or plea of guilty thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each such person shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 2080, 6-17-2008, eff. 6-17-2008; amd.
2012 Code)
CHAPTER 7
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS (SPICE)
SECTION:
6-7-1: Declaration Of Purpose
6-7-2: Definitions
6-7-3: Possession, Use Or Sale Of Synthetic Cannabinoids
6-7-4: Affirmative Defense
6-7-5: Subsequent State Action
6-7-6: Penalty
6-7-1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city hereby finds and declares that the products and synthetic substances
described hereunder are commonly used as an alternative to marijuana, that the
synthetic substances are potentially dangerous to users and that the long term
effects are not yet known. We declare that the products which contain these
synthetic substances often use a disclaimer that the product is "not for human
consumption" to avoid regulations requiring the manufacturer to list the
product's active ingredients and that most of these products only list the
ingredients of damiana leaf and mullein leaf extract. We further declare that
the synthetic substances described hereunder are not yet categorized as illegal
controlled substances under state or federal law, and that it is proper and
necessary for the city to exercise its authority to safeguard and protect the
public health and safety. Finally, we declare that it is within the police
power of city, granted by article XII, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, to
legislate the use, possession and sale of synthetic cannabinoids and/or the
substances known as "spice" in order to preserve the public health, safety and
welfare. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context
that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as
follows:
SPICE: Any herbal or plant material, incense or other substance, regardless of
the purpose it is marketed for, or whether it is labeled as unsuitable for
human consumption, which contains one or more synthetic cannabinoids or their
analogs or homologues.
   A.   "Spice" includes products by whatever trade name that are treated,
sprayed or saturated with one or more of the chemicals identified in the
definition of "synthetic cannabinoids", as defined in this section. Some
currently marketed products containing synthetic cannabinoids identified in
said definition include, but are not limited to: K2, K3, Spice, Black Mamba,
Mr. Smiley, Vanilla Voodoo, Rage and Posh.
   B.   "Spice" includes any incense or alternative smoking blend product,
which contains damiana leaf and/or mullein leaf extract.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS: A synthetic substance with a chemical structure or
pharmacological activity similar to tetrahydrocannabinol, also known as THC,
which is the main psychoactive substance found in marijuana. For the purpose of
this chapter, synthetic cannabinoids are more specifically identified as
follows:
   A.   1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, a substance also known as JWH-018;
   B.   1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, a substance also known as JWH-073;
   C.   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol, a
substance also known as CP 47,497 and its homologues;
   D.   (dexanabinol, (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)- 6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol), a substance
also known as HU-211;
   E.   Any salt, isomer, analog or homologue of the above mentioned chemicals;
   F.   Any other known synthetic cannabinoid; or
   G.   Any similar chemical substances which when inhaled, injected or
otherwise ingested are capable of causing a condition of intoxication,
inebriation, excitement, stupefaction or the dulling of the brain or nervous
system. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-3: POSSESSION, USE OR SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS:
Except as authorized by Idaho Code title 37, chapter 27, as amended, it is
unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally use, possess, purchase,
sell, attempt to sell, publicly display for sale, distribute, or dispense
synthetic cannabinoids, either in their chemical form or as the product
commonly known as spice. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-4: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for possession or use of
synthetic cannabinoids under this chapter that said possession or use is under
and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or
dentist authorized in the state to direct or prescribe such act. (Ord. 2096,
10-5-2010)
6-7-5: SUBSEQUENT STATE ACTION:
If the state legislature adopts a statute enacting criminal penalties for
prohibitions set forth in this chapter, then upon the effective date of such
state statute, provisions of this chapter that are addressed by the state
statute shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations of this chapter
committed prior to the state legislature enacting such a statute may be
prosecuted. To the extent that the provisions within this chapter are not
preempted by state statute, the provisions of this chapter shall remain valid
and in effect. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
6-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person who is found guilty, or who pleads guilty, of a violation of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2096, 10-5-2010)
CHAPTER 8
SAFE HAVEN LAW
SECTION:
6-8-1: Parent Protected From Prosecution
6-8-2: Authority To Take Possession Of Child
6-8-3: In-Person Transfer Of Child
6-8-4: Installation Of Newborn Safety Devises
6-8-5: Actions Required Upon Receipt Of Child
6-8-6: Missing Children
6-8-7: Definitions
6-8-8: Protection From Liability
6-8-1: PARENT PROTECTED FROM PROSECUTION:
A parent subject to the provisions of this act shall not be prosecuted for
child abandonment or child neglect under the provisions of any statute which
makes child abandonment or child neglect a crime, when the allegations of child
abandonment or child neglect are based solely on the relinquishment of a child
thirty (30) days of age or younger to a medical services provider or a first
responder as defined in this section.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-2: AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF CHILD:
The following entities shall, without a court order, take possession of a child
thirty (30) days of age or younger if the child is voluntarily delivered to the
entity by the parent of the child and the parent did not express an intent to
return for the child:
   A.   A medical services provider;
   B.   First responder; or
   C.   Medical staff after delivery in a hospital or other medical facility
when the child's parent notifies the medical staff that the parent is
voluntarily relinquishing the child.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-3: IN-PERSON TRANSFER OF CHILD:
Delivery of the child may be effectuated by an in-person transfer of the child
to the medical services provider or first responder or by leaving the child in
a newborn safety devise that is:
   A.   Voluntarily installed by the medical services provider;
   B.   Physically located inside a police station, fire station, hospital or
other medical facility that is staffed twenty-four (24) hours per day seven (7)
days per week; and
   C.   Located in an area that is conspicuous and visible to the employees.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-4: INSTALLATION OF NEWBORN SAFETY DEVISES:
A medical services provider or first responder that installs a newborn safety
devise shall:
   A.    Be responsible for the cost of the installation; and
   B.   Install an adequate dual alarm system connected to the physical
location of the newborn safety device and it shall be tested at least one time
per week and visually checked at least two (2) times per day to ensure the
alarm system is in working order.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-5: ACTIONS REQUIRED UPON RECEIPT OF CHILD:
Once a child has been relinquished to an entity identified in this chapter, the
entity receiving the child shall:
   A.   Perform or provide for the completion of any necessary act to protect
the physical health of the child; and
   B.   Notify the local office of the department of health and welfare that a
child has been relinquished and the entity has taken possession of the child.
   C.   Not inquire as to the identity of the custodial parent, and if the
identity is known or voluntarily provided, shall keep all information as to the
identity confidential as required in Idaho Code 39-8203.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-6: MISSING CHILDREN:
Upon being notified that a medical services provider or first responder has
possession of a child under the provisions of this chapter, the department of
health and welfare shall immediately check with law enforcement authorities to
determine if a child has been reported missing and whether the missing child
could be the relinquished child and shall thereafter complete such other steps
as required in Idaho Code 39-8201 et. seq. "Idaho Safe Haven Act."
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-7: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this section:
   FIRST RESPONDER: An employee or other designated person on duty at a police
station, fire station, hospital or other medical facility.
   MEDICAL SERVICES PROVIDER: A person authorized to practice the healing arts
including a physician's assistant, nurse practitioner, registered or practical
nurse, or a nurse aide, and such other persons as allowed in Idaho Code 39-
8202.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
6-8-8: PROTECTION FROM LIABILITY:
A medical services provider or first responder with responsibility for
performing the duties pursuant to this chapter shall be immune from any
criminal liability that might otherwise result from the actions of the entity,
if acting in good faith in receiving the relinquished child. In addition such
medical service provider or first responder shall be immune from any civil
liability that might otherwise result from receiving a relinquished child.
(Ord. 2244, 8-1-2023)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Police Administration
7-1-2: Authority Of Police And Fire Department Officials
7-1-3: Penalty
7-1-1: POLICE ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Duty Of Police Department: It shall be the duty of the police
department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city, and all of
the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make
arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with
the public works director and other officers of the city in the administration
of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said
department by the traffic provisions of this code. (2003 Code § 10-02-01)
   B.   Investigation Of Accidents And Reports: It shall be the duty of the
police department to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in
the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to such accidents. The police department shall maintain a suitable
system of filing traffic accident reports by location. Such reports shall be
available for the use and information of the public works director. (2003 Code
§ 10-02-02)
   C.   Emergency And Experimental Regulations:
      1.   The chief of police, by and with the approval of the public works
director, hereby is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective
the provisions of the traffic laws of this city, and to make and enforce
temporary or experimental regulation to cover emergencies or special
conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect
for more than ninety (90) days without city council approval.
      2.   The public works director may test traffic control devices under
actual conditions of traffic. (2003 Code § 10-02-03)
7-1-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the
chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of fire or
other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. Officers of the fire
department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (2003 Code § 10-03-01)
7-1-3: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is specifically provided in this title, or in any
chapter thereof for the violation of any specific provision of a chapter of
said title, any person violating any of the provisions of, or doing any act
forbidden by, or failing to perform any act required in this title, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Some city ordinances
may be cited on a city citation form as a city code violation. In those
situations, the particular ordinance will indicate on its face that it may be
cited as a city code violation and set forth the applicable fine. Penalties and
fines for city code violations shall be processed pursuant to section
1-4-6 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-03-02; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
STATE VEHICLE LAWS; GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Speed Regulations
7-2-3: Driving Rules And Regulations
7-2-4: Miscellaneous Traffic Rules
7-2-5: Skateboard Use Restrictions
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this title, they shall have
the meaning herein ascribed to them:
ABANDONED, UNIDENTIFIED, DISABLED, NO CURRENT PLATE OR WRECKED VEHICLES: Any
vehicle which is left, or which is parked upon any street, alley or public
property for a period of twenty four (24) hours or longer within a district or
part of the city, and the owner of which vehicle cannot be found, located or
determined, or the owner of which refuses to remove such vehicle from such
street, alley or public property upon notice, oral or written, given by the
judge or by any member of the police department.
ALLEY OR ALLEYWAY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the back or
side of property for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles operated by any fire department, fire
district, nonprofit fire protection corporation, publicly or privately owned
fire protection or fire patrol organization, police, sheriff or other law
enforcement agency, ambulances and like emergency vehicles authorized by the
chief of police to mount and use a siren and/or light of the type approved by
the chief of police.
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices.
CITY: City of Blackfoot, Idaho, or the area within the city limits of the city
of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property or persons for hire, compensation or profit.
COMMON AREAS: The areas of a facility, complex, apartment unit, hotel, motel or
the like that are open either to the general public or persons with the
permission of the owner or agent of the owner of the area. This definition
would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools,
restaurants, patios, hot tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies,
lounges, bars and other areas within the facility that are either constructed
or designed for use in this manner.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a street included within the connections of the
lateral lines of the sidewalks at intersections measured from the curbs or, in
the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; or
   B.   Any portion of a street distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other traffic control devices.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent
physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle belonging to a fire department, firefighting
association or fire district, an ambulance, or a motor vehicle belonging to a
federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any load
thereon.
HIGHWAY: Any road, roadway or street within the city.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
intersecting highways or the area within which vehicles traveling on different
highways may come into conflict.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway, which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: A space or section of a street, which has been set aside for the
exclusive purpose of loading and unloading persons, supplies and merchandise.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound production,
reproduction or amplification, including, but not limited to, any radio,
television, phonograph, musical instrument, stereo, tape player, compact disc
player, loudspeaker, public address (PA) system, sound amplifier, or comparable
sound broadcasting device.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle, which is self-propelled but not operated upon
rails, except vehicles moved solely by human power.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor and an ATV three-wheeler.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: The standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in the city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices
placed or erected by authority of the city or official having jurisdiction, for
the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OPERATOR: Every person who shall operate a vehicle upon any street in the city.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actively engaged in loading or
unloading goods, merchandise or persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person who is afoot, including infants in a carriage being
pushed or pulled by a person.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization or entity having a legally
recognized existence, whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and
intended for the overnight accommodation of persons. In the event the building
is used for multiple individual units (i.e., apartment, condominium, hotel,
motel, duplex, triplex, etc.), each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purposes of this title.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly
communicated to the listener, including, but not limited to, understandable
spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal,
comprehensible musical rhythms, melody or instrumentation, and the source of
which is identifiable to the listener.
PRIVATE ROAD DRIVEWAY: Every road, street, way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel only by the owner or by those having express or
implied permission from the owner.
RESTRICTED PARKING DISTRICT: The area of the city so designated for the purpose
of providing special regulations for the control of parking and traffic.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the word "roadway" applies
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to and
from school.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or lateral lines
defining vehicular traffic and the adjacent property lines, and intended for
pedestrian travel.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other
than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
STOLEN VEHICLE: Any vehicle, whether located upon private or public property,
which the police department has reasonable grounds to believe that the owner
thereof has been, or is, unlawfully deprived of possession.
STOP: The complete cessation of movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: When prohibited, shall mean any halting even momentarily if a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign
or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: Shall be used interchangeably and shall mean the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the public, as a
matter of right for public vehicular travel, but not to include alleys.
THROUGH STREET: Every street or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right of way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting roadways is required by law to yield the right of way
to vehicles on such through streets.
TRAFFIC: Either persons or vehicles while using any street or sidewalk for the
purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
proceed.
TRUCK:
General: Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
Pickup Truck: Every motor vehicle eight thousand (8,000) pounds' gross weight
or less which is designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation
of property.
Truck Camper: Any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded
on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place,
office or commercial space.
Truck Tractor: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, except devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
WRECKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle damaged by accidental or other cause, and left
unattended upon any street, alley or public property. (2003 Code § 10-01-01)
7-2-2: SPEED REGULATIONS:
   A.   Basic Rule: No person shall operate a vehicle within the limits of the
city, at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions.
(2003 Code § 10-05-01)
   B.   General Speed Limit: Subject to the provisions of subsection A of this
section, no person shall drive or operate any vehicle in excess of the speed
set forth below:
      1.   Any speed established pursuant to subsection C of this section.
      2.   Ten (10) miles per hour in any alley.
      3.   Ten (10) miles per hour in any public park.
      4.   Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing any school building or when
crossing any marked school zone, such zone to extend one hundred fifty feet
(150'), unless otherwise posted, in either direction from any marked school
crossing when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected, and any of
the following exist:
         a.   A school speed limit sign with a time period specified. In such
case, the twenty (20) miles per hour limit shall apply only during the
specified time period.
      5.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour upon all other streets, unless
otherwise specified by appropriate signage. (2003 Code § 10-05-02; amd. 2012
Code)
   C.   Establishment Of Speed Limits: Whenever the city council determines,
upon the basis of an investigation, that any prima facie speed set forth in
subsection B of this section is greater or less than is reasonable or safe
under the conditions found to exist at any location within the city, the city
council may determine and declare by resolution a reasonable and safe prima
facie speed limit, which, when proper signs giving notice thereof have been
erected, shall be the speed limit for such street or portion thereof. (2003
Code § 10-05-03)
      1.   Chief Of Police Authorized To Set Temporary Speed Limits: At such
times that a special event is being held within the city, which creates high
volumes of pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic, the chief of police is authorized
to temporarily reduce speed limits near the special event in his discretion for
the safety of all participants, visitors and attendees. Any such reduction
shall not exceed ten (10) days. When the chief of police determines that a
temporary speed limit reduction is necessary, he or she shall notify the city
council and mayor as soon as reasonably possible by telephone, electronic mail,
in person, or other similar means of communication. During the period of time
so described, the speed limit set by the chief of police shall be the speed
limit for such streets or portions thereof so long as proper signs giving
notice have been erected. Any reduction in a speed limit in excess of ten (10)
days shall have prior city council approval by resolution per this subsection
C. (Ord. 2151, 1-3-2017)
   D.   Minimum Speed Regulations: No person shall drive a vehicle at such a
slow speed as to impede or block the safe and efficient movement of vehicular
traffic. (2003 Code § 10-05-04)
   E.   Citation; Penalty: Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be
charged as an infraction on a uniform state citation form and processed through
the county court system, in which case the fine shall be as designated under
Idaho Code title 49. Alternatively, violations of the provisions of this
chapter may be charged on a city citation form as a city code violation, which
shall carry a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be processed pursuant
to section
1-4-6 of this code. Speeding violations of twenty (20) miles per hour over the
speed limit and charged as a city code violation, shall carry an enhanced
penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (2003 Code § 10-05-05)
7-2-3: DRIVING RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   State Laws Adopted; Citation:
      1.   Adoption: There hereby is adopted the motor vehicle laws of the
state, that being particularly Idaho Code title 49, as presently in effect or
as may hereafter be amended, marked and identified as the Idaho motor vehicle
laws, and published annually by the authority of the state department of
transportation, for the regulation of motor vehicles and motor vehicle traffic
within the municipal boundaries of the city, and said state motor vehicle laws,
and any subsequent amendments enacted into law by the state legislature,
contained in said document, or its subsequent editions.
      2.   Form Of Citations: Law enforcement officers may issue citations on
the standard uniform state citation form for violations of state vehicle laws
within the city limits. Alternatively, law enforcement officers may issue
citations on a city citation form for violations that, pursuant to any
particular city code provision, may be classified as a city code violation.
Such city code violation citations shall be processed pursuant to section
1-4-6 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-10-01)
   B.   Operating Vehicles On Bike Lanes And Paths: No person shall drive a
motorized vehicle upon any officially marked bike lane, bike path, footpath or
other separate right of way specifically set aside for use by pedestrians or
nonmotorized vehicles, except at an intersection or when entering or leaving a
roadway at a driveway, private road or alley. Prior to crossing a nonmotorized
right of way, the motorist shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian or
nonmotorized vehicle operating thereon. This subsection shall not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles meeting the conditions specified in Idaho Code
section 49-623, or authorized maintenance and construction vehicles while
actually engaged in work upon a roadway or nonmotorized right of way. Violation
of this section shall constitute an infraction, subject to penalty as provided
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-10-05; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Cutting Through Parking Lots: No person shall drive a motorized vehicle
through or over a parking lot, driveway or entrance to a residence, business or
building to avoid driving through an intersection. Violation of this section
shall constitute an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-10-06; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   Jake Brakes Usage Prohibited:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to make it unlawful for
vehicles equipped with compression release type braking systems, commonly known
as "jake brakes", to use such braking systems or devices upon any public
streets, roads or highways within the limits of the city for the peace, health
and comfort of the citizens of the city and the public.
      2.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "compression release
type braking systems" shall mean any devices equipped on vehicles, including,
but not limited to, tractors, semitrucks, motor carriers and buses that
utilized engine compression release or engine retarders as a means of slowing
or braking the speed of the vehicle in lieu of applying the clutch or foot
brakes. (2003 Code § 10-10-07)
      3.   Prohibitive Acts: Every driver of a vehicle who shall cause his or
her vehicle to brake or allow by any method that increases the noise emission
levels of the engine such as engine compression release or engine retarder in
lieu of applying the clutch or foot brakes upon any public streets, roads or
highways within the limits of the city, shall be guilty of an infraction,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code §
10-10-07; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-4: MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES:
   A.   Interference With Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person, not
the owner thereof, to tamper, meddle or interfere with any vehicle, or start or
attempt to start the machinery thereof, or puncture or otherwise mutilate the
tires, scratch, mark or otherwise deface the body or apparatus thereof, or take
or remove from the vehicle any part or portion of the machinery, equipment or
other portion thereof, or throw any stones, rock, glass or other missile at any
vehicle, or the occupants thereof.
   B.   Traffic Hazards: Any hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall or other sight
obstruction of any nature, except buildings, over three feet (3') in height
from the existing centerline road elevation, existing, growing, placed or
installed within a "vision triangle", the boundaries of the "vision triangle"
being formed by measuring from the intersection of the edges of the roadway or
the intersection of the edge of the roadway and railroad and a railroad
property line to points forty feet (40') along the edges of the roadways or the
edge of the roadway and the railroad property line, and then connecting the two
(2) points with a straight line, is hereby deemed to be a traffic hazard and is
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for either the owner or the person in
possession of any premises to permit such traffic hazard to exist.
   C.   Driving Across Wet Painted Traffic Lines: It shall be unlawful to drive
across any painted traffic control markings while the paint is still set and
traffic cones indicating such are in place.
   D.   Emergency Traffic Control Plan: In the event of an electrical power
blackout and/or the malfunction of an individual or number of signalized
intersections, traffic through the inoperative signalized intersections shall
perform as a four-way stop.
   E.   Operation Of ATVs, UTVs, Go-Carts, Etc.:
      1.   Intent. The intent of this subsection is to prohibit the operation
of small motorized vehicles on the public streets within the city for purposes
of transportation. Such vehicles create traffic safety hazards because of their
size and the difficulty that drivers of automobiles and trucks have in seeing
such vehicles. Larger vehicles such as ATV's and UTV's will be allowed as
provided herein.
      2.   Prohibitions: Go-carts, riding lawn mowers, golf carts, and like
vehicles may not be driven on public streets lying within the city for purposes
of transportation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, golf carts may be driven on
public streets lying within the city within one-fourth (1/4) mile from the
municipal golf course, and lawn mowers may be driven upon public streets when
going from one lawn to another for purposes of mowing such lawn.
      3.   Allowance of ATV's and UTV's. The use of "All-terrain vehicles," as
defined by Idaho Code Section 67-7101(1) and the use of "utility type vehicles"
as defined by Idaho Code Section 67-7101(17) is allowed on public streets in
accordance with the following:
         a.   All operators must have a valid driver's license in accordance
with Idaho Code 49-301.
         b.   The operator and any passenger under the age of eighteen (18)
years of age must wear an approved safety helmet as defined in Idaho Code 49-
666.
         c.   All ATV's and UTV's must be properly registered and have
liability insurance with proof of insurance as required by Idaho law.
         d.   All ATV's and UTV's must comply with the vehicle lighting,
signals, horns, spark arrestor, muffler, and all other motor vehicle equipment
requirements as mandated by Idaho or Federal law.
         e.   All ATV and UTV operators shall conform to all vehicular traffic
controls and shall abide by all traffic laws, rules and regulations as set
forth in Blackfoot City Code or Idaho Code for motor vehicles.
      4.   Penalty. Violation of this subsection shall be deemed a city code
violation, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) paid directly to the
City clerk's office. Alternatively, any violation of this section that is also
a violation of state law, may be cited as an offense under such applicable
state law.
   F.   Use Of Wireless Communication Devices:
      1.   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device to write, send or read a text based
communication.
      2.   As used in this subsection, "write, send or read a text based
communication" means using an electronic wireless communications device to
manually communicate with any person using a text based communication,
including, but not limited to, communications referred to as a text message,
instant message or electronic mail.
      3.   For purposes of this subsection, a person shall not be deemed to be
writing, reading or sending a text based communication if the person reads,
selects or enters a telephone number or name in an electronic wireless
communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call.
      4.   This subsection shall not apply to an emergency services
professional using an electronic wireless communications device while operating
an authorized emergency vehicle in the course and scope of his or her duties.
      5.   A violation of this subsection is an infraction, punishable by a
fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (2003 Code §§ 10-13-01 - 10-13-4; amd. Ord.
2098, 6-7-2011, eff. 6-7-2011; Ord. 2149, 11-1-2016; Ord. 2227, 9-6-2022)
7-2-5: SKATEBOARD USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, "wheeled apparatuses"
shall be defined as a nonmotorized vehicle or toy consisting of one or more
wheels constructed or covered with polyurethane and/or rubber materials, which
are gravity operated or human powered and can transport persons or property,
including, but not limited to, in-line skates, skateboards and skates. Any
apparatus used to assist the physically disabled, bicycles and carts shall be
specifically excluded from the above definition. (2003 Code § 10-14-01)
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of the city council to place reasonable limits
on the use for recreation of wheeled apparatuses in congested areas to protect
the public and public improvements from damage or liability occasioned as a
result of the exercise of that recreational activity. (2003 Code § 10-14-02)
   C.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city downtown corridor:
         a.   To use any wheeled apparatus when the wheels are not covered and/
or constructed of polyurethane or rubber materials; or
         b.   To use a wheeled apparatus carelessly and heedlessly or without
due caution and circumspection, or at a speed or in a manner as to endanger or
be likely to endanger any person or property.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any wheeled apparatus in
any parking garage, public building and private commercial parking lot or
building, without prior written authority of the owner or owner's agent. (2003
Code § 10-14-03)
   D.   Penalty: Any person found in violation of this subsection shall be
subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00), and court costs as may be
imposed in accordance with state law. (2003 Code § 10-14-04)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Authority To Install
7-3-2: Specifications For Traffic Control Devices
7-3-3: Traffic Control Signal Legend
7-3-4: Pedestrian Control Signals
7-3-5: Flashing Signals
7-3-6: Display Of Unauthorized Traffic Control Devices
7-3-7: Designation Of Crosswalks And Establishment Of Safety Zones
7-3-8: Traffic Lanes
7-3-1: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL:
The public works director is hereby authorized and directed to place upon the
public streets, appropriate signs, signals, markings and devices for the
purposes of regulating, warning, guiding and directing traffic. (2003 Code §
10-04-01)
7-3-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall, so far as practical,
conform to the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Street And
Highways", and shall so far as practical be uniform as to type and location
throughout the city. (2003 Code § 10-04-02)
7-3-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different
colored lights, or colored lighted arrow, successively one at a time, or in
combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for
special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and said lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   A.   Green Indication:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      2.   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indication shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      3.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as
provided in section
7-3-4 of this chapter, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the
sole green signal is turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any
marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   B.   Steady Yellow Indication:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned
that the related green or red (or "stop") signals will be exhibited immediately
thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when
the red or "stop" signal is exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed
by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in section
7-3-4 of this chapter, thereby are advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then
start to cross the roadway.
   C.   Steady Red Indication:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until a green
indication is shown.
      2.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as
provided in section
7-3-4 of this chapter, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not
enter the roadway.
      3.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red indication when only one lane
of traffic is facing the signal and, if two (2) or more lanes of traffic are
facing the signal in the same direction, vehicular traffic in the right lane
only, may, after stopping, cautiously proceed to make a right turn, with proper
care to avoid accident, but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians
lawfully within a crosswalk, and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
      4.   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red indication when only one lane
of traffic is facing the signal and, if two (2) or more lanes of traffic are
facing the signal in the same direction, vehicular traffic in the left lane
only may, after stopping, enter upon streets designated as one-way streets,
cautiously proceed to make a left turn, with proper care to avoid accident, but
shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk, and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
   D.   Applicability In Other Than Intersections: In the event an official
traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an
intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to
those provisions that by their nature can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where
the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the
stop shall be made at the signal. (2003 Code § 10-04-03)
7-3-4: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk", "Wait"
or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows:
   A.   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signals may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   B.   Don't Walk Or Wait: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island
while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing. (2003 Code § 10-04-04)
7-3-5: FLASHING SIGNALS:
   A.   Legends: Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used
in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
      1.   Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
      2.   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   B.   Railroad Crossing Excepted: This section shall not apply at railroad
grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade
crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth under Idaho Code. (2003
Code § 10-04-05)
7-3-6: DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view
of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   B.   Removal: Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the
highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice. (2003 Code § 10-04-06)
7-3-7: DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES:
The public works director is hereby authorized:
   A.   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such
other places as he may deem necessary;
   B.   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places
as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (2003 Code § 10-04-
07)
7-3-8: TRAFFIC LANES:
   A.   The public works director is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic
is necessary.
   B.   Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
   C.   Upon a roadway where traffic is permitted to move in both directions,
whenever the center lane of said roadway is bounded by solid lines, vehicles
shall travel upon said center lane only for the purposes of turning to the left
or entering a designated traffic lane after completion of a left turn. Vehicles
shall not use said center lane as a passing lane nor shall any vehicle travel
upon said center lane for a distance of more than one hundred feet (100') prior
to turning to the left or following completion of a left. (2003 Code § 10-04-
08)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Standing Or Parking Close To Curb
7-4-2: Angle Parking
7-4-3: Disabled Persons Parking
7-4-4: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
7-4-5: Parking Not To Obstruct Traffic
7-4-6: Parking In Alleys
7-4-7: Extended Parking Prohibited
7-4-8: Parking Of Recreational Vehicles And Trailers On Public Streets
7-4-9: Requirements For Leaving Vehicle Unattended
7-4-10: Parking Near Public Schools
7-4-11: Parking In Violation Of Duly Posted Parking Regulation
7-4-12: Parking Of Overweight Commercial Vehicles Prohibited
7-4-13: Parking Tickets And Procedures
7-4-14: Impounding Vehicles
7-4-15: Impounding Fees
7-4-16: Payment Of Towing And Storage Fees
7-4-17: Establishment Of Storage Fees
7-4-18: Parking On Private Property
7-4-19: Parking On Lot Next To Railroad Tracks
7-4-20: Night Time Parking In Downtown Area Prohibited On Certain Streets
7-4-1: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within
eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb.
   B.   On one-way streets, a vehicle parked on the left side of the street
shall be so stopped or parked with the left hand wheels of such vehicle
parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb. (2003 Code
§ 10-11-01)
7-4-2: ANGLE PARKING:
On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person
shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of
the roadway indicated by such markings. (2003 Code § 10-11-02)
7-4-3: DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
   A.   Regulations: Parking or standing a vehicle in a space reserved for the
disabled, which space is marked in conformance with the requirements specified
in Idaho Code, is prohibited, unless a vehicle is momentarily in the space for
the purpose of allowing a disabled person to enter or leave the vehicle, or
unless a special license plate or card for the disabled as prescribed in Idaho
Code, or a special temporary card as prescribed in Idaho Code, is displayed on
the vehicle. The registered owner of a vehicle parked in violation of the
provisions of this section is guilty of a parking violation and shall pay a
penalty as set forth in subsection
7-4-13G of this chapter.
   B.   Enforcement On Private Property: Law enforcement officials are
empowered to enter upon private property open to the public to enforce the
provisions of this section.
   C.   Unauthorized Use Of Plate Or Card: Any unauthorized use of the plate or
card shall constitute a parking violation. Law enforcement officials shall
enforce the provisions of this section and are empowered, using reasonable
discretion, to check personal identification to determine if the user of the
plate or placard is the disabled person so authorized to use such disabled
person's parking privileges. A violation of this provision shall constitute a
parking violation and carry a penalty as set forth in subsection
7-4-13G of this chapter. (2003 Code § 10-11-03)
7-4-4: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall:
   A.   Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      1.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      2.   On a sidewalk or parkway;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   On a crosswalk;
      5.   On a bike lane or bike path;
      6.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
      7.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      8.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within
a highway tunnel;
      9.   On any railroad tracks;
      10.   Along any yellow painted curb.
   B.   Stand or park a vehicle, unless driver occupied, except momentarily to
pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
      1.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      2.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk or a bike/pedestrian curb
ramp, except at an intersection where a traffic control signal is in operation,
or in a parking meter zone;
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
   C.   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      2.   At any place where official traffic control devices prohibit such
parking.
   D.   Park a vehicle in or upon a street during the nighttime, except that
this prohibition does not apply to a business and the owners or occupants of
property adjacent to a street who may so park a vehicle in compliance with and
as authorized by any other provision of this code. The city council, upon
finding and declaring the necessity to prohibit the parking or standing of
vehicles upon a street during the nighttime or at other times during the day
may, upon motion or order, direct the street department to post or erect signs
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle upon
the streets of the city.
   E.   Park a vehicle on the side of the street whereby the front of such
parked vehicle faces oncoming traffic. (2003 Code § 10-11-04)
7-4-5: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than twelve feet (12') of such roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic. (2003 Code § 10-11-05)
7-4-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, except while actively engaged
in the expeditious loading and unloading of passengers, supplies and
merchandise. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading exceed thirty
(30) minutes. (2003 Code § 10-11-06)
7-4-7: EXTENDED PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any vehicle upon any street, alley or public property for
a period of forty eight (48) hours or longer. (2003 Code § 10-11-07)
7-4-8: PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS ON PUBLIC STREETS:
   A.   Residential: Recreational vehicles and other nonmotorized personal
property shall not be parked on any street or alley in the residential
districts of the city, except that such vehicles and other nonmotorized
personal property may be so parked for the purposes of loading, unloading or
otherwise preparing for use for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours.
   B.   Nonresidential: Vehicles shall not be parked in nonresidential areas
for more than twenty four (24) hours. Utility trailers not connected to a motor
vehicle and other nonmotorized personal property not connected to a motor
vehicle shall not be parked on any street or alley in the nonresidential areas
of city. (2003 Code § 10-11-07.1)
7-4-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
No person having control or charge of a vehicle shall allow such vehicle to
stand on any street unattended without stopping the motor of the vehicle and
effectively setting the brakes thereon. (2003 Code § 10-11-08)
7-4-10: PARKING NEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS:
   A.   Declaration Of Necessity And Purpose: The city council finds and
declares that within certain residential areas of the city there exists a heavy
concentration of vehicles which remain parked throughout the day and that a
substantial portion of these vehicles are not owned or operated by residents of
these areas; that the presence of these vehicles causes vehicular congestion on
residential streets, impedes the movement of traffic, and unduly restricts the
entry of residents to their homes; that such vehicular congestion creates
excessive disturbance, trash and refuse and causes the deterioration of
residential area. The city council, therefore, declares the necessity and
public policy of protecting the availability of parking for residents, of
alleviating congestion of vehicles that are parked on the sides of the streets
in and around the neighborhoods surrounding the public schools located in the
city, and of reducing the excessive disturbance, trash, and refuse in the
residential areas surrounding the public schools, by providing designated
parking areas for public school students during school hours. The purpose of
this chapter is to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhoods surrounding the public schools.
   B.   Student Parking Restricted To Certain Areas: During the hours of seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday,
when school is in session, all students of any public school located in the
city shall park their vehicles only in areas or parking lots designated by the
school and/or the police chief, for student parking. Notice of such designation
shall be given by each respective school or the police department to the
students in a manner that provides reasonable notice to the students of the
areas or parking lots wherein they may park their vehicles. (2003 Code § 10-11-
09)
7-4-11: PARKING IN VIOLATION OF DULY POSTED PARKING REGULATION:
No person shall park or stand a vehicle in violation to any duly posted parking
regulation within the city. (2003 Code § 10-11-10)
7-4-12: PARKING OF OVERWEIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any commercial vehicle having a gross weight capacity in
excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, whether attended or unattended, upon
the streets in any residential or commercial district within the city, for a
period in excess of two (2) hours, except:
   A.   For the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, materials or
merchandise; or
   B.   For any purpose incident to any lawful construction project located
within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle; or
   C.   For any purpose incident to a lawful commercial operation located in
any residential or commercial district within the immediate vicinity of such
parked vehicle, but the vehicle shall not be parked on a city street for more
than eight (8) hours. (2003 Code § 10-11-11)
7-4-13: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURES:
Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle who violates this chapter shall be
guilty of a parking violation and shall be required to pay a penalty as
described below. The administrative procedure for payment of parking tickets
for violations is set forth below.
   A.   Tickets: It shall be the duty of the police department, or other
designee of the chief of police, upon observing a vehicle parked or stopped in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, to leave upon such vehicle a
separate notice or ticket for each violation, or as frequently as every two (2)
hours, that such vehicle has been parked or stopped in violation of provisions
of this chapter. Among other things, each notice shall bear the date and hour
of leaving the same at or upon the vehicle, make of the vehicle, and its
license number, the specific code section violated and the amount of the fine,
instructing the owner or operator of such vehicle to report to the police
department. One copy or an automated record of each notice mentioned herein
shall be filed with the police department.
   B.   Owner Or Operator Liable: If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or
parked in any manner in violation of any provision of this chapter and the
identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner or person or
corporation in whose name said vehicle is registered or the named lessee in a
rental or lease agreement of said vehicle shall be held prima facie responsible
for said violation.
   C.   Time Of Payment: In order to eliminate burdening courts with violations
of ordinances and to eliminate insofar as possible public inconvenience, each
person receiving a parking ticket under this chapter left upon his or her
vehicle shall, within seventy two (72) hours of the time of such notice, pay to
the police department in full satisfaction of such violation, the fee indicated
on the ticket left upon his or her vehicle. If the ticket has not been paid
within the seventy two (72) hours above prescribed, an additional fee in such
amount as established by resolution of the city council for each such violation
shall be assessed and fined against such person, such fee deemed necessary to
defray administrative and clerical expense.
   D.   Contesting Citation: In the event that the ticket is contested, the
person shall appear at the police department within a seven (7) day period and
sign a document contesting the violation charged. In the event that a contest
is made, the city attorney may amend the citation by filing an infraction
citation or complaint for parking violation or failure to pay a parking penalty
with the magistrate division of the district court. At the time of contesting
such violation, the police officer may assign a time and date to appear at an
arraignment in the magistrate division of the county district court. In
addition to the fines set forth above, court costs may be imposed by the
magistrate court in accordance with Idaho court rules.
   E.   Failure To Contest And Pay: Failure to timely contest the citation as
set forth above shall be deemed an admission to the violation and the police
department shall enter a default. Subsequent failure to pay the applicable
penalty within fourteen (14) days after the contest period has run as set forth
in subsection D of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, in addition
to the penalty for the parking violation, subject the violator to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Upon entering the default, the
police department shall notify the violator that the penalty must be paid
within fourteen (14) days or a misdemeanor citation for failure to pay penalty
will be filed in district court, subjecting the violator to possible penalties
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   F.   Immobilization And Towing: In addition to any other penalties that may
apply, vehicles parked in violation of this chapter may be towed and impounded
or booted at the owner's expense. Any vehicle that has one or more delinquent
unpaid tickets, after having an opportunity to contest and/or pay the ticket
pursuant to this section, and who either has been adjudged guilty of the
violation by a competent court and subsequently has failed to pay such ticket,
or who simply failed to pay or contest the ticket, may be immobilized by a tire
boot and towed until such time that the owner of the vehicle pays such
delinquent tickets.
   G.   Fee Schedule: Within seventy two (72) hours of the time of such notice,
the violator shall pay to the police department in full satisfaction of such
violation, the fee indicated in the following fee schedule for each notice left
upon his or her vehicle:
      1.   For violation of section
7-4-3 of this chapter: An amount as set by resolution of the city council.
      2.   For violation of section
7-4-10 of this chapter: As set forth below:
         a.   First Offense: Any person violating section
7-4-10 of this chapter for the first time within a six (6) month period shall
be subject to a penalty as set by resolution of the city council for such
violation. Such fine shall be paid to the police department.
         b.   Second Offense: Any person violating section
7-4-10 of this chapter for the second time within a six (6) month period shall
be subject to a penalty as set by resolution of the city council for such
violation. Such fine shall be paid to the police department.
         c.   Third Offense: Any person violating section
7-4-10 of this chapter three (3) or more times within a six (6) month period of
time, shall be subject to a penalty as set by resolution of the city council
for third and subsequent violations. Such fine shall be paid to the police
department.
      3.   For all other violations: An amount as set by resolution of the City
Council. (2003 Code § 10-11-12; amd. 2012 Code)
7-4-14: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
Any peace officer may remove, cause to be removed and impound, any vehicle
parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 10-11-13)
7-4-15: IMPOUNDING FEES:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer that has been impounded by the police
under any provision of this Code or any law of the State shall pay to the City
an impound fee in the amount set by the City Council. (2003 Code § 10-11-14)
7-4-16: PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer that has been duly impounded, removed
from the City streets, towed or stored at the direction of the police, shall
pay the towing and storage fee before such vehicle or trailer may be released.
The towing and storage fee shall be paid to the person or company effecting the
removal and towing and providing the storage for such vehicle or trailer. If
the motor vehicle or trailer is towed or stored by City personnel, the towing
and storage fees shall be paid to the City. (2003 Code § 10-11-15)
7-4-17: ESTABLISHMENT OF STORAGE FEES:
The City Council shall annually establish by resolution the towing and storage
fees provided for in this chapter for towing and storage by the City. In
addition, the City Council may contract with one or more towing companies or
individuals to tow and store vehicles at the direction of the police pursuant
to a preset maximum fee schedule. Such fees shall be paid by the owner of the
vehicle. (2003 Code § 10-11-16)
7-4-18: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Any person who parks or leaves unattended any motor vehicle upon any private
property posted in accordance with the terms hereof and located within the
City, without the consent of the owner or person thereof, is guilty of an
infraction, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code.
For the purposes of this chapter, property is posted when one or more signs
legibly printed in the English language are placed upon the premises stating
that public parking thereon is prohibited, provided at least one such sign is
plainly visible from each vehicular entrance to the premises. (2003 Code § 10-
11-17; amd. 2012 Code)
7-4-19: PARKING ON LOT NEXT TO RAILROAD TRACKS:
The City has a right-of-way upon a bare lot that lies directly east of the
railroad tracks, south of Judicial Street and directly west of Courthouse
Square Park. The City will allow the parking of semi-tractors and trailers on
the lot under the following conditions:
   A.   All owners and/or drivers must register for a complimentary permit at
City Hall or on-line, and obtain a "hang tag" from City Hall that must be
displayed on the semi-tractor/trailer while it is parked on the lot.
   B.   All semi-trucks and trailers are not to cause any disturbance to
others, and all units must be parked south of the entrance to the parking lot.
All parking must be done in such a manner as to allow others to also use the
lot for parking. No parking shall be allowed for more than three (3)
consecutive days, excluding holidays.
   C.   All owners and/or drivers must keep the lot clean from all trash,
garbage, refuse, or other items left on the lot.
   D.   The City shall not be responsible for any theft, vandalism, or other
damage to personal property while vehicles are parked on the lot.
   E.   All permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance and must
be renewed annually.
   F.   During the winter months, the lot is used by the City for snow storage.
At such times as the lot is used for snow storage, all parking of semi-trucks/
trailers must cease or relocate based upon notice and direction from the City.
   G.   Any peace officer may remove, or cause to be removed and impound, any
vehicle parked in violation of this section with the owner and/or driver
responsible for all towing and storage fees as set forth in sections
7-4-14,
7-4-15, and
7-4-16 of this chapter.
   H.   The City reserves the right to further restrict or prohibit parking at
any time.
   I.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of an
infraction in an amount to be set from time to time by resolution of City
Council or this Code. Any person who violates this section more than three (3)
times within a two (2) year period is guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as
set forth in this Code. (Ord. 2177, 3-5-2019)
7-4-20: NIGHT TIME PARKING IN DOWNTOWN AREA PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   The parking of motor vehicles on the follow streets in the downtown
area is prohibited between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. and six o’clock
(6:00) A.M., Monday through Friday, for the purposes of permitting street
cleaning:
      1.   West Bridge Street from Highway 91 intersection to Maple Street
intersection.
      2.   Judicial Street from Highway 91 intersection to Maple Street
intersection.
      3.   Pacific Street from Highway 91 intersection to Maple Street
intersection.
      4.   Broadway Avenue from Sexton intersection to Francis intersection.
      5.   Southwest Main (Hwy 91) from Judicial Street intersection to Alice
Street intersection.
   B.   Any peace officer may remove, or cause to be removed and impound, any
vehicle parked in violation of this section with the owner and/or driver
responsible for all towing and storage fees as set forth in City Code
7-4-14,
7-4-15, and
7-4-16.
   C.   The City reserves the right to further restrict or prohibit parking at
any time.
   D.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of an
infraction in an amount to be set from time to time by Resolution of City
Council or by Blackfoot City code. Any person who violates this section more
than three (3) times within a two (2) year period is guilty of a misdemeanor
and punishable as set forth in Blackfoot City Code. (Ord. 2216, 12-7-2021)
ARTICLE A. SNOW REMOVAL PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4A-1: Purpose
7-4A-2: Definitions
7-4A-3: Snow Removal; Disposal
7-4A-4: Parking Restrictions
7-4A-5: Other Parking Restrictions
7-4A-6: Removal Of Vehicles
7-4A-7: Payment Of Towing And Storage Fees
7-4A-8: Penalty
7-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this article are:
   A.   To render the removal of snow and ice from the public streets safe and
more economical and efficient;
   B.   Avoid collisions of snow removal equipment with motor vehicles, and
reduce the possibility of accidents involving pedestrians;
   C.   Provide for more efficient and economical utilization of snow removal
equipment. (2003 Code § 10-15-01)
7-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meaning
specified:
EAST-WEST STREET: Streets running in the general direction of east and west.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every self-propelled vehicle in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway,
except vehicles or devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
MOTORCYCLE: A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on no more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground.
NORTH-SOUTH STREET: Streets running in the general direction of north and
south.
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER: The official newspaper of the city of Blackfoot, as
designated in section
1-5-3 of this code.
PROCLAMATION: A proclamation issued by the mayor declaring the necessity to
impose the parking restrictions set forth in this article.
SNOW REMOVAL: The process of removing snow from the streets within the city.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed to carry persons or
property and which is drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks. (2003 Code § 10-15-02)
7-4A-3: SNOW REMOVAL; DISPOSAL:
   A.   Proclamation: The mayor may, at any time, issue a snow removal
proclamation declaring that snowfall has accumulated on the public streets of
the city in amounts sufficient to pose a hazard to the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Such proclamation shall order that the
parking restrictions be placed in effect, and shall state the specific
restrictions and the date and time when the restrictions shall go into effect.
Such restrictions shall become effective upon the date and time stated therein;
provided, however, in no event shall the restrictions become effective before
the expiration of twelve (12) hours following the time when the proclamation is
broadcast at least once by any radio or television station having a general
audience within the city, or before eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. of the day
following the date on which the proclamation is published in the official
newspaper, whichever is earlier.
   B.   Disposal Of Snow: No person shall remove snow from privately owned
property, or property owned by any person or entity other than the city, and
place onto the sidewalks or streets of the city, or onto any other property
owned by the city. Violation of this subsection shall be an infraction, subject
to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   C.   No Overnight Parking Downtown In Winter Months: Parking of any vehicles
on streets and highways in the downtown and heavy traffic areas shall be
unlawful from two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. from
November 15 through March 1 of each winter season.
Said areas described are those streets as follows:
      1.   West Judicial Street and West Bridge Street from SW Main to Meridian
Street.
      2.    West Pacific Street from SW Main to Birch Street.
      3.   West Idaho Street from SW Main to Maple Street.
      4.   Sexton Street from SW Main to Maple Street.
      5.   SW Main from Sexton Street to Francis Street.
      6.   Broadway Street from Sexton to Francis Street.
      7.   Ash Street from Sexton to Francis Street.
      8.   Maple Street from Sexton to Francis Street. (2003 Code § 10-15-03;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2150, 12-6-2016; Ord. 2218, 1-4-2022)
7-4A-4: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle or trailer on the
designated streets during the times set forth in the proclamation. (2003 Code §
10-15-04)
7-4A-5: OTHER PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
In the event any other ordinance, statute or regulation provides for parking
restrictions that are more restrictive than those set forth herein, then such
other parking restrictions shall be controlling and may be enforced in
accordance with the terms of such other ordinance, statute or regulation. (2003
Code § 10-15-05)
7-4A-6: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
Any motor vehicle, motorcycle or trailer parked upon any public street in
violation of this article may be removed at any time at the direction of a
police officer and may be towed to, and stored in, any public or private
storage lot, without prior notice to the owner or operator of the vehicle.
(2003 Code § 10-15-06)
7-4A-7: PAYMENT OF TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, motorcycle or trailer towed or
stored pursuant to section
7-4A-6 of this article, shall be responsible for all reasonable towing and
storage charges of the private towing company. Such charges shall be paid to
the private towing company before the vehicle, motorcycle or trailer is
released. If the vehicle, motorcycle or trailer is towed by city personnel, the
towing charge shall be paid to the city. If the vehicle, motorcycle or trailer
is stored on city property, the storage fee shall be paid to the city. (2003
Code § 10-15-07)
7-4A-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this article is guilty of an infraction, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-15-08;
amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Subject To Traffic Control Signals
7-5-2: Prohibited Crossing
7-5-3: Right Of Way In Crosswalks
7-5-4: Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways
7-5-5: Drivers To Exercise Due Care
7-5-6: Citation And Penalty
7-5-1: SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in chapter 3 of this title, but all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights, and be subject to the restrictions, stated in this chapter. (2003
Code § 10-06-01)
7-5-2: PROHIBITED CROSSING:
No pedestrian shall cross any street except upon the crosswalk thereof where
traffic lights are installed and working. (2003 Code § 10-06-02)
7-5-3: RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALKS:
   A.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
   B.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   C.   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
   D.   At any crosswalk designated and posted as a "Stop For Pedestrian In
Crosswalk", the driver of a vehicle shall stop to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within the crosswalk, until the crosswalk is unoccupied.
   E.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (2003 Code § 10-06-03)
7-5-4: PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   A.   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   B.   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway or
its shoulder facing traffic, which may approach from the opposite direction.
(2003 Code § 10-06-04)
7-5-5: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this title, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and
shall give precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person upon a roadway. (2003 Code § 10-06-05)
7-5-6: CITATION AND PENALTY:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as an infraction on
a uniform state citation form and processed through the county court system, in
which case the fine shall be as designated under Idaho Code title 49.
Alternatively, violations of the provisions of this chapter may be charged on a
city citation form as a city code violation, which shall carry a penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be processed pursuant to section
1-4-6 of this code. (2003 Code § 10-06-06)
CHAPTER 6
BICYCLES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Definitions
7-6-2: Traffic Laws Apply To Persons Riding Bicycles
7-6-3: Required Bicycle Equipment
7-6-4: Riding On Bicycles
7-6-5: Clinging To Vehicles
7-6-6: Riding On Roadways
7-6-7: Using Provided Bike Lanes And Bike Paths
7-6-8: Riding On Sidewalks And Crosswalks
7-6-9: Passing Other Vehicles
7-6-10: Bicyclist Not Required To Dismount When Stopping
7-6-11: Turn Signals
7-6-12: Riding In Groups
7-6-13: Bicycle Parking
7-6-14: Use Of Bike Paths And Bike Lanes By Other Nonmotorized Modes Of
Transportation
7-6-15: Group Events
7-6-16: Unlawful Use Of Bike Lanes And Bike Paths
7-6-17: Penalty
7-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
BICYCLE: Every vehicle propelled exclusively by human power upon which any
person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, except scooters and similar
devices.
BIKE LANE: A portion of a roadway designated for preferential or exclusive use
by bicycles which is distinguished from that portion of the roadway to be used
by motor vehicles by a painted strip and other pavement markings.
BIKE PATH:
   A.   A completely separate right of way designated primarily for use by
bicycles. Conflicts with pedestrians are kept to a minimum while cross flows by
motor vehicles are discouraged.
   B.   Bike path shall include both the paved surface and a minimum of two
feet (2') on either side.
BIKE PATH APPROACH: That area where a transition is made between a roadway,
parking lot, sidewalk or other facility and a bike path.
BIKE/PEDESTRIAN CURB RAMP: A break in a curb designated to facilitate movement
by a bicyclist, pedestrian or handicapped person from a street or parking lot
to a sidewalk or bicycle facility.
BIKE ROUTE: Any roadway specifically signed for shared use by bicycles and
motor vehicles. (2003 Code § 10-12-01)
7-6-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES:
   A.   Applicability: Every person, regardless of age, who operates a bicycle
upon a roadway, public parking lot, sidewalk, bike path, bike lane or other
public vehicular right of way in the city shall be granted the same rights and
shall be subject to the same responsibilities applicable to a motor vehicle
operator by the laws of the state, and the provisions of this title not in
conflict with and as authorized under Idaho Code title 49; except where
provisions of those laws and ordinances by their very nature can have no
application to bicycles, or where portions of this chapter direct otherwise.
   B.   Peace Officers:
      1.   Any "peace officer" of jurisdiction, as defined in Idaho Code
section 19-5101(d), operating a bicycle during the course of his or her duties,
is exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section if the bicycle
is being operated under any of the following circumstances:
         a.   In response to an emergency call.
         b.   While engaged in rescue operations.
         c.   In the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law.
      2.   This section does not relieve a peace officer from the duty to
operate a bicycle with due regard for the safety of all persons. (2003 Code §
10-12-02)
7-6-3: REQUIRED BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
No person shall operate a bicycle without the following equipment:
   A.   Brakes capable of causing the bicycle to stop within twenty five feet
(25') at ten (10) miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement;
   B.   A permanent seat designed for the bicycle being operated;
   C.   When in use at nighttime, a red reflector on the rear, visible from a
distance of three hundred feet (300') when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of a motor vehicle, and a forward facing white light attached either to
the bicycle or the bicyclist which is visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') in front of the bicycle. A bicycle shall be equipped with a
front facing white or yellow reflector when the bicyclist uses a generator
powered light which is unlit when the bicycle is stopped. (2003 Code § 10-12-
03)
7-6-4: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
   A.   No person riding or operating a bicycle shall ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   B.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
   C.   No person shall operate a bicycle that either is too large or too small
for such person to operate safely.
   D.   Every person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebar at all times, and shall carry nothing which prevents full control of
the bicycle or obstructs the operator's vision. (2003 Code § 10-12-04)
7-6-5: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
Persons riding or operating bicycles shall not attach themselves or such
bicycles to a moving vehicle. This section shall not prohibit attaching a
trailer device to a bicycle that is designed to accommodate such a device.
(2003 Code § 10-12-05)
7-6-6: RIDING ON ROADWAYS:
   A.   No person shall operate a bicycle on a roadway against the flow of
motorized traffic, except where permitted by official signs or pavement
markings.
   B.   Every person operating a bicycle upon a two-way roadway shall be
entitled to use the right hand lane and shall proceed in the same direction of
travel as other vehicles in that lane. On one-way roadways, a bicycle may be
operated in any existing lane.
   C.   The operator of a bicycle traveling at a rate of speed which delays a
vehicle or vehicles following in the same lane shall be required, when it is
unlawful or unsafe for the following vehicle to pass, to move as far to the
right of the traveled roadway, or to the left where the bicycle is in the left
lane of a one-way roadway, as is safe under the conditions then existing;
provided, however, that when the bicyclist is within fifty feet (50') of an
intersection, he shall not be required to move to the right or left until he
has moved through the intersection. (2003 Code § 10-12-06)
7-6-7: USING PROVIDED BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
   A.   Wherever a bike lane is present upon a roadway, a bicyclist shall use
that lane and shall not use the roadway; except that the bicyclist shall not be
required to use or remain in a bike lane:
      1.   When the lane is of insufficient width to permit safe bicycle
operation;
      2.   When the condition of the pavement, or the presence of water, dirt,
glass or other foreign objects upon the pavement prevents safe bicycle
operation in the lane;
      3.   When moving into position to make a right or left turn;
      4.   When an opening car door or other obstruction in an adjacent parking
lane requires movement out of the lane.
   B.   Wherever a bike path has been provided immediately adjacent to a
roadway, a bicyclist shall use that path and shall not use the roadway if
official signs or markings so direct; except that a bicyclist shall not be
required to use or remain on a bike path:
      1.   When the path is of insufficient width to permit safe bicycle
operation; or
      2.   When the condition of the surface, or the presence of water, dirt,
glass or other foreign objects upon the surface prevents safe bicycle operation
on the path. (2003 Code § 10-12-07)
7-6-8: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS:
   A.   A bicycle may be operated upon a sidewalk and upon and within a
crosswalk, except where prohibited by official traffic control devices.
   B.   Any bicyclist riding upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and
within a crosswalk, shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall
give an audible warning before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
   C.   A bicyclist riding upon a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and within
a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian
under the same circumstances. (2003 Code § 10-12-08)
7-6-9: PASSING OTHER VEHICLES:
The operator of a bicycle may pass another vehicle upon the right when
traveling on a two-way roadway and may pass on the left when traveling in the
left lane of a one-way roadway, but only under conditions permitting such
movement in safety. A bicyclist shall not pass between two (2) lanes of motor
vehicles proceeding in the same direction. (2003 Code § 10-12-09)
7-6-10: BICYCLIST NOT REQUIRED TO DISMOUNT WHEN STOPPING:
Whenever a bicycle operator is required to bring the bicycle to a stop in
conformance with the official traffic control devices, the operator shall halt
forward motion, but shall not be required to dismount or remove his/her feet
from the pedals. (2003 Code § 10-12-10)
7-6-11: TURN SIGNALS:
The operator of a bicycle intending to turn shall signal his intent to turn
with the appropriate hand and arm signal at least one hundred feet (100') prior
to turning. The hand signal need not be continuous. (2003 Code § 10-12-11)
7-6-12: RIDING IN GROUPS:
Persons riding bicycles shall not ride more than two (2) abreast, except upon
bike paths of twelve feet (12') or more. Bicyclists operating two (2) abreast
upon a roadway or bike path shall return to a single file configuration when a
vehicle approaches from behind in the same lane. (2003 Code § 10-12-12)
7-6-13: BICYCLE PARKING:
Bicycles shall not be parked in such a manner as to obstruct or impede the
movement of pedestrians, motor vehicles or other bicycles, or to cause damage
to trees, shrubs or other living plants. (2003 Code § 10-12-13)
7-6-14: USE OF BIKE PATHS AND BIKE LANES BY OTHER NONMOTORIZED MODES OF
TRANSPORTATION:
   A.   When a pedestrian is traveling upon a bike path or bike lane:
      1.   A bicyclist approaching the pedestrian from the rear shall be
required to give audible warning when overtaking and passing such pedestrian;
      2.   A bicyclist and a pedestrian approaching each other shall each be
required to move to and remain upon their right hand half of the surface.
   B.   A bicyclist shall always yield the right of way to a pedestrian who is
physically disabled. (2003 Code § 10-12-14)
7-6-15: GROUP EVENTS:
A bicycle race, parade or other group event for bicyclists may be conducted
upon public rights of way in the city if a permit is obtained. Permit
applications shall be made through the office of the city clerk. (2003 Code §
10-12-15)
7-6-16: UNLAWFUL USE OF BIKE LANES AND BIKE PATHS:
It shall be unlawful for any person without authorization from the local
authority having jurisdiction thereof to cut, alter, break, injure, damage or
perform work upon any bike path or bike lane in the city. (2003 Code § 10-12-
16)
7-6-17: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. (2003 Code § 10-12-17; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONED, UNATTENDED VEHICLES; REMOVAL
SECTION:
7-7-1: Authority To Tow Or Contract Towing
7-7-1: AUTHORITY TO TOW OR CONTRACT TOWING:
The city may enter into one or more exclusive contracts with one or more towing
operators for purposes of ensuring safe and consistent towing services at
reasonable prices. (2003 Code § 10-07-07)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Oiling Streets
8-1-2: Snow And Ice Removal From Sidewalks
8-1-3: Obstructing Public Sidewalks
8-1-1: OILING STREETS:
   A.   Notice Of Intent To Oil Streets: The street department must give notice
of its intent to oil streets in the city not less than twelve (12) nor more
than thirty (30) hours prior to the time such oiling is to commence. Such
notice is to be given by the posting of notice thereof at a conspicuous place
at the beginning and at the end points on such street where the oiling will be
done. (2003 Code § 3-06-03)
   B.   Operation Of Vehicles On Oiled Streets: No person owning or operating
an automobile shall operate such automobile on said street after the
commencement of oiling operations, unless with permission of the superintendent
of streets, and any and all persons owning or having the control of any
automobile shall remove the same from the vicinity of such oiling operations on
such street prior to the commencement of such operations, and in the event such
oiling operation be commenced, if, in the opinion of the superintendent of
streets, any automobile parked on or in the vicinity of such street is in
danger of being sprayed by such oil, or if such superintendent believes that
such automobile should be removed for any other reason whatsoever, said
superintendent may cause said automobile to be towed from such location to a
city parking lot. The charge for such towing to be at the expense of the owner
or operator of such automobile. The automobile not to be returned to the owner
or operator until such charge be paid. (2003 Code § 3-06-04)
   C.   Streets Blockaded: Immediately prior to the commencement of such oiling
operations, the superintendent of streets shall cause the street to be oiled to
be blockaded to all unauthorized travel. (2003 Code § 3-06-05)
8-1-2: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Owner Or Occupant Responsibility: Owners, tenants or occupants of any
premises within the city abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk shall remove
all snow and ice from any such sidewalk.
   B.   Notice to Remove Not Required: Due to the significant safety hazard to
citizens and patrons of the city, it shall not be the duty of the city to
notify any owner, tenant or occupant of property herein described to remove or
otherwise correct the objectionable matters herein legislated against. However,
the city will make good faith efforts on an annual basis to notify owners,
tenants or occupants of the duty to remove all snow and ice from sidewalks.
Such notice will be either through first class mailings, social media
notifications, internet postings, or other methods as may be utilized by the
city from time to time. Nothing herein shall impose a duty upon the city to
provide such notice or provide a defense to the failure to remove snow and ice.
   C.   Removal by City; Cost of Lien: Upon failure of the owner, tenant or
occupant of said premises to comply with the terms and conditions of this
ordinance, then and in that event the city shall have the right to remove such
snow and ice and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the
sidewalks. The City will invoice the owner, tenant or occupant of said premises
a reasonable dollar amount for the removal of snow and ice. In the event said
invoice is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City shall have the right to
assess the cost against the property as a municipal property tax as set forth
herein. Such assessment shall be certified to the county assessor or other
proper county official having charge of the making of such assessment roll, and
such assessment shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the
same manner as other municipal taxes are collected. The assessment of costs
against the property shall not prohibit the city from also pursuing criminal
remedies as set forth in this section.
   D.   Penalty: Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision
in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(2003 Code §§ 8-01-01, 8-01-14; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2249, 1-2-2024)
8-1-3: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Definitions:
    OBSTRUCTIONS: A hindrance, obstacle or barrier interfering with the use of
a public sidewalk, including merchandise offered or displayed for sale thereon,
or any other impediment placed on said sidewalk without approval of the
governing body. The word obstruction shall not be deemed to include within its
meaning any of the following impediments:
      1.   An obstruction of a temporary character incidental to a lawful use,
such as an obstruction relating to the improvement or repair of the sidewalk.
      2.   An obstruction made, created or caused by the city in order to serve
some necessary public purpose, such as beautification planters, parking meters,
traffic control signs or devices, or other such obstructions installed at the
instruction of the governing body.
      3.   An obstruction for a temporary period caused by loading or unloading
merchandise necessary with reference to the business of the user and with
reasonable reference to the rights of the public.
      4.   An obstruction created by the temporary use of the sidewalk as a
place for depositing building materials while the adjacent property owner is
making improvements on his land, with reasonable reference to rights of the
public.
      5.   An obstruction placed in, under, over or on a public sidewalk with
express permission of the governing body.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALKS: That part of a public street or highway in the city
designed for the use of pedestrians and being exclusively reserved for them.
The term public sidewalk shall not be interpreted as meaning any part of a
sidewalk that leads to the entrance of a private residence.
   B.   Public Sidewalk Obstructions:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall cause an
obstruction to be placed in, upon, over or under a public sidewalk.
      2.   No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity owning or
occupying property shall place, allow to be placed, nor allow to grow, any
obstruction over a public sidewalk closer than seven and one-half feet (71/2')
above any such sidewalk. (2003 Code § 8-01-02)
   C.   Penalty: Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision
in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-01-14; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
SECTION:
8-2-1: Owner Duty To Construct, Repair Or Replace
8-2-2: Ability To Require Construction, Repair Or Replacement
8-2-3: Inspection
8-2-4: Improvement Orders
8-2-5: Notice Of Order
8-2-6: Failure To Comply
8-2-7: Assessment Roll
8-2-8: Delinquent Assessments
8-2-9: Sidewalk Specifications
8-2-10: Permit Required; Application
8-2-11: Stamping Name Of Contractor
8-2-12: Penalty
8-2-1: OWNER DUTY TO CONSTRUCT, REPAIR OR REPLACE:
It is the duty of the person owning or having control of real property along or
abutting any curb or sidewalk, to construct, repair or replace the curb or
sidewalk so as to provide safe, all weather passage for pedestrians, and to
provide adequate street drainage and pavement protection, for the safety and
convenience of the traveling public. (2003 Code § 8-01-03)
8-2-2: ABILITY TO REQUIRE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Specified: If the city council finds that curbs or sidewalks are
dangerous and unsafe, requiring construction, repair or replacement thereof,
the city council may, at its option:
      1.   Serve written notice on the owner or person in control of the real
property adjacent to the curb or sidewalk, informing that person of the unsafe
condition and requiring that person to construct, repair or replace the curb or
sidewalk, as specified by the city council, within twenty one (21) days after
receipt of the notice. In the event the necessary construction, repair or
replacement does not take place, the city council may proceed according to
subsection B of this section; or
      2.   Provide, by general ordinance, for the construction, repair or
replacement of the unsafe curb or sidewalk, and assess the cost thereof to the
adjacent property owner. Collection of the assessment may be done pursuant to
Idaho Code section 50-1008.
   B.   Establishing Local Improvement District: Nothing herein shall preclude
the city council from establishing a local improvement district for the
construction, repair or replacement of curbs and sidewalks, pursuant to Idaho
Code title 50, chapter 17. (2003 Code § 8-01-04)
8-2-3: INSPECTION:
It is hereby made the duty of the public works director to cause an inspection
to be made from time to time of the condition of the sidewalks of the city, and
when, in his judgment, any sidewalks are dangerous or unsafe for public travel,
he shall report his finding to the city council, and it shall cause the
sidewalks to be removed, replaced or repaired as occasion may require in order
to ensure safety for pedestrians. (2003 Code § 8-01-05)
8-2-4: IMPROVEMENT ORDERS:
Upon receiving the report specified in section
8-2-3 of this chapter, the city council shall ascertain the necessity of making
such improvements, and if, in the opinion of the city council, the same should
be made, an order shall be entered upon its minutes, giving the name of the
owner, if known; if not known, it shall be listed to "unknown owners", with the
description of the property affected and the nature of the improvement
required, which shall designate that the improvement shall be made within
thirty (30) days after service or publication of notice as provided in section
8-2-5 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-01-06)
8-2-5: NOTICE OF ORDER:
   A.   Procedure: A notice of the contents of the order provided for in
section
8-2-4 of this chapter shall be served upon the owner of the property adjoining
the proposed improvement, and due return of the service of such notice shall be
made and placed on file in the office of the city clerk; provided, however,
that said notice may be served either by personal service, or by registered
mail addressed to the location of the property; provided, further, that when
any property is owned by a corporation, association, stock company or other
entity, notice shall be served upon the president, secretary or other managing
agent thereof in the same manner as herein provided.
   B.   Unknown Owner: Whenever the property adjoining the proposed improvement
is unoccupied, and the whereabouts of the owner is unknown, the notice shall be
published for two (2) consecutive issues in an official newspaper of the city.
If the owner is unknown, it shall be sufficient to designate the owner as
"unknown owners", with a description of the property proposed to be improved,
together with a description of the character of the improvement required, and
proof of any such publication shall be filed with the city clerk. (2003 Code §
8-01-07)
8-2-6: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In the event of the property owner failing to comply with the terms of the
notice within the time hereinbefore specified, after the service or publication
of same, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to make the
improvements and shall proceed to remove, replace and repair with standard
material any such sidewalk according to the specifications of this chapter,
under the supervision and direction of the public works director, who shall
keep an accurate account of the cost and expense of said improvement, and
forthwith certify the same to the city council. (2003 Code § 8-01-08; amd. 2012
Code)
8-2-7: ASSESSMENT ROLL:
The city clerk shall provide an assessment roll, to be known as "assessment
roll for sidewalk improvements", which shall contain appropriate columns for
the name of the property owner, description of the property and the amount of
assessment. The city council shall examine the expenditures certified to by the
public works director, and if found correct, shall order the city clerk to
enter same in the assessment roll herein provided, and from and after such
entry the amount charged against the property shall be and the same is hereby
made a lien thereon to the same extent and in like manner as other special
assessments authorized to be levied by the city. (2003 Code § 8-01-09; amd.
2012 Code)
8-2-8: DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS:
The assessment shall bear interest at the rate of interest permitted for
judgments pursuant to Idaho Code from and after the entry thereof in the
assessment roll, and the city clerk shall, as soon as may be, after the
completion of the assessment roll, give notice to the property owners therein
affected, to pay their assessments, as now required by law, and if not paid
within the time specified in said notice, the same shall become delinquent, and
a penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added, and the assessment, together
with accrued interest and the penalty, shall be certified to the county tax
collector and be by him placed upon the tax roll for collection, and same shall
be collected in the same manner, with like effect and subject to the same
penalties, as other city taxes. (2003 Code § 8-01-10)
8-2-9: SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications published in the Idaho standards for public works construction
and on file in the office of the public works department. (2003 Code § 8-01-11)
8-2-10: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to lay and construct any cement
sidewalk or curbing within the public right of way in the city, without having
first obtained from the building department a permit so to do. (2003 Code § 8-
01-12; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Applications for permit shall state the exact and correct description
of the property in front of which said sidewalk and curb is to be laid, owner
of the premises, name of applicant for permit and width of sidewalk. The
acceptance of a permit by the building official to lay and construct a sidewalk
or curbing in the city by any person shall be deemed an agreement on the part
of such person to construct said sidewalk and curb in accordance with the
specifications herein provided for. It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct any such sidewalk or curbing in violation of the specifications
herein set out. All sidewalks and curbs constructed under permit shall be
subject to the supervision and inspection of the department of public works.
(2003 Code § 8-01-12)
8-2-11: STAMPING NAME OF CONTRACTOR:
Every person who shall lay or cause to be laid any sidewalks within the
corporate limits shall plainly stamp or print into said sidewalk the name of
the person by whom the sidewalk was laid, together with the year the sidewalk
was laid. Letters and figures of not less than one inch (1") in width and of
not more than two inches (2") in height shall be used, and with spaces of not
more than one inch (1") between said letters and figures shall be stamped or
printed at each end of any portion of sidewalk constructed at any one time and
in case the portion of sidewalk constructed at any one time shall exceed one
hundred fifty feet (150') in length, the name and date shall be stamped or
printed at each end and at intervals of every one hundred fifty feet (150') on
said sidewalk. (2003 Code § 8-01-13)
8-2-12: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-01-14; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY CONSTRUCTION; EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Permit Required
8-3-3: Exceptions To Permit Requirement
8-3-4: Insurance Required
8-3-5: Bond Required
8-3-6: Application For Permit
8-3-7: Adoption Of Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction
8-3-8: Location Of Mains And Lines; Procedure
8-3-9: Completion Of Work And Backfilling
8-3-10: Time To Complete Repairs
8-3-11: Maintenance And Safeguards
8-3-12: Warranty Of Repairs
8-3-13: Repairs By City
8-3-14: Remedy For Noncompliance
8-3-15: No Duty Upon City
8-3-16: Penalty
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings
ascribed below:
ACT: The underground facilities damage prevention act as set forth in Idaho
Code section 55-2201 et seq.
CONSTRUCTION: The construction, placement or laying of any asphalt or concrete
pavement, sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, water line, sanitary sewer line,
storm drain line, telephone line, electrical line, cable TV line, gas line or
any other similar structure or appurtenant facilities in any street, alley,
easement or other public right of way of the city.
EXCAVATION: Any operation in which earth, rock or other material in the ground
is moved or otherwise displaced by any means, including, but not limited to,
explosives.
EXCAVATOR: Any person who engages directly in excavation.
REPAIR: The improvement, alteration, modification or replacement of any asphalt
or concrete pavement, sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, water line, sanitary
sewer line, storm drain line, telephone line, conduit or facilities, electrical
line, cable TV line, gas line or facilities, or any other structure or
facilities in any street, alley, easement or other public right of way of the
city.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY: Any item buried or placed belowground for use in
connection with the storage or conveyance of water, unless being delivered
primarily for irrigation, sewage, electronic signal, telephonic or telegraphic
communications, cable television, fiber optic, electrical energy, petroleum
products, gas, gaseous vapors, hazardous liquids or other substances,
including, but not limited to, pipes, sewers, conduits, cables, valves, lines,
wires, manholes, attachments and those parts of poles or anchors located
belowground.
WORKING DAYS: All days except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
WORKING HOURS: The hours from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. of any working day. (2003 Code § 8-06-01)
8-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in any construction, repair or excavation in any street,
alley, easement or other public right of way within the city without first
obtaining a permit from the city. No permit under this chapter shall be valid
until or unless the notice provisions of Idaho Code section 55-2201 et seq.,
have been complied with. The permit shall clearly define the area within which
the permittee may do such construction, repair or excavation. A copy of the
permit shall be kept on file with the city for a period of not less than five
(5) years after its issuance. (2003 Code § 8-06-02)
8-3-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
Unless facts exist which would reasonably cause an excavator to believe that an
underground facility exists within the depth of the intended excavation, a
permit shall not be required for the following excavations:
   A.   The tilling of soil to a depth of less than fifteen inches (15") for
agricultural purposes;
   B.   For replacement of highway guardrail posts, signposts, delineator
posts, culverts, electric poles, telephone poles and traffic control device
supports in the same location and depth of the replaced item within a public
highway right of way. (2003 Code § 8-06-03)
8-3-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the applicant
presents with the application, or has on file with the public works director, a
certificate of insurance from an insurance company qualified to write insurance
contracts within the state, certifying that the applicant has a policy of
public liability insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) single limit liability for personal injury, death and
property damage; provided, however, if the work to be done under the permit is
limited to excavation in an easement situated entirely on private property or
is for construction of a concrete sidewalk, driveway or curb and gutter within
a street right of way, but parallel with and adjacent to private property, the
amount of such insurance shall be not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) single limit for personal injury, death and property damage. Said
insurance policy shall contain a clause requiring that the city be given at
least thirty (30) days' advance written notice in the event of expiration or
anticipated cancellation. The permit shall be revoked at the time such
insurance expires or is canceled unless a certificate of comparable insurance
is filed with the public works director prior to the time of cancellation or
expiration of the original policy of insurance. (2003 Code § 8-06-04)
8-3-5: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Before a permit may be issued hereunder, the applicant for a permit
must furnish and leave on file with the city clerk either a cash bond or a
corporate surety bond issued by a company licensed to do business in the state,
and in a form approved by the city, in an amount equal to one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of the estimated cost of restoration conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the applicant and permittee that it will fix and
replace the restoration work with respect to such streets, alleys, fixtures or
other property located in, under or over such streets or alleys, and so
affected by such work, to the satisfaction of the city; and such bond shall be
further conditioned that in the event of the failure of applicant and permittee
to do such restoration work, the city may recover from said cash so deposited,
or from the surety of such bond so posted, all costs and expenses to be
incurred by the city to see that the street or alley, and other fixtures or
property, is restored to a satisfactory condition, the penalty of such bond to
cover any legal expenses and court costs which may be incurred by the city for
the purpose of securing faithful compliance with the application and permit;
and conditioned further that said bond shall be deemed to continue in full
force and effect until the public works director shall have issued a completion
certificate.
   B.   Provided, however, that in lieu of the foregoing bond, any person,
firm, or corporation may provide a continuous surety performance bond in a
reasonable amount issued by a company licensed to do business in the state, and
in a form to be approved by the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of such person, firm or corporation to the following effect: that if such
person, firm or corporation secures a permit under this chapter, that permittee
shall comply with all the rules, regulations, orders, requirements and
obligations as required to be complied with by a person, firm or corporation
furnishing a bond as required above; provided, further, that if the aggregate
of the estimated cost of restoration work of all projects of an applicant or
permittee in progress at any one time exceeds the amount of such continuous
surety performance bond, then the amount of such bond must be increased to
cover the aggregate of the estimated costs of all restoration projects with
which applicant permittee is connected and for which a completion certificate
has not been issued. Such blanket performance bond may be adjusted, from time
to time, to coincide with the requirement of the amount of such bond must equal
the aggregate estimated cost of all restoration work not then completed.
   C.   No permit hereunder will be issued to an applicant who is delinquent
for thirty (30) days or more with respect to restoration costs for which
applicant has been previously billed.
   D.   The city may proceed against and collect from the bond or bonding
company of an applicant permittee for any restoration charges which have been
billed and which have not been paid within thirty (30) days after billing.
(2003 Code § 8-06-14)
8-3-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for construction, repair and excavation permits shall be made at
the office of public works. The application shall state the applicant's name,
business or home address, the applicant's city right of way contractor's
license number (if any), telephone number, the location of the construction,
the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property where such
repair or excavation will occur, the date notification was given to all one
number locator services or the owner of any underground public facility, as
defined under the act, and the nature of the work to be performed at the
location specified. If the applicant complies with the provisions of this
chapter and the proposed construction, repair or excavation work complies with
this code and will not endanger public health, safety or welfare, the city
shall issue the permit, provided the city may issue the permit subject to such
conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
No permit shall be issued to any person who does not possess all licenses
required by state or local law. (2003 Code § 8-06-05)
8-3-7: ADOPTION OF IDAHO STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION:
The Idaho standards for public works construction document, 2005 edition
(ISPWC), hereby is adopted by the city, to be used for construction and quality
control of public works infrastructure projects. A copy of the ISPWC document
may be obtained from the public works department. All subsequent editions and/
or supplements to the ISPWC document, hereby automatically are adopted by the
city as they become available unless one or more sections or parts specifically
are excluded by resolution or ordinance. (2003 Code § 8-06-16; amd. 2012 Code)
8-3-8: LOCATION OF MAINS AND LINES; PROCEDURE:
If the permittee desires the city to locate any water main, sewer main or other
utility line, the permittee shall give written or oral notice to the public
works director or his designated representative not more than seven (7) working
days nor less than one working day prior to commencing construction, repair or
excavation. If the permittee, after commencing work, shall cease construction,
repair or excavation for more than one working day, then notice shall again be
given to the public works director or his designated representative not more
than seven (7) working days nor less than one working day prior to the time
when construction, repair or excavation shall again commence. (2003 Code § 8-
06-06)
8-3-9: COMPLETION OF WORK AND BACKFILLING:
All work shall be expeditiously performed and completed as soon as reasonably
possible. Upon completion of construction or repair, the permittee shall
promptly backfill any street, alley, easement or other public right of way in
which permittee has made any excavation. All work and backfilling shall be done
in accordance with the city standard drawings and engineering specifications
adopted by the city. (2003 Code § 8-06-07)
   A.   This subsection covers the work of installing nonshrink backfill
materials in certain trench cuts located within the city of Blackfoot rights of
way. The city of Blackfoot maintains an IWORQ's pavement management system that
grades all rights of way on a scale of 1 to 10, with a 10 being a right of way
in excellent condition. This subsection shall apply to all trench cuts within
rights of way that are designated as a 4 or higher. The designation is
available from the city of Blackfoot at the time of obtaining a permit for the
trench cut.
All requirements for excavation shall meet with the city of Blackfoot
specifications when working within the city's rights of way.
After the permittee has excavated and disposed of all material from the trench
area and upon completion of the installation and testing of the installed line,
the permittee shall wrap all mechanical fittings with plastic sheeting (minimum
4 mil) in a manner which will prevent bonding of the nonshrink material to the
fitting. The permittee shall then place compact gravel to a level of one foot
(1') above the installed line. The permittee shall then place nonshrink
backfill material in the trench using a method that fills all voids to the top
of the existing subgrade elevation. After sufficient time for the nonshrink
backfill material to cure in order to carry the traffic loads, the permittee
shall then replace the asphalt plant mix surfacing and aggregate base in
accordance with specifications of the city of Blackfoot.
The nonshrink backfill material shall be encasement concrete with a minimum
cement content of fifty (50) pounds to the cubic yard, maximum water to cement
ratio of 0.80, a maximum slump of ten (10), and a zero to ten percent (10%) air
content.
All backfilling made pursuant to this subsection shall be supervised at the
time of backfilling and approved by a representative of the street department
of the city of Blackfoot. The permittee must schedule in advance with the
street department for a representative to be present at the time of the
backfill. (Ord. 2128, 1-6-2015, eff. 1-6-2015)
8-3-10: TIME TO COMPLETE REPAIRS:
Permanent asphalt repairs shall be completed by the permittee not later than
three (3) days after the excavation has been backfilled, unless otherwise
authorized by the public works director or his designated representative. If
weather conditions prohibit permanent repairs, the public works director, or
his designated representative, may authorize the use and installation of
temporary cold patches. Such temporary cold patches shall be replaced by the
permittee as soon as weather permits. (2003 Code § 8-06-08)
8-3-11: MAINTENANCE AND SAFEGUARDS:
The permittee shall continuously maintain the construction, repair or
excavation site in a safe condition and keep the site free from any condition
that may cause risk of harm to any person or property at all times after the
work has commenced and until all work, including permanent patching, has been
completed and accepted by the city. During such time, the permittee also shall
provide, install and continuously maintain proper safeguards, signs and
barricades at the construction, repair or excavation site. Such signs and
barricades shall conform to the requirements and standards set forth in the
most recent edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
published by the U.S. department of transportation, federal highway
administration, or any other manual adopted by the state department of
transportation, pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code section 49-201. (2003
Code § 8-06-09)
8-3-12: WARRANTY OF REPAIRS:
The permittee shall warrant to the city the adequacy and continued satisfactory
condition and function of all backfill and permanent patches installed by
permittee or by any agent or employee of permittee for a period of one year
after the permanent patch has been accepted by the public works director. Such
warranty shall extend only to any unsatisfactory condition or function caused
by inferior design, workmanship and materials furnished by permittee or by any
agent or employee of permittee. (2003 Code § 8-06-10)
8-3-13: REPAIRS BY CITY:
If the permittee fails to install permanent patching within three (3) days
after completion of backfill, or if the permittee fails to honor the warranty
set forth in section
8-3-12 of this chapter after demand by the city, the city may complete the work
and make such repairs. If such repairs are completed by the city, the city may
charge the cost of the repairs to the permittee. The cost of repairs shall be
based upon the actual charges and cost to the city of repairs at the time the
repair was completed. If the permittee is charged with the city's costs of
repairs, the permittee shall pay such cost within five (5) days after the city
has given written notice to permittee of the cost. (2003 Code § 8-06-11)
8-3-14: REMEDY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
If any permittee fails to perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or if any
permittee fails to pay the costs assessed pursuant to section
8-3-13 of this chapter within the time provided therein, the city, at its
option and upon prior written notice to permittee, may suspend or revoke any
contractor's license issued by the city to the permittee, cancel or revoke all
permits held by the permittee and refuse to issue to the permittee further
permits for construction, repair or excavation in public rights of way or
easements of the city. In addition to the foregoing remedies, a misdemeanor
criminal action may be filed against the permittee for violating this chapter.
(2003 Code § 8-06-12)
8-3-15: NO DUTY UPON CITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impose any private duty
or obligation upon the city to properly or accurately locate any utility line
or facility or to ensure that a permittee fully complies with the provisions
hereof. (2003 Code § 8-06-13)
8-3-16: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-06-15)
CHAPTER 4
ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Compliance With Chapter
8-4-3: Plantings Or Materials In Parkway; Permit
8-4-4: Encroachment Permit; Application And Conditions
8-4-5: Illegal Obstructions; Abatement
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivation shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ENCROACH: The use, intrusion, enclosure or occupation of a street, sidewalk,
parkway or the unused portion of a street.
OBSTRUCTION: Any obstacle or thing impeding, or inconveniencing or rendering
dangerous, public travel upon and along a street, alley or sidewalk.
PARKWAY: That portion of public right of way situated between the curb line of
any street and the property line of property abutting and adjoining any street.
In the absence of a curb, the curb line of a street shall be deemed to be the
edge of that portion of public right of way maintained and open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
SIDEWALK: The portion of the parkway of a street set aside and intended for the
use of pedestrians.
STREET: Highways, roads, alleys and bridges dedicated, purchased or otherwise
acquired for the public, including the unimproved or unused portion thereof,
maintained and open to use by the public. (2003 Code § 8-04-01)
8-4-2: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided by this chapter:
   A.   To cause, create or maintain any encroachment, or obstruction, upon or
within any street.
   B.   To place, install or maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu
of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation upon or within any street.
   C.   To erect or maintain poles, wires, pipes or structures upon or below
the surface of any street.
   D.   To drive any vehicle or ride an animal upon any sidewalk or parkway.
(2003 Code § 8-04-02)
8-4-3: PLANTINGS OR MATERIALS IN PARKWAY; PERMIT:
   A.   Application For Permit: Any owner or occupant of property abutting and
adjoining any street may, upon and within the parkway of such street:
      1.   Improve, adorn or plant trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation;
and
      2.   Place, install and maintain any object, substance or matter in lieu
of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation.
Provided such owner or occupant shall first file an application for a permit
with the building official, who shall have exclusive jurisdiction and
supervision over any planting of trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation, or
the installation and maintenance of objects, substances or matters in lieu of
trees, shrubs, bushes, grass or vegetation upon and within the parkway of a
street. All permits as herein provided shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Rejection Of Permit; Appeal To Council: In the event an application for
a permit is rejected by the building official, the owner or occupant of
property may, within ten (10) days following the date of the rejection of such
application by the city, appeal to the city council. (2003 Code § 8-04-03)
8-4-4: ENCROACHMENT PERMIT; APPLICATION AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Application For Permit: A person seeking to encroach, obstruct or use a
street, sidewalk or parkway, including the unused or unimproved portion of a
street, must file an application with the building official, who shall present
the same for the approval or disapproval of the city council. The application
shall include plans and specifications of sufficient clarity to indicate the
nature and extent of the proposed obstruction, encroachment, or use of the
street, sidewalk or parkway by which to demonstrate that relevant provisions of
this code and other relevant laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders
will be complied with, the legal description of the property abutting the
street, sidewalk or parkway upon or within which such encroachment, obstruction
or the use shall be or is intended to be performed, and any other additional
information necessary to make a fair determination of whether to allow or
permit the encroachment, obstruction or use.
   B.   Conditions Of Permit: A permit granted pursuant to the provisions of
subsection A of this section shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Limited Rights Of Permittee: The person to whom a permit is given or
granted shall acquire no property or contractual right in and to the street,
sidewalk or parkway and such permit may be revoked whenever the city council
deems it necessary as a proper police measure.
      2.   Compliance With Regulations: The person to whom a permit is issued
shall comply with all laws, orders and regulations of the city and with any
direction of any public officer, pursuant to law, which shall impose any duty
upon such person, or such person shall at his sole expense obtain all licenses
or permits which may be required.
      3.   Indemnification; Insurance Required: The person to whom a permit is
issued shall indemnify and save and hold harmless the city from and for any and
all losses, claims, actions and judgments for damages or injuries to persons or
property and losses and expenses caused or incurred by the permittee, its
servants, agents, employees, guests and business invitees. In addition, the
permittee shall maintain and keep in full force and effect liability insurance
in which the city shall be named as a named insured in amounts established by
the city council. The limits of insurance shall not be deemed a limitation of
the permittee's covenant to indemnify and save and hold harmless the city.
      4.   Restoration By Permittee: Upon revocation of any permit given or
granted, or in case of any disturbance or damage to pavement, sidewalk or other
surface or structure, permittee shall, at its own expense, and in the manner
required by the city, replace and restore such in a condition acceptable to the
city. (2003 Code § 8-04-04)
8-4-5: ILLEGAL OBSTRUCTIONS; ABATEMENT:
   A.   Removal Required: If any encroachment or obstruction has been placed,
installed, erected and maintained, or a use made and maintained for private or
business purposes, upon a street, sidewalk or parkway without prior permission
and consent, the building official shall, in writing, require immediate removal
thereof. (2003 Code § 8-04-06)
   B.   Removal By City; Costs: If such encroachment or obstruction or use has
not been removed, or commenced to be removed, and diligently prosecuted, prior
to the expiration of ten (10) days from such notification, by the person who
caused or owns or controls the encroachment, or obstruction, or use, the
official must commence proper action to abate the same as a nuisance, and if
judgment is recovered in favor of the city, the owner, occupant or person
maintaining such nuisance may, in addition to having the same abated, be
charged a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council
for every day such nuisance remained after notice as well as all costs. (2003
Code § 8-04-06; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
STREET NAMES AND ADDRESSES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose; Applicability
8-5-2: Designation Of Street Names
8-5-3: Street Address Numbering
8-5-4: Variances And Appeals
8-5-5: Failure Of Commission To Act
8-5-6: Violations
8-5-7: Penalty
8-5-1: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
This chapter is adopted with the intent to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of all residents within the city, especially in the context of
efficient emergency dispatch considerations. To achieve this purpose, the city
shall coordinate closely, through the planning and zoning administrator, with
representatives of the addressing committee and the planning and zoning
committee. This collaboration will ensure the implementation and maintenance of
a fair and uniform street naming and address numbering grid system.
Furthermore, the city shall establish procedures for making necessary
corrections and for the effective administration and enforcement of these
systems. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands located within
the city limits. (2003 Code § 8-02-01; amd. Ord. 2275, 8-5-2025)
8-5-2: DESIGNATION OF STREET NAMES:
There hereby is established in the city the following rules and regulations of
the naming of streets. The street names presently in place and previously
passed by the city council hereby are established. Thereafter, all new streets
shall be established in accordance with the same general standards hereinafter
set forth and made a part of the official street name list.
   A.   Standards: The following standards shall be used in determining or
approving street names:
      1.   Duplication Of Names Prohibited: There shall be no duplication of
street names by sound or spelling within any address numbering grid system
area. Differentiation shall not be by the addition of suffixes such as "road",
"street", "lane", etc. Street and road name duplications may be permitted only
where the streets involved are situated within two (2) or more separate
addressing grid system areas, when it can be determined that such duplication
will not cause confusion or jeopardize the public safety.
      2.   Future Street Dedications: Names for future street dedications shall
be suggested by the person or agency proposing the street dedication, subject
to all provisions of this chapter. The planning and zoning commission shall
determine what constitutes a separate street.
      3.   Prefixes: Directional prefixes will only be used in conjunction with
grid streets (i.e., East Bridge).
      4.   Suffixes: Each approved street name shall require a street suffix.
Only one (1) street suffix will be allowed per street name. Directional
suffixes may only be allowed in conjunction with grid streets. All street
suffixes will be abbreviated in compliance with the United States Postal
Addressing Standards. The following suffixes shall be used in designating
street names:
         a.   Street: An east-west right of way generally running in a straight
line that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been legally accepted, except streets in existence at
this date.
         b.   Avenue: A north-south right of way generally running in a
straight line that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent
properties, the dedication of which has been legally accepted, except avenues
in existence at this date.
         c.   Drive: A right of way generally meandering in an east-west
direction that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties,
the dedication of which has been legally accepted.
         d.   Way: A right of way generally meandering in a north-south
direction that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties,
the dedication of which has been legally accepted.
         e.   Court: An east-west dead end street connecting to a drive or
street at one end only and at the other end providing a cul-de-sac with a
radius of forty five feet (45') at the face of curb to the center of the
circle.
         f.   Place: A north-south dead end street connecting to a drive or
street at one end only and at the other end providing a cul-de-sac with a
radius of forty five feet (45') at the face of curb to the center of the
circle.
         g.   Lane: A private street, officially accepted as such, but not
maintained by the city or the county. Its acceptance is based upon an
application request and approval. Any private lane that has two (2) or more
addresses must be officially named.
         h.   Boulevard: Normally eighty foot (80') or greater right of way
which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, the
dedication of which has been officially accepted by the city or county and
which is separated by a median strip, usually landscaped.
         i.   Road: A designated major arterial which extends to both urban and
rural areas, dedicated and maintained by the city or county.
         j.   Loop: A secondary thoroughfare that returns to the same
originating road.
      5.   Component Order: Components of a street address shall always be in
the following order: address number, directional prefix (if any), street name,
directional suffix (if any), and street type, designation of apartment or
suite, and apartment/suite number.
      6.   Circle Or Dead End Streets: Five (5) platted lots or less coming
immediately off of any right of way shall carry the suffix "circle" after the
name of the street from which it emerges and shall be numbered according to the
grid of such street. Short dead end streets with five (5) or less addresses,
coming immediately off of a road of arterial or collector status, may also be
designated as "circles" and carry the name of the streets from which they
emerge, if such dead end streets will not or cannot be extended and provided
with their own names in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      7.   Existing Names; Preference: Where the proposed street is on the same
alignment, and is a continuation of an existing street, the name of the
existing street shall be applied. Where a street is on the same alignment but
is not linked to an existing street, the planning and zoning commission shall
designate a name, giving preference to existing names.
      8.   One Designation: Where a proposed street dedication unites two (2)
differently named streets located on the same alignment, the planning and
zoning commission shall designate one of the existing names.
      9. Prefixes: Streets may be given the prefix "north", "south", "east" or
"west" if they cross address numbering grid system baselines.
      10.   Change In Direction: If a street makes a very obvious change in
direction, a new street name shall be assigned. Whenever this situation occurs,
the change of street name should occur at an intersection rather than the point
where the direction changes.
   B.   Private Streets:
      1.   Official List: Officially accepted private streets (lanes) shall be
listed on an official street name list with the accompanying designation of
"private". Applications for private street names must be made to and approved
by the planning and zoning commission. Names used must not conflict with any
existing street names, public or private.
      2.   Street Signs:
         a.   The city shall make, install and maintain street signs on private
streets at approved locations. The financial obligations for the sign or signs
shall be the owners of properties which front upon such streets.
         b.   Any private street off of an officially accepted street shall
have signs indicating its name and status as "private".
   C.   Subdivisions:
      1.   Shown On Plats: Proposed subdivision street names shall be shown on
preliminary and final subdivision plats when submitted to the planning and
zoning commission. The commission shall not approve such plats until the street
names have been checked against the official street name map and list.
      2.   Partial And Half Streets: All half streets or partial streets shall
be named in accordance with the definitions here noted.
      3.   Overall Theme: Subdividers shall be encouraged to use an overall
theme when naming their streets.
      4.   Determination Of Names: It shall be the decision of the commission
to determine what name is to be used when two (2) or more streets are in
alignment.
      5.   Plat Approval: No plat shall be approved by the city council for
filing until all provisions of this chapter have been complied with. Approval
of a final plat for filing in the county recorder's office shall constitute
acceptance of all street names shown thereon.
      6.   Street Signs: It shall be the responsibility of any subdivider
dedicating a new street to finance street name signs at each and every
intersection.
   D.   Changes In Street Names:
      1.   Address Committee: The city’s address committee shall be comprised
of one (1) representative from each of the following agencies: city council,
city utility billing, City of Blackfoot planning and zoning, City of Blackfoot
fire department, City of Blackfoot GIS technician, City of Blackfoot police
department, Bingham County planning and zoning, Bingham County GIS, Bingham
County assessors, Bingham County sheriff, Bingham County road and bridge,
Bingham County emergency dispatch, Bingham County emergency coordinator,
Bingham County fire district each of the cities within the county, tribal, each
of the local United States Postal Service offices, utility companies, and
communication companies.
      2.   This committee will meet as required with the purpose of making
recommendations to the city’s planning and zoning board of commissioners
concerning public health, safety, and welfare as it relates to addressing.
      3.   Where necessary or desirable, recommendations from the addressing
committee may be made to the commission to change a street name, or the
commission may do so at its discretion, for reasons of duplication, similar
pronunciation or spelling, or for other reasons relating to public safety or
convenience.
      4. Commission Determination: In the case of street name changes
necessitated due to duplication, similar pronunciation or spelling, the
commission shall determine the street to be changed and select the new name to
be used. In so doing, the commission shall take into consideration the number
of existing addresses on the streets in question, the length of time each
street has used the name in question, the date of the original dedication of
said streets and any other factors pertinent to the changes in question. The
commission may hold public hearings on such changes.
      5.   Check With Official Map And List: No street names may be changed
until the proposed ones have been checked with the official street name map and
list.
      6.   Avoid Inconvenience: All changes shall be made in such a manner so
as to create the least possible inconvenience to residents and property owners
in the area. No change shall become effective for at least thirty (30) days
after official action by the commission.
      7.   Signs; Location And Lettering: All street name signs shall be
located in such manner as to be clearly visible to persons operating vehicles
on the road. The lettering of the street name shall be a minimum of three and
one-half inches (31/2") in height; however, all letters designating north,
south, east or west shall be two inches (2") in height. All lettering shall be
of such color and width to contrast sharply with the board or plate upon which
the lettering is placed. Said board or plate shall be a minimum of six inches
(6") in width. All street name signs shall have the street names lettered on
both sides and shall be so positioned that the name is visible from both
directions of the street. (2003 Code § 8-02-02; amd. Ord. 2275, 8-5-2025)
8-5-3: STREET ADDRESS NUMBERING:
All street address numbers shall conform to the grid system shown on the
official address number grid map kept on file at the city hall office.
   A.   Address Grid: The Blackfoot address grid comprises the following
characteristics and is so defined in order to establish and maintain
consistency in addressing standards within the City of Blackfoot.
      1.   The city of Blackfoot road system exists in two (2) general
orientations:
         a.   The downtown original blocks area where North/South Axis roads
are oriented at approximately North 40 degrees East, and East/West Axis roads
are oriented at approximately North 50 degrees West; and
         b.   Roads that are aligned in a predominately orthogonal (true north)
orientation outside the downtown blocks. Roads that run North and South, and
Northeast and Southwest shall be treated the same, and roads that run East and
West, and Northwest and Southeast shall be treated the same.
      2.   Origin : The North/South axis is defined as the Union Pacific
Railroad, and the East/West axis is defined as West and East Bridge Streets.
      3.   Extents: The extent of the Blackfoot address grid shall be the city
limits and shall dynamically evolve as annexations occur to include said
annexed areas. Note: This rule implies that former county addresses shall be
made to conform to the city address grid once they are annexed into the city.
      4.   Interval: Whereas the original downtown blocks were created as three
hundred fifty foot by three hundred fifty foot (350' x 350') on average, these
are used as the precedent throughout the city as being one hundred (100)
addresses per three hundred fifty feet (350').
      5.   Parity: Structures on northerly and westerly sides of roads shall be
addressed as odd, while structures along the easterly and southerly sides of
roads shall consistently be addressed as even throughout the entirety of the
address grid.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3664.png]
 
   B.   Assigned By City: All address numbers shall be assigned by the city. No
other person or organization, public or private, shall assign any address
number to any residence, business, industry or use.
   C.   Guidelines In Assigning Numbers: The following shall be the guidelines
in assigning such address numbers by the city:
      1.   Businesses And Dwelling Units: Only one number shall be assigned to
each business, use or dwelling unit.
      2.   Vacant Lots: Numbers shall be assigned to vacant lots within platted
subdivisions and shall otherwise be assigned in such a manner that adequate
numbers are reserved for possible future developments or resubdivisions of
land.
      3.   Street Frontage: All addresses shall be assigned on the street upon
which the structure fronts. When vehicular access is used from a point other
than the street frontage, the number shall be placed so as to be visible from
the street side of the building.
      4.   Even And Odd Numbers: All addresses one side of a street shall be
designated as either even or odd numbers, but not both.
      5.   Owner To Post Legible Numbers: The owner of each structure shall
post the assigned address number in such a manner that it is clearly visible
from the street. The numbers shall be at least three and one-half inches (31/
2") high. Numbers must be displayed prior to occupancy.
         a.   Address Numbers In Alleyways And On Multi-Occupancy Buildings:
Any building with an access door located in an alleyway or side street, or with
multiple access doors on a single building, or as ordered by the fire chief or
fire marshal, shall post the assigned address number in such a manner that it
is clearly visible and in accordance with the current fire code.
      6.   Change Of Nonconforming Numbers: Existing address numbers not in
conformance with the official address number grid system map may be changed by
the city council giving official written notice at least ninety (90) days in
advance of the effective date to property owners affected by such changes. New
address numbers must be posted on the property by the effective date. (2003
Code § 8-02-06; amd. Ord. 2142, 5-3-2016, eff. 5-3-2016; Ord. 2275, 8-5-2025)
8-5-4: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
   A.   Grant Of Variance By Council: The standards and requirements of these
regulations may be modified or varied by the city council where the enforcement
of the rules hereunder will result in extraordinary hardship; provided, that
substantial justice is done and the public interest is secured hereunder. In
granting any such variance or modification, the city council may require
conditions thereof as will, in its judgment, secure substantial compliance with
the general principles hereof.
   B.   Appeals: Appeals may be had by any person from a decision of the
commission to the city council within ten (10) days after its decision. (2003
Code § 8-02-07; amd. Ord. 2275, 8-5-2025)
8-5-5: FAILURE OF COMMISSION TO ACT:
If in an instance the commission fails to act or carry out its responsibilities
according to the regulations contained herein, the city council shall assume
all the duties of the commission as herein specified in relation to the
application concerned. (2003 Code § 8-02-08; amd. Ord. 2275, 8-5-2025)
8-5-6: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Specified:
      1.   Signs To Comply With Map: No person shall erect or install a street
name sign that is not in accordance with the official street name map.
      2.   Defacing Street Name Signs: No person shall remove, alter, change or
otherwise deface a street name sign that exists in accordance with the official
street name map.
      3.   Posting Address Required: All persons shall post the address number
of his property as designated by the city council and as required by this
chapter.
   B.   Action To Correct Violation: Upon knowledge of a violation, the city
council may require the city attorney to commence action to correct the
violation and to punish the same. (2003 Code § 8-02-09; amd. Ord. 2275, 8-5-
2025)
8-5-7: PENALTY:
Each violation of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each violation for each day it
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (2003 Code § 8-02-09; amd.
2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2275, 8-5-2025)
CHAPTER 6
IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE CANALS AND DITCHES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Intent And Purpose
8-6-2: Maintenance Required
8-6-3: Failure To Maintain Considered A Nuisance
8-6-4: Abatement Of Nuisance; Notice
8-6-5: Appeal
8-6-6: Owner Responsibility
8-6-7: City Removal; Action Against Owner
8-6-8: Penalty For Interference
8-6-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate the use and
maintenance of irrigation and drainage canals and ditches to ensure that each
property owner, and his property, receives the full and lawful amount of water
and the full amount of head and pressure. (2003 Code § 8-03-01)
8-6-2: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this chapter, "maintenance" shall be
defined as sufficient upkeep, repair, cleaning, debris removal, weed removal,
break or hole repair, rodent killing, or construction such that a free flow of
water is maintained and a downstream user has the water head, amount and
pressure that he is legally entitled to.
   B.   Maintenance Of Canals, Ditches And Embankments: It hereby is declared
to be unlawful for any property owner of land through which an irrigation canal
or ditch or a drainage canal or ditch traverses such land to fail to maintain
in good order and repair any such canal or ditch that traverses through his
property such that said canal or ditch is ready to transport water.
Additionally, such owner of the land through which such a canal or ditch
traverses shall maintain the embankments thereof in good repair, in order to
prevent the water from wasting during the irrigating season, and shall not at
any time permit a greater quantity of water to be turned into said ditch or
canal than the banks thereof will easily contain or than can be used for
beneficial or useful purpose. (2003 Code § 8-03-02)
8-6-3: FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CONSIDERED A NUISANCE:
The failure to maintain a canal or ditch as in this chapter required is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. (2003 Code § 8-03-03)
8-6-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE; NOTICE:
   A.   Order To Remove: The city clerk, any member of the police department,
fire department or building department, jointly hereafter referred to as "city
official", may order any nuisance herein in this chapter corrected, abated or
removed after ten (10) days' prior notice of intention to correct, abate or
remove the nuisance.
   B.   Notice Of Abatement Or Removal:
      1.   Posting Or Serving: Notice of such order shall be posted upon said
land. Copies of said notice shall be served upon the owner of the real estate
on which the nuisance is located. If the owner of the land cannot be found or
located, the notice posted on the property shall be sufficient.
      2.   Content Of Notice: If it is determined by the city official that a
public "nuisance", as defined in section
8-6-3 of this chapter, exists on any lot, place or parcel of real property, the
city official shall cause a notice to be issued to correct, abate or remove
such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed "Notice To Clean Ditch Or Canal",
shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably
sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance, shall describe the
nuisance in terms reasonably sufficient to identify the same, shall direct the
abatement of the nuisance, shall specify the penalty provisions as provided
herein, and shall specify the appeal process as provided herein; and shall
state that if the city corrects, removes or abates the nuisance, the city shall
assess the cost thereof against the property with the real property taxes.
(2003 Code § 8-03-04)
8-6-5: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) days from the date of posting, or personal service of the
required notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot, place
or real property affected may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be
in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the regular meeting or
regular adjourned meeting of the city council, not less than ten (10) days nor
more than twenty six (26) days after receipt of the appeal, the city council
shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal, and the decision of the city
council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. In the event that the nuisance
involves flooding, the city may abate, correct or remove the nuisance
regardless of any appeal and may take immediate action without notice to the
owner. (2003 Code § 8-03-05)
8-6-6: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person occupying or controlling any lot,
place or real estate in the city which has been declared a public nuisance as
provided herein within ten (10) days from the date of notification, as provided
herein, or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten (10) days from
the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to correct, remove or
abate the nuisance as stated. (2003 Code § 8-03-06)
8-6-7: CITY REMOVAL; ACTION AGAINST OWNER:
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal or any owner or occupant so notified to
remove the public "nuisance", as defined in section
8-6-3 of this chapter, within the time specified in this chapter, the city
official may notify the city attorney in writing of the last known legal owner
and property description in general terms. The city attorney may cause legal
action to be taken through the magistrate's court for action as follows: (2003
Code § 8-03-07)
   A.   Imposition Of Penalty; Civil Action: The owner of any lot, place or
real property within the city who shall permit or allow the existence of a
public "nuisance", as defined in section
8-6-3 of this chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled
by him, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code. The city attorney, in his discretion, may also take civil action
to obtain an order from said court enjoining the maintenance of said public
nuisance and the city shall be awarded its court costs and attorney fees for
prosecuting the action. (2003 Code § 8-03-07; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Special Assessment For Costs: Regardless of the action by the city
attorney or in addition thereto, upon direction of the city council and at the
city council's discretion, upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or
occupant so notified to remove the public "nuisance", as defined in section
8-6-3 of this chapter, within the time specified in this chapter, the city
official knowing of the violation shall notify the city clerk's office in
writing of the known legal owner, if known, and property description in general
terms and the nature of the violation. The city clerk's office shall proceed
with the work specified in the notice. The cost of the work shall be
transmitted to the city council, who shall cause the same to be paid and levy a
special assessment against the property as allowed in Idaho Code section 50-
1008. The owner of the property shall be notified of the assessment and may pay
the same prior to its certification on the tax rolls. (2003 Code § 8-03-07)
8-6-8: PENALTY FOR INTERFERENCE:
It shall be a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code, for any person to interfere with the city official in correcting,
abating or removing a nuisance as provided herein. (2003 Code § 8-03-08; amd.
2012 Code)
CHAPTER 7
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
SECTION:
8-7-1: Trimming Trees And Shrubs Overhanging Public Ways
8-7-2: Injury To Trees Or Shrubbery
8-7-3: Trees Outside Property Line
8-7-1: TRIMMING TREES AND SHRUBS OVERHANGING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   Trees: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall
trim all trees on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging the sidewalks,
streets or alleys, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with
pedestrian or public travel.
   B.   Hedges And Shrubbery: Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real
property shall trim all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so
that no part of said hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a
public sidewalk in the city. (2003 Code § 8-05-01)
8-7-2: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBBERY:
It hereby is declared unlawful for any person not the owner thereof, or without
lawful authority so to do, to wilfully injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any
fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick
any flower or plant, growing, standing, or being either on private ground or
any street, parking, public park or place within the city. (2003 Code § 8-05-
02)
8-7-3: TREES OUTSIDE PROPERTY LINE:
The mayor and city council hereby are given full and complete control over all
trees growing within the confines of the city limits which are outside the
property lines of the respective lots, plots and tracts. (2003 Code § 8-05-03)
CHAPTER 8
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-8-1: General Rules Applicable To All Parks
8-8-2: Jensen Grove Park And Memorial Park
8-8-3: City Owned RV Park
8-8-1: GENERAL RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL PARKS:
   A.   Purposes And Authority: This section is for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the appropriate use by the public and in the
furtherance of the intended usage of the city parks, and it is enacted upon the
authority derived from the constitution of the state, article XII section 2,
and from Idaho Code sections 50-302 and 50-303, and for the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
   B.   Hours: Unless otherwise specified below, the parks of the city shall be
open and available for use from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to dusk.
   C.   Dogs:
      1.   Leash Required: When parks are open to the public, canines,
possessing a valid dog license, are allowed in the parks so long as they are
leashed and within control of their owner. Violation of this subsection may be
cited as a city code violation and processed under section
1-4-6 of this code.
      2.   Clean Up Required: Any person owning, harboring, keeping,
possessing, caring or having custodial duties over any canine shall clean up
all excrement or other waste from such canine and deposit the same in a trash
bin. Violation of this subsection may be cited as a city code violation and
processed under section
1-4-6 of this code. (Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
   D.   Criminals Banned From Parks: Any person convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor committed within a public park shall be banned from all city parks
for a period of one year from the date of conviction. Violation of this
subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. 2012
Code)
   E.   Littering: Every person using any city park shall clean up all refuse,
litter or other items brought in or used by such person. Failure to so clean up
shall be considered littering.
   F.   Glass Containers Prohibited: Glass containers in city parks are
prohibited. Violation of this subsection may be cited as a city code violation
and processed under section
1-4-6 of this code. (Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
   G.   Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited: Except in Jensen Grove Park and
Memorial Park with a valid permit, or except in the city owned RV park as set
forth in section
8-8-3 of this chapter, alcoholic beverages are prohibited in all parks owned or
maintained by the city. Violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2144,
6-7-2016, eff. 6-7-2016)
   H.   Reservation Fees: The mayor and city council shall adopt fees for the
use of park facilities in order to recover some of the costs of the city to
process the various applications and a portion of the maintenance costs of the
picnic shelters, picnic tables, softball fields, and parks of the city.
   I.   Application For Reservation Required: Persons, associations,
corporations and other entities, desiring to reserve park picnic shelters, ball
fields or the amphitheater shall apply at the city clerk's office to reserve a
time of use.
   J.   Use Without Reservation; Removal: If persons, associations,
corporations, and other entities, using the picnic shelters, ball fields or
amphitheater have not reserved the time and paid the appropriate fee, and are
using such facilities at a time that has been reserved for another person,
association, corporation or other entity, if they refuse to vacate the shelter,
they shall be removed from the shelter by the police department and they may be
cited for trespass. City functions and events shall have precedence over all
other functions and events.
   K.   Reservation List Maintained: A list of reservations for a particular
picnic shelter, ball fields and amphitheater shall be maintained at City Hall.
(Ord. 2077, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
   L.   Smoking In Designated Areas Only: Smoking shall be prohibited in all
City parks. Notwithstanding the foregoing prohibition of smoking in all City
parks, the City Council may, by resolution duly passed at a City Council
meeting, designate that smoking may be allowed in specific designated areas in
one or more City parks. Such areas shall be designated by clearly visible
signage. In the event that the City Council designates such an area, smoking
shall be limited to the designated area. Smoking in any area of a City park not
designated as a smoking area shall be prohibited. Any person who pleads guilty
or is found guilty of violating this subsection shall be guilty of an
infraction with a set fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus applicable
court cost.
For purposes of this subsection, "smoking" shall be defined as the use or
consumption of tobacco products of any form, as defined in Idaho Code 39-5702
(14), or electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic cigar, electronic
pipe, vape product or any other similar product name or descriptor, as defined
in Idaho Code 39-5702(6). (Ord. 2183, 7-2-2019)
8-8-2: JENSEN GROVE PARK AND MEMORIAL PARK:
   A.   Alcohol Permit: Alcohol will be allowed in the amphitheater, the picnic
areas and the ball fields of Jensen Grove Park and Memorial Park, upon granting
of a permit by the City. No alcohol shall be permitted outside of the picnic
areas, the ball fields or the amphitheater.
      1.   Alcohol Permitted: Only beer and wine may be permitted.
      2.   Application: A person desiring to obtain an alcohol permit shall
submit an application to the City Clerk's Office and pay the appropriate fee.
      3.   Fee: The fee for an alcohol permit in the designated areas shall be
set by the City Council. Such fee shall be nonrefundable. The fee shall be in
addition to the reservation and cleaning fees and deposits required under other
sections of this Code.
      4.   Drunkenness: Drunkenness in the park shall be prohibited.
   B.   Large Events: Events and functions that are expected to have more than
one hundred (100) people present or that may require that significant portions
of the park be closed to the general public shall require City Council
approval. (2003 Code § 8-07-02)
   C.   Boat Launch Fee: The City Council may, by resolution, establish a fee
to be charged to anyone that launches a boat or other watercraft into Jensen
Grove Lake. Failure to pay the fee prior to launching a boat or watercraft
after passage of said resolution shall constitute a City Code violation and
shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation. (Ord.
2087, 7-7-2009, eff. 7-7-2009)
   D.   Hours: Jensen Grove Park, including the amphitheater, park, picnic
areas, playgrounds, parking lot, beach, greenbelt walkways, and skate park
shall be open at all times unless otherwise directed by City Council. The
Jensen Grove Lake and all waterways available for watercraft shall be open from
thirty (30) minutes after sunrise to thirty (30) minutes before sunset during
periods of the year sufficient water is available for watercraft use. All boats
must be removed from the water thirty (30) minutes before sunset and may not be
placed in the water until thirty (30) minutes after sunrise. (Ord. 2160, 10-3-
2017)
8-8-3: CITY OWNED RV PARK:
   A.   Alcohol: During the time period of the year that RV spaces are
available for rent from the City, as set by the City Parks and Recreation
Department, alcohol will be allowed in the RV parking area without a permit. No
alcohol shall be permitted outside of the RV parking area.
   B.   Drunkenness: Drunkenness in the RV park shall be prohibited. (Ord.
2144, 6-7-2016, eff. 6-7-2016)
CHAPTER 9
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Cemetery Named
8-9-2: Clerk To Convey Lots; Sale Price
8-9-3: Markers Or Monuments Required
8-9-4: Restrictions On Use Of Cemetery
8-9-5: Fees
8-9-6: Permanent Memorials
8-9-7: Vaults And Concrete Boxes
8-9-1: CEMETERY NAMED:
The name of the cemetery situated about one-half (1/2) mile north of the city,
in section 35, township 2 south of range 35, east of Boise Meridian, owned and
belonging to the city is Grove City Cemetery. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-
2010)
8-9-2: CLERK TO CONVEY LOTS; SALE PRICE:
   A.   The city clerk is hereby empowered to sell lots, adult burial spaces,
which shall be one-third (1/3) of a lot, infant burial spaces, and places of
interment of cremated remains, in Grove City Cemetery, and to collect the
purchase price therefor, as well as all other fees and charges provided for
herein, and it shall be the city clerk's duty to pay all such funds into the
treasury once each month. The city clerk should deliver to the purchaser of
each lot, or burial space, a certificate signed by the mayor and countersigned
by the city clerk under the seal of the city, specifying that the person to
whom the same is issued is the owner of such lot or burial space. (Ord. 2093,
4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010)
   B.   The sale price of each cemetery lot shall be in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council, and the sale price of each
burial space proportionately priced, when such lot or burial space is sold to a
resident of the city, or for burial of any person who, at the time of death,
was a resident of the city. The sale price of each cemetery lot shall be in
such amount as established by resolution of the city council, and the price of
each burial space shall be proportionately priced, when sold to a person for
burial of a deceased person who at the time of death was a nonresident of the
city. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
8-9-3: MARKERS OR MONUMENTS REQUIRED:
The owners of lots or relatives of deceased persons buried in the cemetery are
hereby required to erect headstones or other suitable markers or monuments at
the heads of the graves consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010,
eff. 4-20-2010)
8-9-4: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CEMETERY:
   A.   Fences; Land Disturbance: No person shall erect any fence, corner post
or other boundary mark upon any lot in said cemetery, nor grade the ground or
land thereof, except under the direction of the sexton.
   B.   Certificate Of Title Required: No person shall be permitted to inter
the body of a deceased person without first obtaining a certificate of title to
the lot or plot, or furnishing written permission from the owner thereof, which
permission shall be filed with the city clerk, and no person shall disinter any
body except under direction.
   C.   Prohibited Items: The following items shall not be allowed to be placed
on, near or around any burial lot in the cemetery:
      1.   Bottles, vases and similar containers made of glass.
      2.   Any and all pets. No pets shall be allowed in the cemetery at any
time.
      3.   Solar lights or lights of any kind at ground level.
      4.   Toys and similar objects that cannot be secured, including items of
clothing.
      5.   Benches, unless they are made of concrete and incorporated into and
become part of the headstone and are set in concrete to generally accepted
construction standards, and approved by the sexton prior to installation.
      6.   Food and drinks, alcoholic beverages, cigarettes, and similar
materials.
      7.   Rocks, gravel, and other landscaping material.
   D.   Smoking Tobacco Products: Smoking tobacco products in the cemetery is
prohibited except in specifically designated areas, if any.
   E.   Alcoholic Beverages: Possession of or use of alcoholic beverages in the
cemetery is prohibited. (Ord. 2123, 7-1-2014, eff. 7-1-2014)
8-9-5: FEES:
The fees for services to be rendered at the cemetery with respect to opening,
caring for, and disinterment of graves shall be paid in advance to the city
clerk. Such fees shall be as specified by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
8-9-6: PERMANENT MEMORIALS:
   A.   Flowers shall be allowed in nonglass, permanently secured vases.
   B.   Shepherd's hooks are allowed, but they must be set within a concrete
wash at least three inches (3") in width around all sides and flush to the
ground to permit mowing. Items hanging from shepherd's hooks may be allowed,
but must be secured or fastened in such a manner that they cannot be blown off
by wind.
   C.   Over the headstone monuments, statues and like items are allowed, but
only if they are secured on top of or securely connected to the headstone.
   D.   Slow growing shrubs and perennial flowers may be planted if they are
well maintained, and are within twelve inches (12") to either side of the
headstone (but not in front or behind the headstone).
   E.   Winter decorations are allowed, however, any such decorations not
removed by April 1 of each year shall be discarded by the city.
   F.   All nonsecured and nonpermanent summer type monuments that are not
removed by October 1 of each year shall be discarded by the city.
(Ord. 2093, 4-20-2010, eff. 4-20-2010)
8-9-7: VAULTS AND CONCRETE BOXES:
In order to maintain a high standard of care and to eliminate sunken graves,
all burials, whether standard or cremation, must use rigid and durable outside
containers (commonly known as “vaults”) constructed of reinforced concrete.
(Ord. 2235, 4-4-2023)
CHAPTER 10
CITY LIBRARY
SECTION:
8-10-1: State Law Adopted By Reference
8-10-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The provisions of Idaho Code section 33-2601 et seq., hereby are adopted and
incorporated as the governing law of the city library. (2003 Code § 2-02-01)
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
SECTION:
8-11-1: Name
8-11-2: Rules And Regulations For Operation
8-11-3: Private Franchise
8-11-1: NAME:
The name of the swimming pool operated by the city shall be the Blackfoot
municipal swimming pool. (2003 Code § 8-08-01)
8-11-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION:
The rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the swimming pool
shall be adopted by resolution by the city council. (2003 Code § 8-08-02)
8-11-3: PRIVATE FRANCHISE:
The city may enter into a license, contract or franchise agreement with one or
more individuals or entities to operate the swimming pool. (2003 Code § 8-08-
03)
CHAPTER 12
MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
SECTION:
8-12-1: Title
8-12-2: Supervision Of Golf Course
8-12-3: Budget
8-12-4: Golf Professional
8-12-5: Duties Of Golf Professional
8-12-6: Clubhouse And Food Concession
8-12-7: Junior Golf Clinic
8-12-8: Golf Course Advisory Board
8-12-9: Qualifications, Term Of Office, Compensation Of Golf Course Advisory
Board
8-12-10: Rules, Organization And Meetings
8-12-11: Duties Of Golf Course Advisory Board
8-12-12: Golf Course Fees
8-12-13: Golf Carts
8-12-14: Tournaments
8-12-1: TITLE:
The title of this chapter shall be the GOLF COURSE ORDINANCE. (2003 Code § 8-
09-01)
8-12-2: SUPERVISION OF GOLF COURSE:
The golf course shall be under the supervision of the Mayor. (2003 Code § 8-09-
02)
8-12-3: BUDGET:
An operating budget for the golf course shall be included in the annual budget
to be adopted by the City. (2003 Code § 8-09-03)
8-12-4: GOLF PROFESSIONAL:
The City shall contract with, or employee, in Councils' discretion, a golf
professional to manage and operate the golf course and related facilities.
(Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-5: DUTIES OF GOLF PROFESSIONAL:
The golf professional shall have the responsibility for the operation of the
golf course, subject to the direct supervision of the Mayor. The golf
professional shall have the responsibility of supervising play on the course,
and shall have the sole and final authority with respect to the determination
of starting positions of players on the course. (2003 Code § 8-09-05)
8-12-6: CLUBHOUSE AND FOOD CONCESSION:
The clubhouse shall be maintained in clean condition and kept free of litter
and rubbish. The food concession at the clubhouse shall be managed by the golf
professional, as well as the pro shop. Sanitary conditions in the clubhouse
food concession shall be maintained to State Health Department standards. (Ord.
2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-7: JUNIOR GOLF CLINIC:
The golf professional shall conduct at least one (1) junior golf clinic during
the summer months of each year, such clinic to be available to individuals of
the age of eighteen (18) years and under. The charge for such clinic shall be
in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the City Council with
respect to the use of golf course facilities. Clinics shall consist of four (4)
days, with one (1) clinic session per day. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-8: GOLF COURSE ADVISORY BOARD:
There hereby is created a Golf Course Advisory Board, to be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Mayor may appoint a Council member
to serve as an ex officio member of the board with no voting rights. Such
Council member shall act as a liaison between the Mayor and City Council and
the Golf Course Advisory Board. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-9: QUALIFICATIONS, TERM OF OFFICE, COMPENSATION OF GOLF COURSE ADVISORY
BOARD:
Members of the Golf Course Advisory Board may be City or County resident
taxpayers. Members may be removed after a public hearing by a majority vote of
the full Council. Members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-
2017)
8-12-10: RULES, ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS:
The Golf Course Advisory Board shall elect its own Chairman and adopt its own
rules and regulations pertaining to its function and operation. Meetings shall
be held at least once monthly for not less than six (6) months in each year. A
majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-11: DUTIES OF GOLF COURSE ADVISORY BOARD:
The Golf Course Advisory Board shall observe the operation, maintenance and
management of the golf course, and shall, as needed, confer, through the
Chairperson of the board, in an advisory capacity, with the Mayor or Council
member in charge of the Park and Recreation Department concerning such matters.
All recommendations made to the Council member in charge by such board
Chairperson shall be duly considered by him and be taken into consideration in
the management of the golf course, so long as the recommendations are
consistent with effective operation of the course. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-12: GOLF COURSE FEES:
Fees for the use of the golf course facility shall be in accordance with the
schedule of fees to be adopted by the City Council from time to time, a copy of
which schedule shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's Office, with another
copy to be kept on file at the golf course clubhouse. Such schedules shall be
available for public inspection at any time during business hours of the City
Clerk or the golf professional. (2003 Code § 8-09-12)
8-12-13: GOLF CARTS:
   A.   License; Fees: All golf carts operated on the Municipal golf course
shall be annually registered and licensed with the City. Licenses shall expire
December 31 each year. Fees shall be as adopted from time to time by the City
Council.
   B.   Sticker: A license sticker, issued by the golf professional upon
payment of the annual registration and license fee, shall be attached and
displayed on each golf cart operated on the golf course. Licenses for golf
course stored carts shall designate such by the letter "S" after the numerical
license number. (Ord. 2155, 5-2-2017)
8-12-14: TOURNAMENTS:
Green fees may be waived by the City Council for tournament play. (Ord. 2155,
5-2-2017)
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
SECTION:
8-13-1: Official Name
8-13-2: Purpose And Intent
8-13-3: Definitions
8-13-4: Airport Manager
8-13-5: Supervision Of Airport
8-13-6: Penalty For Failure To Comply With Rules And Regulations Governing The
Airport
8-13-7: Budget; Fees Received From Airport Operations
8-13-8: Maintenance Personnel
8-13-9: Airport Committee
8-13-10: Qualification And Term Of Office Of Airport Committee
8-13-11: Duties Of Airport Committee
8-13-12: Rules, Organization And Meetings Of Airport Committee
8-13-13: Rules And Regulations Relating To Payment Of Fees For Use Of Airport
8-13-14: Use Of Tie Downs
8-13-15: Restrictions On Airport Access And Use
8-13-16: Payment Of Fees
8-13-17: Disposition Of Property To Satisfy Lien
8-13-18: Leasing Of Space For Hangar
8-13-19: Fraudulent Procurement Of Use Of Airport Facilities
8-13-20: Permit For Commercial Use
8-13-21: Failure To Pay Charges
8-13-22: Safety Rules And Regulations
8-13-1: OFFICIAL NAME:
The official name of the airport of the city shall be Blackfoot McCarley Field.
Wherever the term "airport" is used elsewhere in this chapter, it shall be
deemed to refer to Blackfoot McCarley Field. (2003 Code § 8-10-01)
8-13-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is intended that Blackfoot McCarley Field:
   A.   Become economically self-sustaining insofar as possible;
   B.   That the airport premises and all activities thereon be for
aeronautical purposes and the attendant needs of such users;
   C.   That no person be granted an exclusive right to conduct any commercial
aeronautical activity thereon;
   D.   That no person using the airport facility be discriminated against
because of that person's race, religion, sex, color, creed, or national origin.
(2003 Code § 8-10-02)
8-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for
navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance,
designed for such navigation, but used primarily as safety equipment.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water owned or operated by the city or its agents
and which is used or intended for use for the landing and takeoff of aircraft
and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport
buildings or other airport facilities or rights of way, together with all
airport buildings and facilities located thereon.
COMMERCIAL USE: Any operation from the airport for compensation or hire. The
test of commercial operation is whether such operation is incidental to the
operator's other business, or is, in and of itself, an enterprise for profit.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or body politic; and includes any trustee, receiver,
assignee or other similar representative thereof.
USE FEE: A measurable way of assessing fees for the use of the airport.
VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. (2003 Code § 8-10-03)
8-13-4: AIRPORT MANAGER:
The airport manager shall be employed by the mayor, and shall:
   A.   Act as airport manager.
   B.   Make recommendations from time to time to the mayor with respect to the
establishment and revision of regulations governing the conduct and use of the
airport.
   C.   Alert the mayor to rules and directives adopted by the federal aviation
agency of the United States Of America and the department of aeronautics of the
state as they relate to the airport to the end that the airport may be in
compliance with necessary regulations governing its operation and use.
   D.   Serve at a compensation to be decided by the mayor.
   E.   See that the operations of the airport are conducted in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the
operation of the airport or aircraft using such facilities.
   F.   Not allow waste on the airport premises or permit refuse or debris to
accumulate in or about the premises.
   G.   See that the yard, lawns, trees and shrubs surrounding and adjacent to
the administration building are maintained and kept in good condition.
   H.   In the event the city is operating the airport under a lease, see that
the terms of the lease agreement are complied with by the lessee.
   I.   Have the responsibility of supervising the use of the airport by all
persons, subject to the overall supervision of the mayor.
   J.   Follow the instructions given him from time to time by the mayor.
   K.   Have the responsibility of assigning flight priorities, and making
other determinations with respect to the use of the airport facilities as
circumstances may warrant from time to time. (2003 Code § 8-10-04; amd. Ord.
2215, 12-7-2021)
8-13-5: SUPERVISION OF AIRPORT:
The airport shall be under the general supervision of the mayor, and the
airport manager shall be directly responsible to and subject to the control of
the mayor. (2003 Code § 8-10-05)
8-13-6: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE
AIRPORT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to comply with any
lawful order or instruction given to such person by the airport manager with
respect to the use of the facilities at the airport. (2003 Code § 8-10-06)
8-13-7: BUDGET; FEES RECEIVED FROM AIRPORT OPERATIONS:
   A.   Budget: An operating budget for the airport shall be included in the
annual budget to be adopted by the city. Such budget requests shall take into
consideration recommendations of the airport manager and airport committee made
to the mayor. The responsibility for the submission of said budget requests
shall nevertheless be the sole responsibility of the mayor, subject to the
approval of the city council at its budget hearing.
   B.   Fees: All fees collected from airport operations shall be placed in a
special fund to be used only for airport maintenance and operation. (2003 Code
§ 8-10-07)
8-13-8: MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL:
The city shall employ personnel for the purpose of maintaining the airport, as
needed, under the direction of the mayor, the salary for such personnel to be
paid from the operating budget referred to in section
8-13-7 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-10-08)
8-13-9: AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
There hereby is created an airport committee, to consist of a total of five (5)
members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. (2003
Code § 8-10-09)
8-13-10: QUALIFICATION AND TERM OF OFFICE OF AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
Four (4) members of the airport committee shall be resident taxpayers of the
city or the county. One of those four (4) residents shall be associated with
commercial aviation activities at the city airport; a second such resident
member shall be a private aircraft owner, not engaged in commercial activities
related to aviation; a third such resident member shall have no relationship to
flying or aviation, either as an owner or operator of an aircraft, nor
interested in a firm or corporation having an interest in matters pertaining to
aviation, airports or related activities; the fourth such resident member may,
but need not be, associated with aviation activities at the city airport. The
fifth member of the airport committee shall be associated with commercial
aviation at the city airport or shall be a private aircraft owner who uses the
city airport on a regular basis. Such fifth member must be a resident of the
state. The term of office for the first three (3) appointive members of the
committee shall be one, two (2) and three (3) years, to be determined by lot,
and thereafter the term of each member shall be three (3) years. The term of
office for the last two (2) appointive members shall be for a term of three (3)
years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall
be filled by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members may be
removed, after a public hearing, by the mayor, confirmed by a majority vote of
the full city council. Members shall serve without compensation. (2003 Code §
8-10-10)
8-13-11: DUTIES OF AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
The airport committee shall observe the operation, maintenance and management
of the airport and shall, from time to time, confer with the airport manager in
an advisory capacity and with the mayor or the council member appointed by the
mayor to oversee the airport. All recommendations made to the mayor or council
member by such committee chairperson shall be duly considered by him and be
taken into consideration in the management of the airport, so long as the
recommendations are consistent with effective operation of the airport. Any
such recommendation so made shall not be binding upon the mayor or council
member, but if not given satisfactory consideration, the airport committee may
then submit such recommendations to the city council for further consideration.
The chairperson of the airport committee shall be the only member of the
committee having the authority to make such recommendations to the mayor or
council member. (2003 Code § 8-10-11)
8-13-12: RULES, ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS OF AIRPORT COMMITTEE:
The airport committee shall elect its own chairperson and adopt its own rules
and regulations pertaining to its function and operation. (2003 Code § 8-10-12)
8-13-13: RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO PAYMENT OF FEES FOR USE OF AIRPORT:
Fees to be charged for the use of airport facilities shall be in accordance
with a schedule of fees to be adopted by the governing body from time to time,
a copy of which schedule of fees shall be filed with the city clerk in the city
hall and the airport manager at the airport office. Schedules and fee records
shall be available for examination by interested persons during regular
business hours of the city clerk. Fee records shall be audited by the city
treasurer annually. Said schedule of fees may be amended or altered by the
governing body from time to time. The following rules and regulations shall
pertain to the payment of such fees:
   A.   Any fee charged to the user of the aircraft shall be payable when the
charge is incurred, unless otherwise prescribed in this chapter, and such fees
shall be paid to the city clerk or airport manager as herein provided. Fees
collected by the airport manager shall be accounted for to the city clerk at
least once monthly. If a fee payable to the airport manager is incurred when
the airport office is not open, the fee shall be paid promptly as soon as the
airport office opens.
   B.   Transient fees, daily fees and use fees shall be paid to the airport
manager; and all other fees are payable to the city clerk.
   C.   The airport manager shall conduct periodic inspections to determine
whether fees are being collected, paid and accounted for as required by the
provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-10-13)
8-13-14: USE OF TIE DOWNS:
Use of any tie down space in the tie down area of the airport shall be subject
to the following terms and conditions:
   A.   The owner, user or occupier of such space shall be deemed to have
examined the physical facilities of such tie down area from time to time, and
by the use of same shall be deemed to have accepted the same in the condition
in which the area was at the time he began his initial use of such area, and
shall likewise by his continued use of such area be deemed to have accepted the
condition in which the same is maintained from time to time.
   B.   In the event the owner, user or occupier of such space is dissatisfied
with the manner in which the same is being maintained then, his recourse shall
be to terminate his use of such facilities forthwith. (2003 Code § 8-10-14)
8-13-15: RESTRICTIONS ON AIRPORT ACCESS AND USE:
   A.   Access to the airport shall be controlled by the airport manager and
all accessways may be closed and locked and ingress and egress permitted only
by the airport manager.
   B.   Access to the airport by a mobile fuel tanker or other fuel conveyance
or containment means may only be had upon the permit of the airport manager and
in strict compliance with the safety rules and regulations adopted in this
chapter and applicable codes.
   C.   No vehicles not directly related to the private or commercial use of
aircraft shall be allowed on the airport. Such vehicles shall be towed away at
the owner's expense.
   D.   No materials, substances, vehicles or other matter not directly related
to the private or commercial use of aircraft shall be stored upon the airport.
   E.   No inoperable, partial or wrecked aircraft or components thereof shall
be placed or allowed to remain on any airport property not leased or rented by
the owner of said aircraft or components.
   F.   No business not directly related to the private or commercial use of
aircraft shall be conducted at the airport or in a private hangar.
   G.   No automobile repair, auto restoration or the like shall be conducted
at the airport or in a private hangar. (2003 Code § 8-10-15)
8-13-16: PAYMENT OF FEES:
The city shall have a common law lien for services upon any aircraft using the
airport, for any fees charged for the use of the airport and its facilities and
unpaid by the owner or operator of said aircraft, including court costs and
reasonable attorney fees incurred in enforcing such lien. The city shall have
the right to retain and hold possession of said aircraft and all property
situated therein until the amount of said charges and money have been fully
paid, and to sell such aircraft, or other property situated therein, for
payment of such lien, charges, costs and attorney fees, and such aircraft and
other property shall not be subject to attachment or execution by any other
person until such lien storage charge and costs of satisfying such lien are
fully satisfied. (2003 Code § 8-10-16)
8-13-17: DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY TO SATISFY LIEN:
The city shall retain such aircraft and other property situated therein upon
which the city has a lien as mentioned in section
8-13-16 of this chapter, for a period of thirty (30) days, at the expiration of
which time, if such lien shall not be fully satisfied, the city may proceed to
sell such aircraft or other property, or any part thereof, at a public auction
after posting notice of sale as provided by law upon execution, and by mailing
notice at least ten (10) days prior to the sale, by certified or registered
mail, of the time and place of such sale to the owner of such aircraft at his
last known address. The proceeds of sale shall be applied first to the costs of
sale and attorney fees, and then to the discharge of the lien. The remainder,
if any, must be paid to the owner. (2003 Code § 8-10-17)
8-13-18: LEASING OF SPACE FOR HANGAR:
In the event the city council deems it for the best interests of the city,
hangar space at the airport may be leased, subject to the following terms and
conditions:
   A.   Rental for the same shall be paid at a rate to be determined by the
city council in accordance with a schedule of fees with respect thereto,
adopted by the city council.
   B.   Any improvements placed on the leased premises consisting of buildings
or structures of any kind may be removed by the lessee at the expiration of the
lease term; provided, that such lessee shall restore the leased premises, at
lessee's sole expense, to as good a condition as the same were in at the
commencement of the lease term; and provided further, that failure of a lessee
to remove such improvements within sixty (60) days from the date of expiration
of his leasehold shall constitute an abandonment of the same and investment of
title thereto in the city.
   C.   No hangar space shall be leased for a term of more than twenty (20)
years, with an option to renew for an additional twenty (20) year term. The
option to renew shall continue at the end of each term.
   D.   Rent for the term of the lease shall be paid in equal annual
installments, prorated over the life of the lease; provided, that the first
installment shall be prorated to March 1 next, with said prorated amount to be
paid upon execution of any such lease, with annual payments to be paid on or
before March 1 of each year thereafter. No refund shall be given in the event
the lessee desires to discontinue the use of the leased premises before the
expiration date thereof. In the event any lease is discontinued before its
termination date, the question of whether unpaid rent shall be required to be
paid for the remaining portion of the term of the lease shall be determined
solely by the city. (2003 Code § 8-10-18)
   E.   Leases of an airport hangar may be assigned or subleased by lessee to a
third party. Any such assignment or sublease shall be subject to all duties,
obligations and restrictions contained within city code, the lease agreement,
federal, state, or county laws or regulations. (Ord. 2132, 5-5-2015, eff. 5-5-
2015)
   F.   Lessee shall pay for all improvements placed on the hangar space leased
to lessee as well as all utility extensions, the same to be constructed in
accordance with the city building code requirements.
   G.   Any improvements placed or constructed on leased premises shall be
placed or constructed thereon in accordance with the building and zoning
requirements of the city in effect at the time of the placement or construction
of such improvements on such premises.
   H.   Lessee shall secure and maintain general public liability insurance
protecting and indemnifying the lessor and tenant against all claims for
damages to person or property or for loss of life or of property occurring
upon, in, or about the leased property, the streets, gutters, sidewalks or
curbs adjacent thereto, to such limits as the lessor may reasonably, from time
to time, require in respect to injuries to any one person, in respect to any
one accident or disaster or incident of negligence, and in respect to property
damage. Any lease agreement written containing the provisions of this section
shall be conditioned upon the city being able to change the limits of such
policies so required from time to time, as the city may reasonably require.
   I.   All airport leases are to contain rental adjustment provisions that
provide for an adjustment of the rental sum by multiplying the original rental
by a fraction determined by placing the U.S. consumer price index for all urban
consumers (CPI-U), U.S. city average for July, 1983, as determined by the U.S.
department of labor, bureau of labor statistics, as the denominator, and the
most current CPI-U available at the time of such adjustment, as the numerator;
each such rental adjustment to be on the fifth year anniversary of the lease
agreement and each five (5) year multiples thereafter throughout the term of
said lease.
   J.   All lessees are to promptly submit such operational reports as may
periodically be requested by the city. (2003 Code § 8-10-18)
8-13-19: FRAUDULENT PROCUREMENT OF USE OF AIRPORT FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain use of the airport facilities,
such as tie down spaces, runways, leasehold spaces or hangars, fuel dispensing
facilities, metered pump, or other services available at the airport, with
intent to defraud the city by not paying for the same. Any person who violates
any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 8-10-19;
amd. 2012 Code)
8-13-20: PERMIT FOR COMMERCIAL USE:
   A.   No person may use the airport facilities for commercial aircraft
related purposes without having:
      1.   A valid permit from the city for the purpose of conducting
commercial business at the airport; and
      2.   A valid leasehold contract; and
      3.   Proof of payment of fees or rents charged for such uses.
   B.   Failure or refusal of an operator, lessee or owner to be in compliance
with this section shall be just cause for cancellation of such obligor's
airport lease and permits held by such operator.
   C.   Any person using airport facilities for commercial purposes must pay
for the use of the same according to the schedule of fees on file with the city
clerk's office or airport manager, and also comply with the following rules and
regulations:
      1.   Pay leasehold rent pursuant to the terms of the leasing contract.
      2.   In addition to the insurance requirements of subsection
8-13-18H of this chapter, provide proof of product liability insurance as the
city may reasonably require.
      3.   Pay permit fees as of January 1 of each year, or as of the date of
intended operation under such a permit so secured.
      4.   Tie down space rental shall be paid on the first day of each month
preceding the use of such a space. If a space is to be used for only a fraction
of a month, the fee therefor shall be paid in advance at a daily rate according
to the schedule of fees herein referred to. (2003 Code § 8-10-20)
8-13-21: FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Use any facilities or services available at the airport without paying
for the use thereof as set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Fail to pay fees for use of airport facilities at the time, place, in
the amount and manner as required by this chapter. (2003 Code § 8-10-21)
   C.   Violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(2003 Code § 8-10-21; amd. 2012 Code)
8-13-22: SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   No dispensing, transfer or storage of flammable or combustible liquids
shall be permitted inside of any building or structure.
   B.   No flammable or combustible liquid shall be dispensed into or removed
from the fuel system of an aircraft within any aircraft hangar.
   C.   No flammable or combustible liquid shall be dispensed into or removed
from a container, tank, vehicle or aircraft, except in a location approved by
the airport manager.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to clean any aircraft, engines or
parts of aircraft in an aircraft hangar or within fifty feet (50') of another
aircraft, building or hangar with any flammable liquid.
   E.   Airport hangar lessees must comply with all city, state and federal
regulations that pertain to the operation of the airport and the airplanes,
fuel and equipment stored and/or used at the airport. (2003 Code § 8-10-22)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-3: Application Of Chapter; City Authority
9-1-4: Use Of City Water Required
9-1-5: Application For Water Supply
9-1-6: Point Of Liability For Maintenance
9-1-7: Water Service Connections And Water Lines
9-1-8: Rejection Of Materials Or Workmanship
9-1-9: Backfilling And Surface Repair
9-1-10: Right Of Entry For Inspections Or Testing
9-1-11: Water Main Extensions
9-1-12: Extent Of Service
9-1-13: Basis For Authorized Water User Charges
9-1-14: Water User And Equivalent Connection
9-1-15: Connection To City Water System Outside City Limits
9-1-16: Power Of Mayor And City Council To Set Charges
9-1-17: Purpose Of Monthly Water User Charge
9-1-18: Monthly Rates
9-1-19: Payment Of User Charges; Late Fee
9-1-20: Delinquencies; City Procedure
9-1-21: Turning On Water After Turnoff For Nonpayment
9-1-22: Authority To Amend Regulations
9-1-23: Water Fund
9-1-24: Private Water Systems
9-1-25: Water Line Development
9-1-26: Stoppage Of Work
9-1-27: City Not Liable For Shortage
9-1-28: Lawn Sprinkling And Water Use Restrictions
9-1-29: Post Hole Digging
9-1-30: Fire Hydrants
9-1-31: Protection Of Pipes
9-1-32: Waste Of Water Or Injury To Water System
9-1-33: Users Liable For Violation
9-1-34: Public Works Infrastructure
9-1-35: Violations; Penalties
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public and inhabitants
of the city, and for the purpose of controlling the use and connection to, and
for providing an equitable distribution of the costs and expenses of
maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of the entire municipal water system,
which includes the water supply, water storage and water distribution
facilities of the city, to charge and collect service charges or fees upon all
lots, lands, property and premises served or benefited by the municipal water
system, which system and facilities consists generally of all wells, storage
reservoirs, transmission mains, structures, buildings, treatment facilities,
valves, service connections, service meters, fittings, mechanical equipment and
all other facilities as required for the furnishing and distribution of water
as a public system to the customers of the city; and to provide for the
control, use and administration of the installation of private domestic water
systems where a public water system is not available. (2003 Code § 9-01-01)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
AUTHORIZED WATER USER: Any person making authorized and proper use of the
municipal water system and/or the water delivered thereby, and who has made
application for water service and such application has been granted and has
paid for such service, water and all fees required. An authorized water user
may be an owner, his tenant by lease or rental, a developer, etc.
CITY: Refers to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho, or its authorized
or designated agent, representative or deputy thereto.
CITY WATER SERVICE LINE: That portion of any individual water service line that
runs from its connection with the public water main to, and including, the
corporation stop, valve box and meter that is installed in the service line. It
will usually be installed within the limits of the public right of way or
utility easement and, after installation, it is to be owned and maintained by
the city. The service line is considered private and is the responsibility of
the property owner beginning at the right of way line or utility easement
boundary line.
EQUIVALENT CONNECTION: The connection to a typical residential house on an
individual lot that is occupied by an average single-family dwelling is
designated as one equivalent connection.
MASTER WATER PLAN: Any document that the city has accepted by official action
of the city council that describes or otherwise indicates an overall view of
proposed future water system needs, minimum water main sizing and/or minimum
water main spacing. This plan is updated periodically as the community grows
and demands change.
MONTH: The period between scheduled water meter readings. The city will, as
nearly as possible, schedule the water meter readings thirty (30) days apart.
MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: Includes the various types of developments that
would have common or joint ownership areas such as condominiums, townhouses,
mobile home parks or courts, shopping centers, professional offices, etc.
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM: Includes all components and facilities of the public
water system that are owned, operated or maintained by the city for domestic
and other uses.
OVERSIZED MAIN: Any water main that is required to have a larger inside
diameter than is necessary based on the estimated flow of the service area for
which the main is being installed.
OWNER: Refers to the property owner, lessee, occupant or water user that is
served by the municipal water system or desires to be served by the municipal
water system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
POINT OF CONNECTION: The right of way line or utility easement boundary.
PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION: A separate and independent connection from the
municipal water main that connects directly to a sprinkler system or fire
control device that has been, or is to be, installed in any building for the
purpose of fire control within the specific building and said connection is to
be for no other purpose.
PRIVATE WATER SERVICE LINE: The portion of the water service line that runs
from the building being served to the point of connection with the city water
service line.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: Any water system for domestic use that is not owned,
operated and maintained by the city.
PROPERTY: Refers to all property, whether privately or publicly owned, within
the service limits of the municipal water system, excluding therefrom lands
that have been dedicated for public street or highway rights of way.
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE LINE: See definition of City Water Service Line.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SPRINKLER IRRIGATION: Refers to any system for the purpose of watering lawns,
gardens, shrubs, trees, etc., as they are normally grown in the out of doors or
open spaces.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of the city waterworks is the individual
appointed by the city council to be in charge of, and oversee, the water
system. He shall, under the direction of the city engineer, mayor and city
council, have charge of the municipal water supply system. The superintendent's
duties shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance, operation,
supervision and/or inspection of all additions or modifications. The
superintendent shall report, on a regular basis, to the city engineer the
condition of the municipal water system.
UNAUTHORIZED WATER USER: Any person who makes any use of the municipal water
system or the water delivered thereby who is not an authorized water user or
who improperly or illegally uses the water system, or who causes damage or
injury to the system in any fashion.
WATER MAIN: Any pipeline owned by the city for the purpose of transportation
and/or distribution of water to serve more than one water service line or user.
(2003 Code § 9-01-02)
9-1-3: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER; CITY AUTHORITY:
   A.   Application: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property
within the corporate limits of the city, and any special users outside of the
corporate limits of the city, including all property owned or occupied by the
United States Of America, the state and the county.
   B.   City Authority: The water system for the supply of the city shall be
under the sole and exclusive control of the mayor and city council, who may,
from time to time, direct the construction of such works, placing of mains,
service pipes and fire hydrants, as the necessities of the city may require.
(2003 Code § 9-01-03)
9-1-4: USE OF CITY WATER REQUIRED:
   A.   Connection To City System: The owner or occupant of any house, building
or property used for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or
recreational use, or any other purpose, situated within the city which is
abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley or right
of way in which there is located a city water line is hereby required to use
the city water system; provided, that said city water is within three hundred
feet (300') of any property line where said building to be served is located.
   B.   Disconnection Of Private System Required: At such time as the owner or
tenant connects his property to municipal service, it is mandatory that the
private water supply be terminated and that it not be connected or cross
connected in any way to the water lines served by the city water system. The
disconnection of the private water supply line shall be inspected and approved
by the city engineer and/or the waterworks superintendent, or his designated
representative. (2003 Code § 9-01-04)
9-1-5: APPLICATION FOR WATER SUPPLY:
   A.   Application Required: Whenever any owner desires to obtain a supply of
water from the city waterworks, he shall make application therefor on forms
supplied by the city and sign such form agreeing to be governed by such rules
and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter, as may be prescribed by the
mayor and city council for the control of the water supply. An application fee,
deposit and/or other fees may be required. Such fees shall be set by the city
council by resolution.
   B.   Contents Of Application; Grant Of Application: The applicant must state
the location, kind of building and the entire area of the ground to be
supplied, and fully and truly state the purpose for which the water is to be
used, and shall furnish a set of floor plans showing all water uses. Whereupon,
if the application is granted, the superintendent of the waterworks may
authorize the extension, at the expense of the applicant, and at no expense to
the city, the service pipe and meter tile, meter yoke, meter tile lid, curb
stop and any other fittings that are necessary to install service to the inside
line of the curb at the point most convenient for supplying the applicant.
(2003 Code § 9-01-05)
9-1-6: POINT OF LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
   A.   User Responsibility: All users shall have the responsibility of, and be
liable for, and shall pay for, all costs and expenses of maintaining their own
water service line extending from the property improvement to a point of
connection. The city's responsibility for maintenance of the individual user
service line extends from the water main tap to the point of connection.
   B.   Damage To Water System: Responsibility for damage to the city water
system is as outlined in subsection
9-1-32B of this chapter.
   C.   Nonconflicting Provisions: This section shall not be construed to be in
conflict with section
9-1-31 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 9-01-06)
9-1-7: WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND WATER LINES:
All materials and workmanship in the installation of private water service
lines and connections to the city water service line shall conform to the
following regulations:
   A.   Permit Required: No person other than one authorized by permit or
license from the city shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter or disturb any municipal water main, city water service line or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
The permit is not to be used until all water installation charges and fees have
been paid in full and all required tests have been completed and accepted by
the waterworks superintendent.
   B.   Application For Permit; Fees: To obtain municipal water service, the
owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city and
requested by the city. A permit and inspection fee may apply if so set by
resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed. The owner or his agent shall pay a connection fee to
the city at the time the application is filed. The application fee shall be set
by the city council by resolution.
   C.   Service Line Installation: The owner may request permission from the
city to install the water service line, including tap to the city water main,
city stop valve, service line, valve, meter vault and cover under private
contract. Such installation shall be in conformance with any applicable
plumbing codes and state department of environmental quality rules and codes.
The installation also shall conform to all city standards for water system
construction. When installation of a water service line and appurtenances
causes damage to any property, public or private, other than the owner's
property, the owner shall be responsible for all repair costs, including repair
to streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewer lines, irrigation facilities,
storm drains, lawns, fences, gas lines, other water mains, telephone lines and
electrical lines.
   D.   Old Private Service Lines: Old private water service lines may be used
in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
being tested as required by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Conformance With Building And Plumbing Codes; Inspection:
      1.   The materials of construction of the private water service line and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
applicable building and plumbing codes and standards as have been or may be
adopted by the city.
      2.   The private water service connection to the city water service line
shall conform to the requirements of the applicable building and plumbing codes
and standards as adopted by the city.
      3.   All connections to or extensions of the service line, as previously
installed by the city, or under its authorization, shall be made in accordance
with the requirements of the state plumbing code for such an installation. The
connection of the service line shall be inspected by the city before the
installation is backfilled and before the water is turned on for use at the
premises.
   F.   Service Line Size And Location:
      1.   The private water service line from the building to the point of
connection with the city water service line shall be as specified by the water
department, city engineer or city building officer. The city shall determine
the size of the city water service line and water meter.
      2.   The alignment of the private water service line from the outlet of
the building to the city water service line shall be reasonably straight and
perpendicular to the water main and shall be located such that the distance
between the water service line and the sewer service line shall be a minimum of
ten feet (10').
   G.   Cross Connection Prohibited: No person shall make or permit the cross
connection of any private water supply to a water line that is served by the
municipal water system.
   H.   Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the city water service
line permit shall notify the city when the connection of the private water
service line to the city water service line is ready for inspection.
   I.   Excavations Guarded; Restoration: All excavations for all water service
installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
   J.   Private Fire Service Connection: The installation of a private fire
service connection shall comply in all respects to the requirements for a city
water service line and the owner, or his agent, will be required to pay all
costs for connection and extension of the facility from the municipal water
main.
   K.   Connections Made By Plumber: The connection of the private water
service line to the public water service line and the connection of a private
fire service connection to the municipal water main shall be made by a plumber
holding a valid license.
   L.   Meter, Stop Valve And Stopcock:
      1.   A separate and independent city water service meter and stop valve
shall be provided for every authorized water user.
      2.   To each service pipe there shall be attached at the inside line of
the curb a stopcock and key box which shall be paid for by the water consumer
and be under the exclusive control of the superintendent of the waterworks.
(2003 Code § 9-01-07)
9-1-8: REJECTION OF MATERIALS OR WORKMANSHIP:
The city may reject any materials or workmanship for cause and upon such, the
rejected material shall be removed and replaced with approved material.
Disapproved workmanship shall cause the removal and replacement of all
materials involved, including appurtenances such as excavations, backfilling
and other work items. (2003 Code § 9-01-08)
9-1-9: BACKFILLING AND SURFACE REPAIR:
   A.   Owner Responsibility; Costs: All backfilling and surface repair
required by a water service installation shall be the owner's responsibility.
When the city makes installation of a city water service, all costs of surface
repair and backfilling shall be included in the installation charge.
   B.   Work Under Private Contract: When the owner has the water service
installation done under private contract, the costs for surface repair shall be
the owner's responsibility.
   C.   Cuts Must Be Paved Within One Week: In no case shall a pavement cut go
unpaved for more than one week. During cold weather or when hot asphalt is not
available, cold mix asphalt may be used as a temporary patch. Such temporary
patch must be replaced within two (2) weeks or as soon as weather permits.
   D.   Conformance With Special Specifications; Inspection And Approval: All
surface repair and backfilling shall conform to special specifications
promulgated by the city for water line installation and shall be subject to
inspection by and approval of the city, or where applicable, the county highway
district. (2003 Code § 9-01-09)
9-1-10: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS OR TESTING:
   A.   Free access to all places supplied with water, at all reasonable hours,
shall be allowed the water superintendent, assistant water superintendent, city
engineer, mayor, city clerk, committee from the city council, or their
designee, to examine the apparatus, the amount used, and the manner of use of
the same, and any water user violating any of the rules and regulations
controlling the water supply shall be subject to penalty as provided for in
section
9-1-35 of this chapter.
   B.   The city, through its authorized representative bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted, during proper and
reasonable hours of the day, to enter all properties, premises or buildings to
which water is furnished from the municipal water system for testing or for any
other purpose necessary for the proper administration of the water system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Also, the city, through its
authorized representative bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, repair and maintenance of any portion of the municipal water
system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (2003 Code §
9-01-10)
9-1-11: WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: No extensions of city or privately owned water mains
fed by the city water system shall be made without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the city engineer. Each main line extension must conform to the
current and applicable public works construction standards adopted by the city.
   B.   Compliance With City Policies; Responsibility For Costs: All proposed
extensions of the municipal water system to serve undeveloped areas within the
existing corporate limits, newly annexed areas or areas outside the corporate
limits shall comply with existing water system extension policies and standards
and with the overall master plan for the city municipal water supply system.
Costs for all extensions to any property shall be the responsibility of that
property owner or his agent. Cost for water service extensions within the
property for which the extension is requested shall also be the responsibility
of the owner or his agent. When it is necessary to install oversized mains as
part of an extension, the cost of all oversized lines will be the
responsibility of the owner or his agent. Such water line extensions, public or
private, shall be extended to the farthest boundary of the property.
   C.   Fire Hydrants And Service Lines: It shall also be the property owner's
or his agent's responsibilities to install all necessary fire hydrants and city
water service lines for all extensions of the municipal water system at no
expense to the city. Unless a special permit is granted by the city, all
municipal water system extensions, including the city water service lines, to
newly developing areas shall be installed prior to the construction of any new
streets.
   D.   Approval Of Plans: All design and construction of any extensions to the
municipal water system shall comply with the official specifications as adopted
by the city for the water distribution system. In approving a plan for
extension to the municipal water system, the city reserves the right to
stipulate other requirements such as a special permit fee, rights of way
limits, sequence of construction, time limits for having existing service
disrupted, the filing of a performance bond and other similar measures as may
be required to protect the public. No work shall commence on any such extension
of the municipal water system until the extension project has been approved by
the city engineer.
   E.   City Service Line; Permit And Fees: If it is necessary for the city to
provide a city water service line after the extension has been accepted by the
city, the owner, or his agent, shall be required to pay the hookup and other
applicable fees and standard installation charge as well as the standard permit
and inspection fee. (2003 Code § 9-01-11)
9-1-12: EXTENT OF SERVICE:
The service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or
premises may be controlled by a separate stopcock placed within or near the
curb. Where water is already supplied through one service to several houses or
families, the superintendent may, at his discretion, either decline to furnish
water until separate services are provided, or continue the supply on condition
that one person shall pay for all on the same service. (2003 Code § 9-01-12)
9-1-13: BASIS FOR AUTHORIZED WATER USER CHARGES:
   A.   System Established: There hereby is established a system of periodic
service charges and fees for the authorized use of, and for service rendered
by, the municipal water system, and which charges and fees shall be as near as
possible, uniform as to the different users served by said municipal water
system. The rates, charges and fees provided by this chapter are hereby levied
and assessed against the authorized water user or owner, and his property,
having any water service connection with the municipal water system.
   B.   Property Subject To Charges: It is specifically enacted that all
improved property in the city to which the municipal water system is available,
but is not used by the owner or occupier of said parcel of land, is still
subject to user charges under the provisions of this chapter to cover the cost
of standby fire protection facilities and other benefits. (2003 Code § 9-01-14)
9-1-14: WATER USER AND EQUIVALENT CONNECTION:
Each user and parcel being subject to water user charges as provided for
hereinabove is assessed for the purpose of establishing the equivalent
connection rating and the monthly service charge or fee to be charged or
assessed to and against the property. The assessment takes into consideration
the estimated volume of water to be used, the uniformity of the use of the
water, the standby benefits of the water system for fire protection and for
other factors so as to as nearly as possible fix the rate, charge or fee upon
the same relative basis as is imposed upon other like property within the city
that has the municipal water service available. (2003 Code § 9-01-15)
9-1-15: CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
In order to obtain municipal water system service to parcels that are either
partially or entirely outside of the corporate city limits, the following
provisions must be complied with:
   A.   There shall be an application form which shall provide that the
applicant will agree to the terms and conditions required by this section as a
consideration for obtaining such service. The city council shall establish an
application fee, which fee shall be based upon various classes of applications
as recommended by the public works director given the amount of staff review
required for processing the application. The application form shall specify the
legal description of the parcels for which service is being applied, the name
and address of the legal owners of the parcels, and purpose of the requested
service.
   B.   A completed application must be filed with the public works department.
   C.   Following the filing of a completed application form and the payment of
the application fee, the public works director shall then review the
circumstances presented by the application in accordance with the terms and
conditions and regulations of this chapter as are relevant to the application
and which shall also include a review of the effect the granting of the
application will have on the ability of the municipal water system to provide
an acceptable level of service to developed parcels with existing service and
reasonable service capacity to be held in reserve for in city users.
   D.   The public works director shall then review the findings and
recommendations with the applicant for comment.
   E.   Upon being satisfied that the application for service is complete and
that all information needed to determine serviceability has been presented, the
public works director shall then submit the application and a report of
recommendations to the city council regarding the application. Nevertheless, if
the public works director determines that the proposed developments is not
serviceable, he may deny the application.
   F.   The city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may either grant
or deny the application after review of the application and the report of
recommendations of the public works director.
   G.   In the event the city council grants the application, it shall include
as a condition that the legal owners and/or applicable occupants of the parcels
shall enter into an agreement for the extension of domestic water service
outside the city limits (hereinafter in this section referred to as the
"agreement"), which agreement form shall provide that the legal owners of the
parcels agree that the provisions of the city's ordinances, regulations and
policies, and inspection fees, which appertain to the regulation, control and
use of its domestic water system, including hookup and service fees as apply to
terms of the "agreement", and which form shall also provide that the owners of
the parcels agree to the annexation into the city of the parcels serviced; and
the city council may also impose such other conditions of granting the
application as are reasonable to assure the protection of the level of service
to previously developed parcels within the city limits.
   H.   The water user of the parcels serviced pursuant to a granted
application under this section shall be considered a user and subject to the
terms and conditions of the agreement so long as the property being served
remains outside of the corporate limits of the city.
   I.   Notwithstanding subsection E of this section, if the requested
connection is for a residence, or a multi-family residence or commercial or
industrial user development that requires only a two inch (2") or smaller
service, and if water service is readily available to the affected parcel
without extension of service, then, if the public works director deems it in
the best interests of the city to do so, said connection may be authorized by
the public works director without action by the city council. If the director
declines to approve the connection, the request may, upon consent of the mayor,
proceed to the city council for final decision. (2003 Code § 9-01-16)
9-1-16: POWER OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL TO SET CHARGES:
The mayor and city council shall determine and set all applicable fees and
charges for use of the water system. Such fees and charges may be set by
resolution. (2003 Code § 9-01-17)
9-1-17: PURPOSE OF MONTHLY WATER USER CHARGE:
The monthly water user charge is established to cover administrative,
operation, maintenance and replacement costs of the system, and to provide a
fund to pay for capital improvement costs, additions, oversized extensions to
the system, or redemption of bonds that have been used to finance system
improvements, all as a part of the city's responsibility to provide adequate
domestic water service and facilities for the city. The monthly water user
charge shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be effective
upon the date and time cited in the resolution. For new connections, the water
user charge is to begin when the connection to the city service line has been
inspected and approved, or within sixty (60) days after the city service line
has been installed, whichever is the earliest. (2003 Code § 9-01-18)
9-1-18: MONTHLY RATES:
   A.   User Charge:
      1.   All owners who receive or have the right to receive the benefit of
the municipal water system shall, in return for said benefit, pay monthly user
charges as described below. The monthly user charge shall be based on the
amount of water used and the amount of fire and health protection provided by
the municipal water supply system, plus the cost of reading the meters,
preparing and sending utility bills, collecting monthly fees, and administering
and overseeing the system by various city employees and contractors. The owners
of all property within the corporate limits, which property is within three
hundred feet (300') of the municipal water supply system or within six hundred
feet (600') of a fire hydrant, shall pay a minimum monthly user charge. The
minimum monthly user charge for all uses shall be based on the most recent cost
of service study. All other water service connections shall be prorated as to
the number of EDUs assigned to that water user by this chapter, or as
determined by the public works director, and will be computed on an individual
basis. Any user having more than one classification of use shall be charged for
the sum of classifications.
      2.   The minimum monthly user charge shall be set by resolution of the
city council and be based on an EDU unit. Any owner that has a total EDU rating
less than one shall pay a minimum monthly user charge for one full EDU. Any
owner which has an EDU rating greater than one shall pay a minimum monthly user
charge that is the product of that user's EDU rating multiplied by charge per
EDU. Example: A laundry having twelve (12) machines would have an equivalent
connection rating of 4.00 + (2 x 0.25) = 4.50 and a subsequent minimum monthly
user charge of (4.50) x ($ the charge per EDU).
      3.   Each owner will pay a monthly user fee based on the quantity of
water used and the schedule of water use fee in table I, as established by
resolution of the city council and on file in the city office. Each owner shall
pay, as full compensation for the benefits derived from the municipal water
supply system, the minimum monthly user fee or the monthly user fee, whichever
is greater. Should an owner request a city water service line to be
disconnected, for any reason, there shall be paid to the city a disconnection
fee as set by the water superintendent, with approval of the city council. The
owner must request the city to place the line back in service. There will be a
charge set by the water superintendent with approval of the city council
associated with the reactivation of the existing service line. All monthly
water rates will be charged against the property for which the city water
service line is installed. The owner of record is liable for that amount, which
must be paid before the water service is resumed. In the event an owner leaves
an unclaimed balance in his account, that amount shall be kept for six (6)
months, after which time it shall revert to the general fund of the city. The
owner of the property serviced shall pay for the monthly user charge and such
owner will be billed for such monthly user charge.
   B.   Charges For Water, Service Line Installations And Other Fees:
      1.   The charges for water shall be as set by resolution.
      2.   In case a water meter fails to register correctly the water used,
the owner shall pay for the water on the basis of the average reading of the
meter for the previous three (3) months. Water meter installation charges shall
be as follows:
         a.   For all meters and service lines installed, the charge shall be
set by the public works director. All installed meters shall be property of the
city.
         b.   Service applicability fees, as set by resolution by the city
council.
   C.   Private Fire Service:
      1.   Available only on monthly flat rate charge when used for fire
protection only; owner to install all lines to the city mains at his expense.
All connections to be supervised by the city and to conform to city
requirements and city codes. Fees shall be set by the city council by
resolution.
      2.   All private fire service lines shall be equipped with gate valve or
thermal automatic openings and backflow prevention as approved by the water
superintendent.
      3.   Private fire service lines shall be used for fire control only. Any
other use is unlawful.
   D.   Fire Hydrant Use: Water drawn from any fire hydrant, public or private,
except when a private fire hydrant resides behind or downstream of a water
meter, shall have a fire hydrant meter installed by the water department for a
set up fee, daily availability fee and a consumption fee to be set by
resolution. In no case shall any water be drawn from a public or private fire
hydrant by a person or company, excluding authorized city personnel, without
the permission of the city water superintendent. Failure to obtain permission,
permit and/or fire hydrant meter may be cited for theft of city services and
public endangerment. It is the responsibility of the person drawing water from
any fire hydrant to ensure that all backflow prevention measures, procedures
and equipment are in place prior to connecting to said fire hydrant. (2003 Code
§ 9-01-19; amd. 2012 Code)
9-1-19: PAYMENT OF USER CHARGES; LATE FEE:
All utility charges shall be due and payable to the city clerk between the
first and tenth day of each calendar month for the billing from the previous
month. Upon failure to pay the same, as prescribed, each owner shall pay, in
addition to the amount due, a late fee in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council. (2003 Code § 9-01-20; amd. 2012 Code)
9-1-20: DELINQUENCIES; CITY PROCEDURE:
   A.   Termination Of Service; Notice: The city clerk shall furnish each
property owner a statement of the amount due for utility service for the
preceding month or up to the time that the water meter has been read and for
other charges relating to the water system and other utility service; and if
any owner neglects to pay his utility bill by the due date, the utility user's
account shall be delinquent. Owners shall be notified by regular mail of this
delinquency and if the bill is not paid in full within ten (10) days after
service of this notification on the owner, the right to utility service shall
cease and terminate. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council shall be charged each time an individual or entity's water
services are reconnected after a disconnect due to nonpayment. (2003 Code § 9-
01-21; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Termination Of Water Service For Reasons Other Than Nonpayment Of City
Utility Bills: City water services may be terminated for the following:
      1.   Failure to comply with building permits or failure to obtain a
certificate of occupancy prior to occupying a building.
      2.   Failure to comply with a minimum maintenance citation or order.
      3.   Failure to pay any fine, assessment, charge, penalty or fee to the
city when it becomes due.
      4.   Any other failure to comply with a duly issued city code violation
citation.
   C.   Lien Imposed: All delinquent charges or fees, as provided by this
section, not paid after the final determination of the delinquent account,
shall be imposed as a lien against and upon the property or premises against
which such charge or fee is levied or assessed; and the city clerk shall, at
the time of certifying the city taxes, certify such delinquencies together with
all penalties to the county tax collector, and when so certified, the same
shall be a lien upon the property. All monies collected by the city clerk under
the provisions of this section shall be paid over to the city treasurer in the
same manner as is required for the payment of other city monies. (2003 Code §
9-01-21)
9-1-21: TURNING ON WATER AFTER TURNOFF FOR NONPAYMENT:
If any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises on account
of nonpayment of rates, or for failure to pay charges for the repair of water
lines, assessed to the owner, or for other violation of the rules and
regulations pertaining to the water supply, shall turn on or permit to be
turned on, or use or permit the water to be used without authority, he shall be
subject to the penalties provided for in section
9-1-35 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 9-01-22)
9-1-22: AUTHORITY TO AMEND REGULATIONS:
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the mayor and city council from
amending, altering, or adding to the provisions of this chapter in relation to
the water supply or the rules of same which may be adopted in conformity
therewith; provided, that no alteration in water rates shall apply to any
charge upon, or contract made with, an owner under this chapter until after the
expiration of the time for which such charge was made or contract entered into.
Hereafter when, and/or if, the mayor and city council deem it advisable to
alter the water or installation rates or charges as in this chapter recorded,
such changes shall be made by resolution. (2003 Code § 9-01-23)
9-1-23: WATER FUND:
All fees and charges received and collected under the authority of this chapter
shall be credited to a fund to be designated as the water fund. The accounts of
said fund shall show all receipts and expenditures for the administration,
maintenance, operation, expansion, upkeep and repair of the domestic water
system and any payments into a sinking fund established for the purpose of
paying principal of and interest on the water indebtedness of the city, which
shall from time to time be outstanding. As provided by law, when budgeted and
appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the water fund shall be
available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance, operation,
expansion, repairs and upkeep of the domestic water system of the city, and to
the extent legally available, for payment into a sinking fund established for
the payment of the principal and interest on any water bond indebtedness of the
city which shall from time to time be outstanding. (2003 Code § 9-01-24)
9-1-24: PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS:
Where the municipal water system is not available under the provisions of this
chapter, or when placed outside of the public right of way or within a planned
unit development or commercial or industrial development, a private water
system may be installed; provided, that the system complies with all the
provisions of this chapter.
   A.   Permit Required; Fee: Before commencement of construction of a private
water system, the owner shall first obtain written permit from the city. The
application for said permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by plans, specifications and other
information as may be deemed necessary by the city engineer. A permit and
inspection fee set by resolution shall be paid to the city at the time the
application is filed. This fee is refunded when a building permit is filed and
paid for.
   B.   Inspection Of System: A permit for a private water system shall not
permit the use of the system until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city
when the work is ready for various inspections, and before any underground
works are covered. The inspection shall be made by the city engineer or his
designee by the end of the next working day after receipt of notice from
applicant.
   C.   Compliance With State Regulations: The type, capacities, location and
layout of a private water system shall comply with all of the rules and
regulations and recommendations of the state department of environmental and
community services (health and welfare).
   D.   Mandatory Connection With City Water When Available: The owner or
occupant of any house, building or property used for residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental or recreational use, or other purpose, situated within
the city which is abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any
street, alley or right of way in which there is located a city water line is
hereby required to cease using any other water system and at his expense to
connect such building directly with the city water in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within fifteen (15) days after the date of official
notice from the city to do so; provided, however, that the city water is within
three hundred feet (300') of any property line where said building to be served
is located. At such time as the municipal water system becomes available to the
property served by the private water system, and the owner or tenant connects
his property to municipal service as required, it is mandatory that the private
water supply is not connected or cross connected in any way to the water lines
served by the municipal water system.
   E.   Conduct Of Private System; Health And Safety: The owners shall operate
and maintain the private water facility in a manner conducive to public health
and safety at all times, and at no expense to the city.
   F.   Provisions Additional To State Regulations: No statement contained in
this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements
that may be imposed by the state health and welfare. (2003 Code § 9-01-25)
9-1-25: WATER LINE DEVELOPMENT:
The primary cost and responsibility for water line development shall be that of
the owner, subdivider or developer. It shall be the owner, subdivider or the
developer's responsibility to purchase and lay water lines from the present
water supply to the proposed project and to the boundary of the project
farthest from the original water supply line. The city, however, recognizes
that in certain instances it may be desirable from the city's standpoint, to
have a larger line installed than required to serve the specific development in
question. When such a situation exists, it is the city's policy to require the
larger line, and to varying degrees, depending on each specific situation,
possibly participate in the increased costs necessitated by the larger line.
(2003 Code § 9-01-26)
9-1-26: STOPPAGE OF WORK:
The public works director has the authority to stop work on any water system
installation or improvement. Work shall remain stopped until the public works
director is satisfied that the problem has been corrected and written approval
to resume work has been obtained from the public works director. (2003 Code §
9-01-27)
9-1-27: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR SHORTAGE:
The city shall not be held liable for damage to any person or property by
reason of stoppage or other interruption of the water supply, caused by
scarcity of water, lack of pressure, accident to works or mains, alterations,
additions or repairs, or from other unavoidable causes. (2003 Code § 9-01-29)
9-1-28: LAWN SPRINKLING AND WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Lawn And Garden Sprinkling:
      1.   Sprinkling To Cease During Fire: Fountains and sprinkling for lawns,
yards or gardens shall not be operated during or after any alarm of fire until
the signal is given that the fire is out. No fountain attachment shall be of
greater than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter, and there shall be a
stopcock to each fountain attachment and the same shall be under the control of
the superintendent of waterworks. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided
in section
9-1-35  of this chapter.
      2.   Sprinkling Hose Size: Sprinklers for lawns, gardens and yards may
not be larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter, and in any time of
scarcity of water, whenever it shall, in the judgment of the mayor and city
council be necessary and they shall so direct, the mayor shall, by
proclamation, still further limit the use of water for other than domestic
purposes; and in his discretion provide that lawn sprinklers and hydrants shall
be used only on alternate days in certain designated localities and any person
violating the provisions of this section or of any proclamation made by the
mayor shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in
section
9-1-35 of this chapter.
      3.   Lawn and/or Landscape Irrigation Standards.
         a.   All lawn and/or landscaping irrigation systems must be installed
to current state and local code, including, but not limited to, all cross
connection and back flow prevention standards.
         b.   All lawn and/or landscape irrigation system installations shall
obtain a permit from City Hall prior to the initiation of the installation. All
fees shall be paid as set forth by resolution of City Council.
         c.   All lawn and/or landscape irrigation systems are required to have
an approved backflow prevention device. This must be either a pressure vacuum
breaker (PVB) or a reduced pressure zone device (RP). A list of approved
devices can be found on the City of Blackfoot website, or by contacting the
Water Department.
            (1)   All backflow devices must be tested and certified for correct
installation and operation before the lawn and/or landscape irrigation system
may be used.
            (2)   All backflow prevention devices must be tested and inspected
by a person holding a valid State of Idaho license.
         d.   All land and/or landscape irrigation systems require control
valves arranged in a “block and bleed” arrangement with no “stop and waste”
valves installed. See detail below for typical arrangement.
            (1)   A City Water Department representative must inspect and
approve the valve arrangement before a system is utilized.
         e.   Any water user who violates or refuses to comply with this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall for each offense by subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code.
   B.   Water Use Restricted: Watering troughs for animals shall not be allowed
a constant flow of water but shall be allowed to use such quantity as shall
supply the actual wants of the stock having access thereto, nor shall
continuous streams of water be permitted to flow from hydrants, faucets or
stops over wash basins, water closets or urinals. (2003 Code § 9-01-30; amd.
Ord. 2217, 1-4-2022)
9-1-29: POST HOLE DIGGING:
No telegraph or telephone posts, or other posts, shall be put down or set
within four feet (4') of any water service pipe, nor within six feet (6') of
any main pipe. (2003 Code § 9-01-31)
9-1-30: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Authority To Operate; Obstructing Access: It shall be unlawful for any
person, except one duly authorized by the city, to open, close, operate, turn
on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to or connect anything
with any fire hydrant or auxiliary valve belonging to the city. Further, it
shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by
placing around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material, or
to wilfully or carelessly injure the same. (2003 Code § 9-01-32)
   B.   Damaging Hydrants: Any person who shall wilfully or carelessly run any
vehicle against a fire hydrant, or draw or attempt to draw water therefrom,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, and be
liable for all damages done to said hydrant. (2003 Code § 9-01-32; amd. 2012
Code)
9-1-31: PROTECTION OF PIPES:
All water users shall keep their pipes, connections and other apparatus in good
repair and protected from frost at their own expense; but no person, except
under the direction of the superintendent of waterworks, shall be allowed to
dig into the street or sidewalk for the purpose of laying, removing or
repairing any service pipe. (2003 Code § 9-01-33)
9-1-32: WASTE OF WATER OR INJURY TO WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Waste Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste
water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect water stops, valves or leaky pipes
that are not under the jurisdiction of the city, or to permit the malicious or
wilful consumption of water, having no beneficial use. The city, based on meter
readings, will make a determination of where water has been wasted and shall
notify the user of that determination. It shall then be the user’s
responsibility to make the necessary repairs, or to institute actions that will
correct the situation within ten (10) days of the city’s notification to the
user. All costs incurred, including the cost of wasted water and any repairs,
shall be the responsibility of the user and if it is necessary that the city
correct the situation or make repairs, the cost and charges therefor may be
assessed and added to the owner’s water bill.
   B.   Damage Or Injury To System:
      1.   No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the water system.
      2.   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, pipeline,
fire hydrant, fitting connection appurtenance or equipment which is a part of
the municipal water system. This shall include, but not be limited to, water
mains, water arterials, water piping, water meters, radio system components,
manholes, manhole covers, well stations, and all other aspects of the water
system.
   C.   Unauthorized Use Of Shut Off Valve: It shall be unlawful for any person
to turn a municipal water service on or off without authorization from the
City’s water department. A violation of this section will be considered a
misdemeanor. (2003 Code § 9-01-34; amd. Ord. 2207, 7-6-2021; Ord. 2217, 1-4-
2022)
9-1-33: USERS LIABLE FOR VIOLATION:
If any owner shall permit any person from any other premises, or any
unauthorized user to use or obtain water from his premises or water fixtures,
whether inside or outside of his buildings, the water supply of such owner may
be cut off and the amount paid therefor, if any, forfeited; and such
unauthorized person shall for taking said water be liable to a fine, plus
costs. Any user or owner suspected of having violated the provisions of this
chapter, other than nonpayment of user fees, assessments or charges for
repairs, shall be notified of the violation and be notified that if the
violation is not corrected within ten (10) days, the superintendent shall shut
off his water; provided, however, in the event of an emergency, the
superintendent may shut off the water without notification. (2003 Code § 9-01-
35)
9-1-34: PUBLIC WORKS INFRASTRUCTURE:
Section
8-3-7 of this code shall apply to public works infrastructure construction and
public works projects. (2003 Code § 9-01-37)
9-1-35: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Responsibility For Remedy: Any person found to be
violating any provisions of this chapter, other than for nonpayment of a water
bill, shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing ten (10) days for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations and if necessary make all corrections and
repairs to the system or pay for same if the city has to make the correction or
repair. (2003 Code § 9-01-36)
   B.   Penalty Imposed; Discontinue Service: Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in this section, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code, and shall have his water service terminated. Each day in which such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (2003 Code § 9-01-
36; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Liability To City For Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation and, for other
than nonpayment of water bill violations, may have their water supply
terminated after the above ten (10) day notice period has expired.
   D.   Cumulative Penalties: These penalties shall not be construed to be
exclusive but shall be construed to be cumulative of, and in addition to, any
other penalties provided for in this city code or the criminal code of the
state. As an example, a person stealing water could be criminally charged with
theft or a person injuring the water system could be criminally charged with
malicious injury to property. For all criminal violations relating or
pertaining to the water system, the notice provisions provided for in this
chapter shall not apply. (2003 Code § 9-01-36)
CHAPTER 2
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
9-2-1: Purpose
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-3: Protection Against Cross Connections
9-2-4: Use Of Backflow Prevention Devices
9-2-5: Supervision And Inspection
9-2-6: Violations And Penalties
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the benefit of consumers receiving their water
supply from the city by protecting the water supply system of the city from
actual or potential pollution or contamination through cross connections. (2003
Code § 9-03-01)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BACKFLOW: The flow, in the opposite direction from that intended, of any
foreign substance which may enter the water supply system or of any
contaminated or polluted water.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: An approved device which counteracts back pressure
and/or prevents back siphonage. A reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device, a double check valve assembly, a pressure or atmospheric
vacuum breaker shall be considered approved if it has successfully passed the
performance tests of the University Of Southern California engineering center,
or other testing laboratories acceptable to the city and the state of Idaho
department of environmental quality.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, or any authorized agent thereof.
CONTAMINATION: The infiltration of either solids, liquids or gases into the
water supply system which does constitute public health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby the water supply system is
connected either directly or indirectly with any unapproved water supply,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other
device which contains or may contain any substance capable of pollution or
contamination.
CUSTOMER: Any persons and/or premises receiving water from the city water
supply system.
POLLUTION: The infiltration of either solids, liquids or gases into the water
supply system which, although not constituting a public health hazard, does
impair the water quality with respect to taste, odor, color or turbidity.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: The potable water supply system provided by the city.
(2003 Code § 9-03-02)
9-2-3: PROTECTION AGAINST CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No water service or fire sprinkler system connection shall remain or be
installed to any customer unless the water supply system is adequately
protected against cross connection by backflow prevention devices commensurate
with the degree of hazard that either does or potentially may exist. The
installation or maintenance of a cross connection that may endanger the water
supply system quality shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross
connections now existing or hereafter installed shall be abated. The control or
elimination of cross connections shall be in accordance with this chapter, the
most current Pacific Northwest section - American water works association cross
connection control manual for accepted procedures and practices, and the Idaho
regulations for public drinking water systems, section 01-8601.04, dated July
1985, or subsequent revisions, together with any other publications pertaining
to cross connection control approved by the director of the state department of
environmental quality. (2003 Code § 9-03-03)
9-2-4: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   Installation Requirements; Certain Circumstances: Backflow prevention
devices shall be installed, if possible, within the confines of the affected
building in a readily accessible location with adequate clearances for
maintenance and testing. If the preceding installation is not possible, the
device shall be installed in an accessible, aboveground, locked, heated,
enclosure adjacent to the structure. The structure shall be situated above
seasonal high groundwater, shall contain a floor drain, shall provide adequate
room for testing and maintenance and shall protect the device against freezing.
Backflow prevention devices shall be installed under any circumstances included
in, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Premises housing an auxiliary water supply that has not been
approved by the city for its quality and protection.
      2.   Premises having intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
difficult to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist.
      3.   Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross
connections could not be made during reasonable hours, at sufficiently short
notice to assure that cross connections do not exist.
      4.   Premises where any substance handled under pressure could enter into
the water supply system. This shall include the handling of process and cooling
waters.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
created or recreated.
      6.   Premises having a lawn and/or landscape irrigation system.
   B.   Types Of Facilities Requiring Devices:
      1.   The following types of facilities shall fall into one of the above
categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the water
supply system, unless the city and the state department of environmental
quality determine that no hazard exists:
         a.   Sewage treatment plants.
         b.   Laboratories.
         c.   Food processing plants.
         d.   Chemical or other industrial plants.
         e.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics.
         f.   Agricultural chemical storage, formulation and distribution
facilities.
         g.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         h.   Car washes.
         i.   Other facilities specified by the city and the state department
of environmental quality.
         j.   Facilities, either residential or commercial, which include a
lawn and/or landscape irrigation system.
         k.   Facilities required to have a backflow prevention device by the
Idaho Administrative Code, Department of Environmental Quality.
      2.   Certain public facilities present potential sources of cross
connections. All of the following facilities and any others the city specify
shall be required to install backflow prevention devices as required by the
city:
         a.   Schools.
         b.   Movie theaters.
         c.   Recreation and sports grounds.
         d.   Restaurants.
         e.   Stores (wholesale or retail).
   C.   Types Of Devices For Use: The type of backflow prevention device
required for a particular situation shall be commensurate with the degree of
hazard presented. The following guides shall be used:
      1.   Where the water supply system could be contaminated as a result of
cross connection, an air gap separation or a reduced pressure backflow
prevention device shall be installed.
      2.   Where cross connection could result in pollution of the water supply
system, either of the above devices or a double check valve assembly shall be
used.
      3.   Back siphonage, such as from irrigation sprinkler systems, may be
prevented by the use of either atmospheric vacuum breakers or pressure vacuum
breakers, as directed by the city and the state department of environmental
quality.
   D.   Stagnant Water; Double Check Valve Assembly: Facilities having plumbing
arrangements connected to the water supply system, where the water remains
stagnant for prolonged periods of time, shall be required to install a double
check valve assembly. (2003 Code § 9-03-04; amd. Ord. 2217, 1-4-2022)
9-2-5: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
   A.   Supervision; Expense: Backflow prevention devices required by this
chapter shall be installed under the supervision of and with the approval of
the city. Such installations shall be completely at the customer's expense.
   B.   Inspection And Testing:
      1.   Inspecting Firm; Customer's Expense: Backflow prevention devices
installed prior to the effective date hereof, shall be inspected and tested by
a testing firm of the customer's choice that is qualified and approved by the
city to inspect and test said devices. This work shall be at the customer's
expense and the results forwarded to the city. Any protection device installed
prior to the effective date hereof that is not approved by the city shall be
replaced by an approved device, at the customer's expense.
      2.   Replacement Of Faulty Parts: Annual inspection and testing of all
installed backflow prevention devices shall be carried out by a qualified and
approved testing firm of the customer's choice. Any parts found faulty shall be
replaced. All inspection, testing and parts replacement data shall be forwarded
to the city. All of this work shall be carried out at the customer's expense.
      3.   Frequency Of Testing: When the city considers it necessary, because
of the degree of hazard involved should any cross connection occur, inspection
and testing may be more frequent than annually.
      4.   Right Of Entry Allowed: During reasonable hours, all customers shall
permit entry of the city to inspect for cross connections.
      5.   Newly Constructed Premises; Compliance Required: No water service
shall be supplied to any newly constructed premises until the said premises has
successfully passed the city inspection for cross connections and complies with
this chapter.
   C.   Verify Need For Cross Connection: Inspection shall be made by the city
waterworks department to verify requirement of a cross connection control
device. Inspection shall be made by the city waterworks department after the
device has been installed and prior to its certification. Request for
inspection shall be the responsibility of the customer.
   D.   Final Determination: The water department shall make the final
determination regarding cross connections. (2003 Code § 9-03-05)
9-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Grounds For Termination Of Water Service:
      1.   The following shall be grounds for termination of water service to a
customer:
         a.   Failure to install, maintain, inspect and test any backflow
prevention device required by this chapter.
         b.   Refusal of access, during reasonable hours, to any property for
the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections exist.
         c.   Any owner who refuses to comply with current procedures and
practices required by this chapter.
      2.   Only upon the customer's complete compliance with this chapter shall
the service be resumed.
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Any customer who violates or refuses to comply with
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall for each offense be subject to penalty as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code § 9-03-06)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Policy And Purpose
9-3-2: Definitions
9-3-3: Application Of Chapter
9-3-4: City Authority
9-3-5: Superintendent Of Sewers
9-3-6: Rules And Regulations
9-3-7: Authority Of City Authorized Representatives
9-3-8: Required Use Of Sewers
9-3-9: Regulations For Use Of Public Sewers
9-3-10: Permission To Discharge Objectionable Water Or Wastes
9-3-11: Building Sewers And Service Connections
9-3-12: Industrial Users
9-3-13: Inspection And Approval Of Connections
9-3-14: Rejection Of Materials Or Workmanship
9-3-15: Sewer Line Extensions
9-3-16: Backfilling
9-3-17: Sewer Equivalency Fee
9-3-18: Cooperative And Reimbursement Agreements
9-3-19: Basis For Sewer Charges
9-3-20: Power Of Mayor And City Council To Set Charges
9-3-21: Sewer Connection Requirements; Fees And Charges
9-3-22: Special Charges; Sewer Inspections; Septic Tank Waste Dumping
9-3-23: Billing And Payment Of Monthly Charges
9-3-24: Delinquencies; City Procedure
9-3-25: Disconnection Of Service For Nonpayment
9-3-26: Sewerage System Fund
9-3-27: Receipt And Disbursement Of Monies
9-3-28: Private Enhanced Sewage Disposal Systems
9-3-29: Maintenance Of Lines
9-3-30: Point Of Liability For Maintenance
9-3-31: Users Liable For Violation
9-3-32: City Not Liable For Damage Or Service Interruption
9-3-33: Injury To Sewerage System Unlawful
9-3-34: Public Works Infrastructure
9-3-35: Penalties
9-3-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Declaration Of Policy:
      1.   It is hereby declared that the city owns and operates a municipal
sewer system and that the sewer system has been expanded and a wastewater
treatment plant constructed. It is the policy of the city to operate the sewer
system for the benefit of the residents of the city.
      2.   Additionally, due to the integral nature of the requirement of water
to operate the sewer system, violation of the sewer provisions may require
termination of water service and to efficiently enforce these sewer provisions,
such water termination is specifically authorized and is the policy of the
city.
         a.   In the case of private water systems, the sewer may be cut and
capped at the user's expense. Return to service must be completed by a licensed
contractor.
   B.   Purpose: It hereby is determined and declared to be necessary and
conducive to and for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
public and inhabitants of the city, and for the purpose of controlling the use
and connection to and for providing an equitable distribution of the costs and
expenses of maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of the entire sewerage
system which includes the sewer collection system and sewage disposal
facilities of the city:
      1.   To charge and collect service charges or fees upon all lots, lands,
property and premises served or benefited by the sewerage system of the city,
which system and facilities consist generally of all pipelines, conduits, catch
basins, manholes, cleanouts, sewer mains, intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
lift stations, pumps, structures, mechanical equipment and facilities for the
treatment and disposal of sewage or sewage byproducts;
      2.   To provide for industrial cost recovery from all industrial users;
and
      3.   To provide for the control, use and administration of the
installation of private sewage disposal systems where a public sanitary sewer
is not available. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act entitled public law 92-500, and
its amendments of 1972, as administered by the United States environmental
protection agency (EPA).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the point of
connection with the public sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY: Refers to the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, Idaho, or its authorized
or designated agent, representative, or deputy thereto.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU): The average volume of domestic waste discharged
from an average residential dwelling unit.
FLOW: The volume of sewage being discharged into the sewage system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY: Financial recovery by the city, from the industrial
users of the sewerage system, of that portion of the U.S. government grant
amount allocable to the treatment of wastes from such users pursuant to section
204(b) of the act.
INDUSTRIAL USERS:
   A.   Any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified
in the standard industrial classification manual (SIC), 1972, office of
management and budget, or North American industry classification system
(NAICS), 1997, U.S. office of management and budget as amended and supplemented
under the following divisions:
      1. SIC division A: Agriculture, forestry and fishing; NAICS sector 11:
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting.
      2. SIC division B: Mining; NAICS sector 21: Mining.
      3. SIC division D: Manufacturing; NAICS sector 31-33: Manufacturing.
      4. SIC division E: Transportation, communications, electric, gas and
sanitary services; NAICS sector 48-49: Transportation and warehousing; NAICS
sector 51: Communications; NAICS sector 22: Utilities.
      5. SIC division G: Retail Trade; NAICS sector 44-46: Retail trade; NAICS
sector 72: Accommodations and food services.
      6. SIC division I: Services; NAICS sector 54: Professional, scientific,
and technical services; NAICS sector 56: Administrative and support and waste
management and remediation services; NAICS sector 61: Educational services;
NAICS sector 62: Health care and social assistance; NAICS sector 71: Arts,
entertainment, and recreation; NAICS sector 81: Other services (except public
administration).
   B.   An industrial user is also defined as follows:
      1. A nongovernmental, nonresidential user that discharges more than the
equivalent of ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day of sanitary waste and which
is identified in the standard industrial classification manual under divisions
A, B, D, E and I;
      2. A user that discharges any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or
which has any other adverse effect on the treatment works; or
      3. A commercial user of an individual system.
   C.   A user in the SIC divisions and NAICS sectors listed may be excluded if
it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences through the completion and review of the data
disclosure form.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes,
trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
IPDES: Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
MULTIPLE BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: Includes the various types of developments that
would have common or joint ownership areas, such as condominiums, townhouses,
mobile home parks or courts, shopping centers, etc.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
NONDOMESTIC SOURCE: Any residential or commercial discharger which discharges
or could potentially discharge nondomestic wastewater, and any industrial
discharger.
OWNER: A person owning real estate that is, or proposes to be, connected to the
sewage system.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution with a pH value of 7 being neutral.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not admitted.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point at which the building sewer connects to the
public sewer.
SEWAGE OR WASTE MATTER: A combination of the water carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY: Any devices and system
used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature to implement section 201 of the act.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER AVAILABILITY FEE: A onetime fee assessed per equivalent residential unit
(ERU) when connecting to the sewerage system.
SEWER USER: Any individual, firm, company, association, society or corporation
or group who has connected to the sewerage system.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: Means:
   1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum
limit, the average limit, or City of Blackfoot Maximum Allowable Discharge
Limit for the same pollutant parameter;
   2.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty- three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit, the average limit, or City of Blackfoot’s
Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4
for COD, TSS, Total Nitrogen and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
longer-term average), that City of Blackfoot determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, (including
endangering the health of City of Blackfoot WWTP personnel or the general
public);
   4.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in City of Blackfoot’s
exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   5.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   6.   Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self- monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
   7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   8.   Any other violation or group of violations which City of Blackfoot
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of city’s
pretreatment program.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes for more than five (5) times the
average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted water such as cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids, organic or inorganic, that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which
are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods For
The Examination Of Water And Waste Water" and referred to a nonfilterable
residue.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-3-3: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property within the corporate
limits of the city, and any special users outside of the corporate limits of
the city, including all property owned or occupied by the United States Of
America, the county, and the state. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-4: CITY AUTHORITY:
The sewer system for the transmission, treatment and disposal of sewage for the
city shall be under the sole and exclusive control of the mayor and city
council, who may from time to time direct the construction, expansion,
extension, repair and maintenance of the sewer system owned and operated by the
city as the necessity of the city may require. The cost of maintenance and
repair of the city sewer system may be paid out of the general fund. (Ord.
2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-5: SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWERS:
   A.   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of a superintendent
of sewers, who shall, under the direction of the city engineer and the mayor
and council, have charge of such works, mains, laterals, trunk lines, treatment
plant, connection of service pipes and conduits, and all other matters
pertaining to the city sewer system. The superintendent shall report to the
city engineer monthly, or as often as required, the condition of the sewer
system and make such recommendations as the nature of the service may require.
In the absence of a superintendent, or if the mayor has not appointed one, the
city engineer shall act as superintendent of sewers.
   B.   Duties: The sewer system shall be kept in repair by the superintendent
of sewers and no other person, unless authorized by him, shall work on or
operate said system or any part thereof. It shall be the superintendent's duty
at all times to maintain said system in such a working condition that the
sewage of the city is efficiently and sanitarily carried from the premises of
the users of said system and processed in the wastewater treatment plant owned
and operated by the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Adoption: The city shall have the authority to adopt by resolution such
rules and regulations as it shall deem appropriate for the maintenance and
charges for said use of the sewer system and treatment facility as are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Amendment: Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the mayor and
council from amending, altering or adding to the provisions of this chapter in
relation to the sewer service supplied by the city in regard to rates, charges,
expansion, alteration, repair or any other matter related to the sewer system,
as changed conditions may require from time to time. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-7: AUTHORITY OF CITY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES:
   A.   Right Of Entry: The city, through its authorized representatives,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public
sewers or natural waterways.
   B.   Observe Safety Rules; Liability Restrictions: While performing the
necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this
section, the authorized representative of the city shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the sewer user and the sewer
user shall be held harmless for injury or death to any city authorized
representative, and the city shall indemnify the sewer user against loss or
damage to its property by any authorized city representative, and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury and property damage asserted
against the sewer user and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the sewer user to
maintain safe conditions as required in this chapter or as reasonably required
by prudent standards.
   C.   Access To Easements: The city, through its authorized representatives
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-8: REQUIRED USE OF SEWERS:
   A.   Connection To Public Sewer: The owner or occupant of any house,
building or property used for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental
or recreational use, or other purpose, situated within the city which is
abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley or right
of way in which there is located a public sewer of the city hereby is required
to cease using any other method of disposing of sewage, waste or polluted
water, and at his expense to connect such building directly with the public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within fifteen (15)
days after date of official notice from the city to do so; provided, however,
that said sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of any property line of the
building to be served or common property line in a multiple building
development.
   B.   New Subdivision Or Development: The owner or developer of a new
subdivision or development, whether subdivided or not, shall, at his expense,
construct the necessary extensions of the public sewer system to provide public
sewer facilities for each lot or building area in his subdivision.
Additionally, the owner or developer shall have the responsibility, at his
expense, of installing the main sewer line to the boundary in his development
which is farthest away from the point at which initial connection is made to
the present city sewer main.
   C.   Prohibited Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   D.   Discharge Of Sewage To Natural Outlet: It shall be unlawful to
discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter.
   E.   Privies And Septic Tanks: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 2122, 5-
6-2014)
9-3-9: REGULATIONS FOR USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
The use of the public sewers of the city shall be in accordance with the
following regulations:
   A.   Discharge Of Surface Waters:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any
connection any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, complying with the requirements of section 308 of the
act and on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
         a.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant,
including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two-tenths milligram per
liter (0.2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
         c.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
         d.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
      2.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the city, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, wastewater
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater
treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32o) (0o) and one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting any excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the city for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
         h.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 12.0.
         i.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the wastewater
treatment works.
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs", as defined in section
9-3-2 of this chapter.
         j.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   C.   City Authority:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection B2 of this section, and which, in
the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of section
9-3-20 of this chapter.
      2.   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   D.   Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and/or sand interceptors
shall be required on all new construction for eating establishments,
maintenance shops or any other facility that in the opinion of the city may
discharge grease, oil and/or sand and dirt that may restrict or plug the POTW
sewer lines. In addition, any new food establishment planning to open in an
existing building, must ensure that an appropriate grease interceptor be
installed prior to opening for business, or any major remodeling of an existing
building that does not currently have any interceptor installed, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The interceptor shall be adequately maintained as to prevent
overloading of the interceptor, thereby transmitting wastes to the POTW sewer
lines. These interceptors are subject to periodic inspection by the city.
   E.   Maintenance Of Treatment Facilities: Where preliminary treatment or
flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense.
   F.   Manhole Installation: When required by the city, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall
be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   G.   Measurements, Tests And Analyses: All measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
chapter shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136, including, but not
limited to, the latest EPA approved edition of "Standard Methods For The
Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
   H.   Special Agreements: No statement contained in this chapter shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern.
   I.   Notice Of Violation; Remedial Action: Any property owner or sewer user
violating the provisions of this section shall, upon notice by the city,
immediately install such preliminary treatment through separators, traps and/or
chemical, physical or biochemical processes as will make and assure that the
sewage contributed from such property or premises will meet the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-10: PERMISSION TO DISCHARGE OBJECTIONABLE WATER OR WASTES:
   A.   Review And Approval: The admission into the public sewers of any water
or wastes having:
      1.   Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than three hundred
milligrams per liter (300 mg/l),
      2.   Chemical oxygen demand (COD) greater than nine hundred milligrams
per liter (900 mg/l),
      3.   Suspended solids in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter
(300 mg/l),
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.
   B.   Preliminary Treatment Provided By Owner: Where necessary, in the
opinion of the city, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to three hundred milligrams per
liter (300 mg/l), the COD to nine hundred milligrams per liter (900 mg/l) and
the suspended solids to three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l). Plans,
specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the
city and of the state department of health and welfare, and no construction of
such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-11: BUILDING SEWERS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
All materials and workmanship in the installation of building sewers and
service connections shall conform to the following regulations:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
The permit shall not be issued until all sewer availability fees and other fees
have been paid in full.
   B.   Classes Of Permits: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits: 1) a general permit for residential and commercial sewer service, and
2) industrial user permits for sewer service to establishments producing
industrial wastes.
      1.   General Permits: General permits shall be applied for by the owner
or his agent on a form provided by the city clerk. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the city at the time the application is filed.
Also, the owner or his agent shall pay to the city, at the time the application
is filed, a sewer availability fee, which shall be established by resolution of
the city council; and
      2.   Industrial Permits: Industrial user permits shall be applied for by
the owner or his agent by letter to the city council accompanied by an executed
copy of the industrial user agreement together with any plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.
Industrial user permits shall be approved by the city council based on
recommendation by the engineer for the city. Approval shall be contingent upon
the availability of excess capacity in the wastewater treatment plant, the
provisions of this chapter and any other considerations the city council deems
appropriate. The amount of the permit, inspection fee and sewer availability
fee for an industrial wastes sewer service will vary with each permit and shall
be established by the city at the time of application.
   C.   Costs Borne By Owner; Liability: All costs and expense incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer and service connection shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer and the marking of the service connection
for same to the public sewer.
   D.   Separate Connections For Each Building: A separate and independent
building sewer and service connection shall be provided for every building;
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no separate sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
   E.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and being tested as
required by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   F.   Conformance With Building And Plumbing Codes: The materials of
construction of the building sewer and service connections, and the methods to
be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling
the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
codes as have been or may be adopted by the city.
   G.   Pipe Size; Building Sewer Grade And Slope: The building sewer from the
building drain to the public sewer and the service connection thereto shall not
be smaller than four inch (4") diameter sewer pipe.
      1.   Grade And Slope: The minimum grade or slope of the building sewer
shall be as follows:
         a.   Four inch (4") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of
not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot;
         b.   Six inch (6") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of not
less than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot; and
         c.   Eight inch (8") diameter sewer pipe shall be laid on a grade of
not less than four feet (4') per one thousand feet (1,000').
      2.   Alignment: The alignment of the building sewer from the outlet of
the building drain to the public sewer connection shall be straight, with no
bends, warps or sags permitted except with the permission of the city. The
trench bottom shall be cut to proper grade so that when the pipe is laid the
body or barrel of the pipe shall be on solid material. Bell holes are to be
excavated in the trench bottom at all pipe joints.
   H.   Connecting Surface Water Drainage To Building Sewer: No person shall
make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains
or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
   I.   Service Connection Requirements: The service connection to the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes as
adopted by the city. In addition, the materials and workmanship of the service
connection shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Precast Fittings: A precast service connection fitting shall be
installed as an increment of the sewer pipeline or installed as an external
fabrication to the sewer pipeline; said fabrication to be installed within the
center one-third (1/3) of an individual laying length of the public sewer pipe,
as a precaution in preventing the breaking of the bell or the spigot end of the
sewer pipe. The service connection fitting shall be installed as a watertight
connection to the public sewer, care being taken not to extend the building
sewer line into the public sewer line, therefore, creating a possible
restriction. The invert of the building sewer line at the service connection
fitting shall be at an elevation above the invert of the public sewer at least
equal to two-thirds (2/3) of the diameter of the public sewer. All foreign
material shall be removed from the sewer pipe and there shall be a permanent
connection which is airtight and watertight between the public sewer line and
the building sewer line.
      2.   Connection Tee:
         a.   The building sewer service connection fitting to reinforced sewer
pipelines shall be made as specified under subsection I1 of this section,
except that in cutting a hole in reinforced pipe for installation of the
service connection tee, extreme care shall be exercised to avoid damage to the
pipe. The hole for the tee shall be carefully chipped first to expose the
reinforcing steel and the steel cut by torch or saw. No chisel cutting of the
reinforcing steel of any character will be permitted.
         b.   In lieu of a standard service connection fitting, a riser service
connection may be made to sewer lines that are deep below ground surface. The
branch or riser shall be connected the same as a tee, except that it shall be
set vertically over the public sewer pipe, and extended vertically upward such
that the top of the riser is not to be less than five feet (5') below the
surface of the ground.
   J.   Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit
shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer.
   K.   Guarding Excavations; Restoration: All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
   L.   Backwater Devices Required On New Service Connections:
      1.   Purpose: To prevent sanitary sewer overflows, from blockages or
sewer jetting of mainlines, for municipal sewer customers.
      2.   Installation:
         a.   Installation of a backwater valve, to prevent sewage from the
main sewer backing up into the private sewer lines due to cleaning or plugs in
the main, is required for all fixtures installed on a floor lower than the next
upstream manhole cover of the public or private sewer, serving such drainage
piping, shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an approved
type of blackwater valve. Fixtures on floor levels above such elevation shall
not discharge through the backwater valve. Cleanouts for drains that pass
through a backwater valve shall be clearly identified with a permanent label
stating “Backwater Valve Downstream.” In all:
            (1)   New construction,
            (2)   Replacements or repairs made to an existing sanitary sewer
lateral,
            (3)   Building permit applicants who are remodeling more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the structure area or where plumbing fixtures are
added to the property,
            (4)   Properties that have been damaged by the blockage of the city
sanitary sewer main or the private lateral,
            on all new structures where a pump is used to lift sewage to the
sanitary sewer system main line, the tie in to the building sewer shall be
downstream of the backwater valve.
      b.   Installation shall be completed in accordance with current Idaho
Statutes, administrative rules and plumbing code.
(Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-3-2016, eff. 5-3-2016; Ord. 2188, 10-1-
2019)
9-3-12: INDUSTRIAL USERS:
All industrial users of the sewerage system shall comply with any applicable
requirements of sections 204(b), 307 and 308 of the federal water pollution
control act and 40 CFR 403. There shall be two (2) classes of industrial users:
a) major contributing industry, and b) minor contributing industry.
   A.   Contributing Industries Defined: The contributing industries are
defined as follows:
      1.   Major Contributing Industry: A major contributing industry is one
that:
         a.   Will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design
hydraulic flow of the treatment works.
         b.   Will contribute greater than ten percent (10%) of the design
pollutant loading of the treatment works.
         c.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the act.
         d.   Has significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on the sewerage system or the quality of its
effluent.
         e.   Is classified as a categorical industry or significant industry.
      2.   Minor Contributing Industry: A minor contributing industry shall be
all industries not included in the major contributing industry classification
as defined in subsection A1 of this section.
   B.   Requirements:
      1.   Monitoring Wastes: All major contributing industries' wastes shall
be monitored by the city or industry on a regular basis at intervals not less
than monthly, and more frequently as the characteristics of the specific
industrial discharge may dictate. Minor contributing industries shall be
monitored by the city or industry as the characteristics of the specific
industrial discharge may dictate as determined by the city.
      2.   Reports To City: All major contributing industries shall submit to
the city on the first day of the months of June and December, a statement in
writing regarding specific actions taken to achieve full compliance with the
requirements of section 307 of the act.
      3.   Report Changes In Flow Or Characteristics: Each contributing
industry shall report any substantial (exceeding 10 percent plus or minus)
change in flow or characteristics of wastewater being discharged into the
sewerage system. The report shall include quantity and quality of effluent and
duration and frequency of discharge. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-13: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS:
No connection of any kind to a public sewer line shall be made and no sewage
permitted to flow through such connection except pursuant to inspection of and
approval issued by the city. See section
9-3-11 of this chapter for sewer permits, inspection fees, inspection notices,
etc. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-14: REJECTION OF MATERIALS OR WORKMANSHIP:
The city may reject any material or workmanship for cause and, upon such order,
rejected material shall be removed and replaced with approved material.
Disapproved workmanship shall cause the removal and replacement of all
materials involved, including appurtenances, excavation, backfilling and other
work items. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-15: SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Compliance With Master Plan: All proposed extensions of the municipal
sewerage system to serve undeveloped areas within the existing corporate
limits, newly annexed areas or areas outside the corporate limits shall comply
with the overall master plan for the municipal sewerage system.
   B.   Owner Responsible For Costs; Exception: Costs for all extensions which
lie outside the boundary limits of the property for which the extension is
requested shall be the responsibility of that property owner or his agent. Cost
for sewer extensions within the property for which the extension is requested
shall also be the responsibility of the owner or his agent. Sewer extensions
shall be required to extend to the farthest boundary of the development. When
it is necessary to install oversized lines as part of an extension, the cost of
all oversized lines will normally be the responsibility of the owner or his
agent. However, the city may, in its discretion, if it has uncommitted funds in
its sewer construction account, participate in a portion of the cost of any
oversized sewer lines.
   C.   Newly Developed Areas: Unless a special permit is granted by the city,
all municipal sewerage system extensions into newly developing areas shall be
installed prior to the construction of any new streets.
   D.   Compliance With City Specifications: All design and construction of any
extensions to the municipal sewerage system shall comply with the official
specifications for sewerage system extensions as adopted by the city.
   E.   Preparation And Filing Of Plans: The plans for all extensions to the
sewerage system shall be prepared as per the licensing requirements of Idaho
Code. Three (3) copies of the said plans shall be filed with the city. Two (2)
copies of the plans shall be filed with the state department of environmental
quality for their review and approval as required by Idaho Code. In approving a
plan for extension to the municipal sewerage system, the city reserves the
right to stipulate other requirements such as a special permit fee, rights of
way limits, sequence of construction, time limits for having existing service
disrupted, the filing of a performance bond and other similar measures as may
be required to protect the public. No work shall commence on any such extension
of the municipal sewerage system until the extension project has been approved
by the city.
   F.   Certification By Registered Engineer: After the construction of any
municipal sewer system extensions, it shall be the obligation of the owner, or
his agent, to have a registered professional engineer certify to the city and
to the state department of health and welfare that the said system extensions
were installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications on file
with the respective agencies. Following certification by the registered
professional engineer and acceptance by the city, the entire extension of the
municipal sewerage system, including the city sewer service lines, shall become
the property of the city and it shall be the city's responsibility to maintain
and operate the system thereafter.
   G.   Connections Made After Extension Accepted: If it is necessary for the
city to permit a sewer service connection and/or sewer service line at any time
after the extension has been originally accepted by the city, the owner or his
agent shall be required to pay the sewer availability fee as well as the
standard permit and inspection fees as may be established by the city for such
purposes. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-16: BACKFILLING:
Backfilling of building sewers and service connections within the limits of
public rights of way or easements shall conform to special specifications
promulgated by the city, for sewer installation, and shall be subject to
inspection by and approval of the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-17: SEWER EQUIVALENCY FEE:
   A.   Payment Of Fee Required: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this
chapter, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association or property
owner who has not otherwise paid for, or contributed proportionately toward,
the costs and expenses of constructing a sewer line, whether that construction
has been performed by the city, a local improvement district or a private
entity, or combination thereof, and who subsequently desires to connect to the
city sewer system, shall be required to pay a sewer equivalency fee. In
determining who has or has not paid, or contributed proportionately, toward the
costs and expenses of constructing a sewer line, the sole factor shall be
whether that user, or a predecessor in title of the user's property, has in
fact, paid consideration to the city in cash, services or in-kind, for the
construction of the sewer trunk line to which he now desires to connect, which
consideration is commensurate with what the user, or his predecessor in title,
would have paid under this section had the user not paid or contributed
previously to the cost of construction of the sewer line.
   B.   Fee Set By City Council: The sewer equivalency fee for each parcel of
ground connected to a trunk sewer line shall be established and set by the city
council, which shall consider the use to which the property will be put, the
expected flows, the amount of capacity of the trunk line that will be used by
the proposed use, and the type of effluent. The council also shall take into
consideration the amount of land that might be able to be serviced by the trunk
sewer line, whether the land be directly adjacent to the trunk line or not, and
also shall take into consideration the cost of the engineering and construction
of the trunk line, in current dollars, and shall consider the interest that
could have been earned on the money used to pay for the original sewer line.
The sewer equivalency fee may be different for residential, commercial, and
industrial users and may be different for differing users within those three
(3) classifications depending upon the considerations referenced above but
shall be as consistent as possible under similar factual circumstances. The
sewer equivalency fee shall be assessed in terms of single-family equivalent
connections. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-18: COOPERATIVE AND REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Reimbursement To Sewer User: Should a sewer user at his own expense
construct an extension to the sewer system in a public right of way or easement
with prior approval of the city and in accordance with the standards and
designs of the city and which sewer line extension has been determined by the
city to be able to benefit properties other than the user's, the sewer user
constructing the extension may request that the city enter into an agreement
with the user such that all or a portion of the costs of extending the sewer
line will be reimbursed to that sewer user from the connection charges
collected under section
9-3-17 of this chapter from those property owners who will benefit from the
sewer line extension and who otherwise have not paid or contributed their
proportionate share of the construction costs of that sewer line and who are
required to pay the sewer equivalency fee. The city shall not be required to
enter into such an agreement and whether or not to enter into such an agreement
shall be at the sole discretion of the city council; provided, however, that:
      1.   No reimbursement agreement shall have a duration greater than ten
(10) years, unless the city is a beneficiary of the agreement.
      2.   No reimbursement agreement shall pay to the sewer user paying for or
constructing a sewer line extension more than one hundred percent (100%) of his
actual engineering and construction costs, it being noted that in most cases at
least some of the cost would ordinarily be assessed to the sewer user's own
property.
      3.   A reimbursement agreement may provide for interest to be paid to the
sewer user.
      4.   The city may charge and may receive a ten percent (10%)
administrative fee for handling the accounting, auditing, and payment of the
reimbursement payments made to the sewer user so extending the sewer line and
having reached a reimbursement agreement with the city.
      5.   All or a part of the sewer equivalency fee associated with the sewer
line constructed and paid pursuant to section
9-3-17 of this chapter may be set aside and earmarked for reimbursement
pursuant to a reimbursement agreement.
      6.   The reimbursement agreement shall be personal to the sewer user
entering into it and shall not be assigned without the written consent of the
city, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld.
      7.   The agreement will terminate when the user has been fully reimbursed
if the agreed upon reimbursement amount is paid prior to the end of the term of
the agreement.
      8.   The agreement shall be binding on the sewer user and his assigns,
successors, heirs and executors and may be recorded as an encumbrance against
the property of the sewer user.
      9.   The sewer user shall be required to indemnify and hold the city
harmless from any and all liability whatsoever until the sewer line has been
accepted for maintenance by the city.
      10.   Said lines, after acceptance, shall become part of the city
sewerage system and be the sole property of the city.
   B.   Reimbursement To City: Where the city constructs a sewer line
extension, either on its own or in conjunction with another person or entity,
the city may enter into a reimbursement agreement as authorized in subsection A
of this section such that the city is reimbursed for its costs of construction,
engineering, legal costs and interest. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-19: BASIS FOR SEWER CHARGES:
   A.   System Of Charges Established: There hereby is established a system of
connector charges, permit and inspection fees, industrial cost recovery
charges, periodic service charges and other fees for the use of, and for
service rendered by the sewerage works of the city, and which charges, rates
and fees shall be as near as possible, uniform as to the different classes of
property served by said sewerage works. The rates, charges and fees provided by
this chapter hereby are levied and assessed against each lot, parcel of land,
building, building unit, apartment, or property having any connection with the
sanitary sewerage works of the city or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage,
industrial wastewater or other liquids directly into the sanitary sewerage
works of the city. The rates, charges and fees shall be billed to and paid by
the registered owner of each lot, parcel of land, building or property served
by the sewerage system.
   B.   Properties Subject To Charges: It specifically is enacted that all
property in the city to which a public sewer is available and is required to
connect to the sewer as required in section
9-3-8 of this chapter, but is not used by the owner or occupier of said parcel
of land, nevertheless is subject to user charges under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-20: POWER OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL TO SET CHARGES:
The mayor and city council shall determine and set all applicable fees and
charges for use of the sewer system. This chapter supplants and replaces
resolution 240 and amendments thereto. The city currently does not have the
technology or ability to measure each class's exact use of the sewer system.
Therefore, the rates are based on an estimate of each class's contribution or
potential contribution to the loading of the sewer system. A multiplier is
assigned to each class pursuant to the table set forth below. The multiplier is
not based solely on the amount of water used and discharged into the system,
but rather, takes into consideration other factors such as the estimated amount
of BODs, CODs, suspended solids, and other contaminates that may be discharged
into the system by the various classes of users, and the estimated number and
types of users under each classification. To determine the monthly sewer
charge, the multiplier (or equivalent residential unit, as it is sometimes
called) is multiplied by the rate set from time to time by the city council by
resolution or ordinance. The chart below may also be used in determining the
sewer availability fee for new users to the system, regardless of the pipe size
or number of connections to the city's sewerage system.
Classification Equivalent Residential Unit
Classification                                    Equivalent Residential Unit
Assembly hall or auditorium, no food service, per
each:
 200 seats                                       1.00
 Additional for bar/food service                 See food and beverage service
Automotive service (without car wash):            1.00
 Convenience store: treat separately as retail
  store
 Fuel and bathroom only: add per pump island     0.25
  over 4
 Full service: add per each pump island or stall 0.25
  over 4
 Repair only: add per stall over 4               0.25
Bowling alley (with first 3 lanes):               1.00
 Additional per lane over 3                      0.20
 Additional for bar/food service                 See food and beverage service
Business for each 4,000 square feet (no food      1.00
prep):
 Apparel and accessories
 Bank or savings and loan
 Business office (individual restroom
  facilities, per office)
 Business office (shared restroom facilities)
 Car dealer (less wash bays or repair shop):     1.00
  Additional per repair stall                   0.25
  Additional per wash bay                       0.25
 Department and retail
 Drugstore
 Durable goods
 Florist
 Grocery (without resident butcher or baker):
  Add for resident butcher and/or baker         1.00
  Miscellaneous retail foods (no food or        1.00
    beverage processing)
 Hardware
 Lumberyard, hardware or gardening sales
 Nursery or greenhouse
 Physical therapy
 Post office
 Tire store
Campsite ground:                                  1.00
 Add for each campsite over 4 with sewer hookup  0.20
 Add for on site restrooms/showers               1.00
 Add for RV dump                                 4.00
Car wash per bay:
 Self-service                                    1.50
 Automatic with recycled water                   1.50
 Automatic without recycled water                2.00
 Pet wash - self-service                         1.00
Churches:
 With kitchen per congregation                   2.00
 Without kitchen per congregation                1.50
Club, or lodge:
 With kitchen: for each 75 general membership    1.00
 Without kitchen: for each 100 general           1.00
  membership
 Additional for bar                              See food and beverage service
Commercial warehouse or storage unit for each     1.00
12,500 square feet
Food and beverage service (fire occupancy load):  1.00
 Bar/lounge: add per each 20 over 20             0.50
 Restaurant: for each over 20                    0.05
Gym, spa, or fitness center:
 With showers per 100 members                    1.00
 Without shower per 200 members                  1.00
Health practitioner (doctor, dentist (wet chair),
chiropractor, specialist):
 For up to 3 chairs or exam rooms                1.00
 For each chair or exam room over 3              0.25
Hotel or motel:                                   1.00
 Additional per unit with kitchen over 2         0.50
 Additional per unit without kitchen over 3      0.33
Industrial use:
 Per each 16 employees                           1.00
 With showers per each 12 employees              1.00
 With showers and cafeteria per each 10          1.00
  employees
 Add industrial process wastewater               As per IWA
Institutional:                                    1.00
 Assisted living additional per bed over 2       0.40
 Daycare: per 20 children over 20                1.00
 Hospital additional per bed over 1              0.80
 Jail: add per each bed over 2                   0.50
 Nursing home additional per bed over 2          0.40
 School without cafeteria or showers: per 40     1.00
  students over 40
 School with cafeteria: per 30 students over 30  1.00
 School with showers: per 30 students over 30    1.00
 School with cafeteria and showers: per 25       1.00
  students over 25
Laundry:
 Self-service up to 5 machines                   2.00
 Additional per machine over 5                   0.20
 Commercial per machine                          1.00
Personal care services:                           1.00
 Barber: add per station over 4                  0.20
 Pet groomer: add per station over 2             0.60
 Salon: add per station over 2                   0.40
Photo lab, printing shop                          2.00
Residential units:                                1.00
 Apartment per dwelling unit
 Condominium per living unit
 Duplex per dwelling unit
 Fourplex per dwelling unit
 Mobile home or trailer park, per space
 Single-family dwelling
 With business additional (if business type is   1.00
  in this chart)
 
This table, along with applicable charges per multiplier or equivalent
residential unit may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city
council. Commercial users not included in the table shall be considered to be
industrial users and shall be charged rates based on applicable industrial
waste agreements. Any of the users in the table may be classified as industrial
users if information on their contribution flow and/or strength indicates a
need to do so. A single user having more than one classification of use shall
be the sum of the fees. The minimum monthly sewer charge shall be one
equivalent residential unit. A reassessment of each commercial user will be
completed at a minimum of once every five (5) years. Within thirty (30) days of
notice of assessment, a user may appeal the assessment to the mayor in writing
setting forth the reasons for the appeal and articulating why the assessment is
being disputed. The mayor shall have thirty (30) days to review the appeal and
recommend to the department head that the assessment stand or be amended. The
department head or the user shall have thirty (30) days to appeal the mayor's
recommendation to the city council. If neither party appeals the mayor's
recommendation, then such recommendation shall become the effective assessment
until such user is reassessed pursuant to the assessment schedule of the
department. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-21: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS; FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Permit Required; Fees:
      1.   Application For Permit: To obtain municipal sewer service, the owner
or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.
      2.   Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee shall be paid
to the city at the time the application is filed. Also, the owner or his agent
shall pay to the city, at the time the application is filed, a sewer
availability fee in the amount as provided for in subsection B of this section.
The amount of the permit and inspection fee shall be determined by the city
council.
   B.   Sewer Availability Fee:
      1.   The owner, or his agent, of all properties connecting to the public
sewer of the city under the terms of this chapter shall pay a sewer
availability fee as set forth by resolution of the city council for each
equivalent connection or fraction thereof as may be assigned to the property by
the city.
The fees are for the privilege of connecting to the city sewer system. All work
necessary for making a proper connection shall be done to the satisfaction of
and under the direction of the city inspector and shall be paid for by the
person desiring such connection. Such person shall pay a permit and inspection
fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
      2.   For properties that have an existing public sewer adjacent to their
property without direct cost to the present owner or former owners of the
property, there shall be an additional connection charge as set forth by
resolution by the city council for each equivalent connection thereof as may be
assigned to the property by the city.
   C.   Materials And Construction Methods: The materials of construction of
the sewer service line and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the trench and surface replacement
shall all conform to the requirements of specifications and codes as have been
or may be adopted by the city.
   D.   Separate Connection For Each Building: A separate and independent city
sewer service connection shall be provided for each building.
   E.   Notify City For Inspection: The applicant for the city sewer service
connection shall notify the city when the connection of the sewer service
connection and line to the public sewer main is ready for inspection during
normal business hours. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-22: SPECIAL CHARGES; SEWER INSPECTIONS; SEPTIC TANK WASTE DUMPING:
   A.   Connection To City Sewer System Outside City Limits: In order to obtain
municipal sewer system service to parcels that are either partially or entirely
outside of the corporate city limits, the following provisions must be complied
with:
      1.   There shall be an application form which shall provide that the
applicant will agree to the terms and conditions required by this section as a
consideration for obtaining such service. The city council shall establish an
application fee which fee shall be based upon various classes of applications
as recommended by the public works director given the amount of staff review
required for processing the application. The application form shall specify the
legal description of the parcels for which service is being applied, the name
and address of the legal owners of the parcels and purpose of the requested
service.
      2.   A completed application must be filed with the public works
department.
      3.   Following the filing of a completed application form and the payment
of the application fee, the public works director shall then review the
circumstances presented by the application in accordance with the terms and
conditions and regulations of this chapter as are relevant to the application
and which shall also include a review of the effect the granting of the
application will have on the ability of the municipal sewer system to provide
an acceptable level of service to developed parcels with existing service
within the city limits which shall not be compromised.
      4.   The public works director shall then review the findings and
recommendations with the applicant for comment.
      5.   The public works director shall then submit the application and a
report of recommendations to the city council regarding the application.
      6.   The city council, in the exercise of its discretion, may either
grant or deny the application after review of the application and the report of
recommendations of the public works director.
      7.   In the event the city council grants the application, it shall
include as a condition that the legal owners of the parcels shall enter into an
"agreement for the extension of domestic sewer service outside the city limits"
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the "agreement") which agreement
form shall provide that the legal owners of the parcels agree that the
provisions of the city ordinances, regulations and policies which appertain to
the regulation, control and use of its domestic sewer system including hookup,
service fees, and inspection fees, apply as terms of the "agreement" and which
form shall also provide that the owners of the parcels agree to the annexation
into the city of the parcels serviced; and the council may also impose such
other conditions of granting the application as are reasonable to assure the
protection of the level of service to developed parcels within the city limits
and to assure that the proprietary funds of the city domestic sewer service are
not used for the extension and/or enlargement of the system which conditions
shall also be included in the "agreement".
      8.   The sewer user of the parcels serviced pursuant to a granted
application under this section shall be considered a user and subject to the
terms and conditions of the "agreement" so long as the property being served
remains outside of the corporate limits of the city.
      9.   Notwithstanding subsection A5 of this section, if the requested
connection is for a residence, or a multi-family residence not exceeding four
(4) residential units, and if sewer service is readily available to the
affected parcel without extension of service, then, if the public works
director deems it in the best interests of the city to do so, said connection
may be authorized by the public works director without action by the city
council. If the director declines to approve the connection, the request will
proceed to the city council for final decision. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-23: BILLING AND PAYMENT OF MONTHLY CHARGES:
All monthly sewer charges shall be due and payable from the owner to the city
clerk between the first and tenth day of each month for billing from the
previous cycle as billed on the city utility bill. For new construction, the
monthly user charge shall be computed from the date the service connection has
been inspected and approved or when the building being served is substantially
completed, whichever is the latest date. Upon failure to pay the utility bill
as prescribed, each user shall pay in addition to the amount due, a late fee in
such amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-
2014)
9-3-24: DELINQUENCIES; CITY PROCEDURE:
   A.   Termination Of Water Service For Nonpayment: If a sewer user has not
paid his monthly charges by the tenth of the month, it shall be deemed
delinquent. The city shall follow the procedure set forth in chapter 1 of this
title for termination of water services, and shall cause the water supplied to
said sewer user to be turned off from the premises, the city taking notice
that, without water, the sewer system of the user cannot be used and shutting
off the water is the only way to prevent the use of the sewer for nonpayment;
provided, if the charges are not paid within ten (10) days after the
delinquency notice, an additional penalty in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council will be added to the account each month.
   B.   Lien Against Property: All delinquent charges or fees, as provided by
this chapter, not paid after the final determination of the sewer user's
account shall be imposed as a lien against and upon the property or premises
against which such charge or fee is levied or assessed, and the city clerk
shall, at the time of certifying the city taxes, certify such delinquencies
together with all penalties to the tax collector and when so certified, the
same shall be a lien upon the property and will be collectible as other taxes.
   C.   Use At New Location: The owner of any property leaving a delinquency in
sewer fees at any location shall not be entitled to the use of the sewerage
system at any new location until all fee delinquencies are paid.
   D.   Disposition Of Monies Collected: All monies collected by the city clerk
under the provision of this section shall be paid over to the city treasurer in
the same manner as is required for the payment of other city monies. (Ord.
2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-25: DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT:
   A.   Discontinue Sewer And Water Service: The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the city, including
all property owned or occupied by the United States Of America, the county, and
the state, and in case of nonpayment or delinquency, the superintendent of
sewers is, after the city has complied with the provisions of section
9-3-27 of this chapter, hereby authorized and directed to disconnect and/or
plug the sewer connection with the sewer system of the city and direct the
water superintendent to terminate the water supply to the property.
   B.   Penalty For Turning On Water: If any person, after the water has been
turned off from the premises on account of nonpayment of rates or other
violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations pertaining to the sewer
service, shall turn on or permit to be turned on or use or permit the water to
be used, without authority, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-26: SEWERAGE SYSTEM FUND:
   A.   Fund Established; Purpose: All fees and charges received and collected
under authority of this chapter shall be deposited and credited to a special
fund to be designated as the sewage system fund. The accounts of said fund
shall show all receipts and expenditures for the administration, maintenance,
operation, replacement, upkeep and repair of the sewerage works and any
payments into sinking funds as may be established for the purpose of:
      1.   Paying principal of and interest on the general obligation sewer
bonds of the city that shall from time to time be outstanding;
      2.   Industrial cost recovery funds for payment to EPA if applicable;
      3.   Sewerage capital improvement funds for industrial cost recovery
payments that are to be used exclusively for future expansion, upgrading or
reconstruction on the sewage system eligible for EPA assistance; and
      4.   Other special funds as may be established by the city council.
   B.   Disposition Of Funds And Credits: As provided by law, when budgeted and
appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the sewerage system fund
shall be available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance,
operation, repairs and upkeep of the sewerage works of the city and, to the
extent legally available, for payment into a sinking fund established for the
payment of the principal of and interest on the general obligation sewer bonds
of the city which shall from time to time be outstanding. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-27: RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF MONIES:
All monies collected by the city clerk under the provisions of this chapter
shall be paid, received, disbursed and accounted for as directed by the city
council. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-28: PRIVATE ENHANCED SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this
chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private enhanced sewer
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance
with the following special provisions:
   A.   Permit Required; Permit And Inspection Fee: Before commencement of
construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain
a written permit from the city. The application for said permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by plans,
specifications and other information as may be deemed necessary by the city. A
permit and inspection fee in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   B.   Inspection And Approval By City: A permit for private enhanced sewage
disposal system shall not be effective until the installation is completed to
the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground works are covered. The inspection shall be made by the city within
seventy two (72) hours after receipt of notice from the applicant, Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays being excluded in calculating the elapsed time.
   C.   Compliance With State Regulations: The type, capacities, location and
layout of a private enhanced sewage disposal system shall comply with all of
the rules and regulations and recommendations of the Idaho department of health
and welfare and/or the Southeast Idaho district health department. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   D.   Connection To Public Sewer When Available: At such time as a public
sewer becomes available to property served by a private enhanced sewage
disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter and any septic tank, cesspool or similar private
enhanced sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   E.   Operation In Sanitary Manner: The owners shall operate and maintain the
private enhanced sewage disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times and
at no expense to the city.
   F.   Septic Tank Pumpings; Disposal And Fee: Septic tank pumpings shall not
be deposited in any manhole, cleanout or sewer opening. The pumpings may be
dumped, upon approval from the superintendent at the wastewater treatment plant
at a point designated by the city. The number of gallons dumped and the nature
of the wastes shall be provided to the plant operator prior to dumping. A fee
for the septic tank dumping shall be determined by the city council.
   G.   Additional State Requirements: No statement contained in this section
shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the state department of health and welfare.
(Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-3-29: MAINTENANCE OF LINES:
All users of the sewer system shall keep their pipe connections and other
apparatus in good repair and protected from freezing at their own expense, but
no person, except under the direction of the superintendent, shall be allowed
to dig into the street, alley, sidewalk or easement beneath which the lateral
and trunk line sewers run or to tap into any such lateral or trunk line in any
manner. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-30: POINT OF LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
   A.   User Responsibility: All users shall have the responsibility of, and be
liable for, and shall pay for, all costs and expenses of maintaining their own
sewer lines extending from their property until such sewer lines pass the
vertical plane of the user's property line or until they reach city main sewer
lines, whichever point is reached last. This liability of the user shall
include the entire sewer service connection apparatus and plumbing equipment
and materials. Thus, the city's end point of liability for maintenance shall be
at such point as the city main sewer line connects to the user's sewer service
connection, and not thereafter with the user having complete responsibility for
the sewer service connection to the city main sewer lines.
   B.   Nonconflicting Provisions: This section shall not be construed to be in
conflict with any provision that states that no person shall be allowed to dig
into the street, alley, sidewalk or easement beneath which the lateral and
trunk line sewers run or tap into any such lateral or trunk line in any manner
without the superintendent's direction and authorization, in that such person
shall still have to contact the superintendent to obtain his permission to
perform work within the street, alley, sidewalk or easement for which the user
is liable. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-31: USERS LIABLE FOR VIOLATION:
No user of the city sewer service shall permit or allow any person from any
other premises or any unauthorized person to discharge sewage into said system
and the permit to connect with the sewer system shall be limited to the person
and the premises designated in the permit. Any violation of this section by
either the permit holder or an unauthorized person shall be deemed a
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
Any such violations shall be grounds for the superintendent to withhold sewer
service, without notice of termination of service, and the superintendent may
require the water superintendent to terminate water service. In appropriate
circumstances, the superintendent may require that a separate service
connection is put in for each user. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-32: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGE OR SERVICE INTERRUPTION:
The city shall not be held liable for damages to any sewer user or his property
by reason of a stoppage or other interruption of his water supply or sewer
disposal service caused by scarcity of water, accidents to the works,
alterations, additions, or repairs to the sewer or water system, or from other
unavoidable causes beyond the control of the city. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-33: INJURY TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM UNLAWFUL:
   A.   Damaging Property: No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully
or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewerage works.
   B.   Depositing Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any
garbage, rubbish, dead animals or any substance having a tendency to obstruct
the flow of the sewer in any manhole, cleanout or sewer opening. (Ord. 2122, 5-
6-2014)
9-3-34: PUBLIC WORKS INFRASTRUCTURE:
Section
8-3-7 of this code shall apply to public works infrastructure construction and
public works projects. (Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
9-3-35: PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Responsibility For Remedy: Any person found to be
violating any provisions of this chapter, other than for nonpayment of a sewer
bill, shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing three (3) working days for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations and if necessary make all
corrections and repairs to the system or pay for same if the city has to make
the corrections or repairs.
   B.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall continue any violation, beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, for each violation. Each day in
which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   C.   Liability To City For Loss Or Damage: Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation and, for
other than nonpayment of sewer bill violations, may have their sewer and water
supply terminated after the above three (3) working day notice period has
expired.
   D.   Cumulative Penalties: These penalties shall not be construed to be
exclusive, but shall be construed to be cumulative of, and in addition to, any
other penalties provided for in this code or the criminal code of the state; as
an example, a person injuring the sewer system could be criminally charged with
malicious injury to property for all violations initially charged as a criminal
violation, the notice provisions provided for in this chapter shall not apply.
(Ord. 2122, 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER PRETREATMENT
SECTION:
9-4-1: General Provisions
9-4-1-1: Purpose And Policy
9-4-1-2: Administration
9-4-1-3: Definitions
9-4-1-4: Abbreviations
9-4-2: Confidential Information
9-4-3: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
9-4-4: Wastewater Treatment Rates
9-4-5: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
9-4-6: Conflicting Provisions
9-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
9-4-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
   A.   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply with
all applicable state and federal laws, including the clean water act (33 USC
1251 et seq.), and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part 403). The
objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW;
      3.   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge
is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
      4.   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
      5.   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
      6.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW by FOG
dischargers that will interfere with the operation of the POTW;
      7.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW by FOG
dischargers that will cause combined sewer overflows (CSOs) or sanitary sewer
overflows (SSOs);
      8.   To protect the environment from pollution caused by CSOs and SSOs;
      9.   To adequately regulate the sale and use of additives added to grease
removal systems (GRSs).
   B.   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter
authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring,
compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent
to other city personnel. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.
ACCESSIBLE: When applied to required pretreatment monitoring or treatment
equipment, shall mean direct access without the necessity of removing any
panel, door, vehicle, equipment, materials or other similar obstruction.
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
ADDITIVE: Any material, in any physical form, put into a GRS or any drain lines
or appurtenances discharging to a GRS intended in any way to modify the
operation of the GRS.
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY (FINE): A punitive monetary charge unrelated to
treatment cost, which is assessed by the superintendent rather than a court.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, city
prohibitive standards, city specific pretreatment standards (local limits),
state of Idaho pretreatment standards, or EPA's national pretreatment standards
and categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is
appropriate or most stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: Regional administrator of EPA region 10.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
   A.   If the user is a corporation:
      1. The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
      2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions
which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations
and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively;
   C.   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her
designee.
   D.   The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the city.
AUTOMATIC GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM (AGRS): AGRS that has provision to
automatically remove separated FOG and/or settled solids from the tank and
collect them for disposal.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in section 403.5(a)(1) and (b) of the act. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20oC) usually expressed as a
concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which applies to a
specific category of users and which appears in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405 through 471.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one of EPA's categorical pretreatment
standards.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual or
grab wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of
either flow or time, and taken from the same sampling point each time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: Refers to:
   A.   The POTW if the POTW's pretreatment program submission has been
approved in accordance with requirements of section 403.11 of the act; or
   B.   The approval authority if the submission has not been approved.
COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such
as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the
only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes or allows
the contribution of wastewater into the city POTW that is of a similar volume
and/or chemical makeup as that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from
a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one hundred (100) gallons
per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita per day, and 0.17 pounds of
TSS per capita per day.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency
or, where appropriate, the director of the region 10 office of water, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: A categorical industrial user, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which would be applicable to such source if and when
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the
act.
EXISTING USER: Any noncategorical user which was discharging wastewater prior
to the effective date hereof.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG): Those components of wastewater amenable to
measurement by the methods described in "Standard Methods For The Examination
Of Water And Wastewater", latest approved edition, or other methods approved by
40 CFR section 136. For the purposes of this chapter, the term fats, oils and
grease shall include polar fats, oils and grease, and other components
extracted from wastewater by these methods, excluding the nonpolar fraction.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Any establishment, commercial or
noncommercial, primarily engaged in the preparing, serving or otherwise making
available for consumption foodstuffs in or on a receptacle that requires
washing more than two (2) days per week and that discharges to the POTW.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time. A grab sample is an individual sample collected over a period of time not
exceeding fifteen (15) minutes.
GREASE, GREASES: See definition of Fats, Oils And Grease (FOG).
GREASE IMPACT AREA: Any area of the POTW collection system where grease
deposits originating at FSEs and/or NFDs create maintenance requirements
exceeding normal sewer maintenance. These areas will be delineated by the
superintendent and updated as needed.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR, INTERCEPTOR, INTERCEPTOR STYLE GRS: Any relatively large
inground or aboveground tank, generally of precast concrete, with internal
plumbing and baffling intended to act as a GRS or AGRS to serve one or more
fixtures and which shall be remotely located.
GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM (GRS): Any device designed for, and intended for,
separating, collecting and removing waterborne FOG and settleable solids prior
to discharging to the POTW. This includes any AGRS.
GREASE TRAP, TRAP, TRAP STYLE GRS: Any relatively small appurtenance, generally
of cast iron or fabricated steel, with internal configuration and internal or
external flow control, intended to function as a GRS or AGRS.
HIGH STRENGTH WASTE: Any waters or wastewater having a concentration of BOD or
total suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250
mg/l), or having a concentration of fats, oil and grease in excess of two
hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW
from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
act. The discharge into the POTW is normally by means of pipes, conduits,
pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water
intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant
thereto.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of an indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCEPTANCE PERMIT (IWA): An authorization or equivalent
control document issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the
POTW. The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, either: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations; b) inhibits or disrupts its sludge
processes, use or disposal; or c) is a cause of a violation of the city NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the
clean water act; the solid waste disposal act (SWDA), including title II,
commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA); any
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the clean air act; the toxic substances
control act; and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries act.
IPDES: Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
LIQUID WASTE: The discharge from any fixture, appliance or appurtenance in
connection with a plumbing system which does not receive fecal matter.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration (or loading) of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of
any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
NEW SOURCE:
   A.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided,
that:
      1. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
      2. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
      3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
   C.   Construction of a new source, as defined herein, has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
      1. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction
program:
         a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment;
or
         b. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation
or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
      2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
NEW USER: A user that is not regulated under federal categorical pretreatment
standards, but that applies to the city for a new building permit or occupies
an existing building and plans to commence discharge of wastewater to the city
collection system after the effective date hereof. Any person that buys an
existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered
an "existing user" if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing
operation.
NONDOMESTIC SOURCE: Any residential or commercial discharger which discharges
or could potentially discharge nondomestic wastewater, and any industrial
discharger.
NON-FSE FOG DISCHARGER (NFD): Any establishment, such as a church, synagogue,
worship hall, banquet facility or meeting space, with a commercial style
kitchen that is used for preparing, serving or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs in or on a receptacle that requires washing two (2) days
a week or less, and that discharges to the POTW.
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS): An industry
classification system that groups establishments into industries based on the
activities in which they are primarily engaged. It was developed by the U.S.
office of management and budget and adopted in 1997.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the city NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
PERMITTEE: A person or user issued an industrial waste acceptance permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state or local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics
of the wastewater, i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical
oxygen demand (COD), toxicity or odor.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and/or BMPs established by
the city/POTW.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances, which appear in section
9-4A-1 of this chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works", as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The
term also means the city.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SETTLEABLE SOLIDS: The solids that sinks to the bottom of water, wastewater or
other liquid, and which is amenable to measurement by the methods described in
standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater, latest approved
edition or other methods approved by 40 CFR section 136.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit ditch or other device used to collect and transport
sewage from the generating source.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER:
   A.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
   B.   A user that:
      1. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) GPD or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blow down wastewater); or
      2. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
      3. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   C.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW
operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR section 403.8
(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: Means:
      1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum
limit, the average limit, or City of Blackfoot Maximum Allowable Discharge
Limit for the same pollutant parameter;
      2.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty- three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit, the average limit, or City of Blackfoot’s
Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4
for COD, TSS, Total Nitrogen and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
      3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer-term average), that city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, (including
endangering the health of city WWTP personnel or the general public);
      4.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in city’s exercise of
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
      5.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
      6.   Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self- monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
      7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
      8.   Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of city’s pretreatment
program.
SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the discharge standards in sections
9-4A-1 through
9-4A-4 of this chapter, or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or
permit conditions. The results of such activities shall be available to the
approval authority upon request.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the
standard industrial classification manual issued by the United States office of
management and budget.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL: Any modification to an existing FSE or NFD kitchen that
involves changes to fifty percent (50%) or more of the floor area of the
kitchen.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of
the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United
States.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge. The source shall not
include "domestic user (residential user)", as defined in this section.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW that is
designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4-1-4: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
AGRS: Automatic grease removal system.
AKART: All known available and reasonable technology.
ASPP: Accidental spill prevention plan.
BMP: Best management practices.
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
COD: Chemical oxygen demand.
DDF: Data disclosure form.
EPA: U.S. environmental protection agency.
FOG: Fats, oils and grease.
FSE: Food service establishment.
GPD: Gallons per day.
GRS: Grease removal system.
IWA: Industrial waste acceptance permit.
l: Liter.
LEL: Lower explosive limit.
mg: Milligrams.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter.
NAICS: North American industry classification system.
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system.
O&M: Operation and maintenance.
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA: Resource conservation and recovery act.
SIC: Standard industrial classifications.
SNC: Significant noncompliance.
SWDA: Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.).
TSS: Total suspended solids.
USC: United States Code.
VOC: Volatile organic compounds. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-2: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, industrial waste
acceptance permit applications, industrial waste acceptance permits and
monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.
When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data",
as defined by 40 CFR section 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential
information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-3: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the municipality where the POTW is located (at the time of passage hereof, "The
Morning News"), a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, an industrial
user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the
following criteria:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all wastewater measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period (by any
magnitude) the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR section 403.3(I);
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined herein as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equals or
exceeds the product of a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR section 403.3(I)
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH);
   C.   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement, as defined by 40 CFR section 403.3(l) (daily maximum, longer term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);
   D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city exercise of its
emergency authority under 40 CFR section 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an industrial waste acceptance
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, the city determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-4: WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES:
Wastewater treatment rates shall be set by the city council by resolution.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4-5: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the city pretreatment program, which may include:
   A.   Fees for industrial waste acceptance permit applications, including the
cost of processing such applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including,
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals;
   E.   Fees for high strength discharges above specified levels set within
industrial users' permits; and
   F.   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by
the city. (Ord. 2121, 5-6-2014)
9-4-6: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting
with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9-4A-1: Prohibited Discharge Standards
9-4A-2: Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
9-4A-3: State Requirements
9-4A-4: Local Limits
9-4A-5: City Right Of Reversion
9-4A-6: Special Agreements
9-4A-7: Dilution
9-4A-8: Pretreatment Facilities
9-4A-9: Deadline For Compliance With Applicable Pretreatment Requirements
9-4A-10: Additional Pretreatment Measures
9-4A-11: Grease Removal System Requirements
9-4A-12: Accidental Spill Prevention Plans
9-4A-13: Septic Tank Wastes
9-4A-14: RV Dumping Regulations
9-4A-1: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW,
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR section 261.21; (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-
2008)
      2.   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.0, or otherwise
causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; (Ord. 2148, 9-6-
2016)
      3.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids
greater than two inches (2") in dimension;
      4.   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      5.   Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C), unless the
approval authority, upon the request of the POTW, approves alternate
temperature limits;
      6.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
      7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the city;
      9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      10.   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the city NPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of
the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent
(10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
      11.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as
specifically approved by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state
or federal regulations;
      12.   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the superintendent;
      13.   Any sludge, screenings or other residue from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
      14.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city;
      15.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      16.   Detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
      17.   Any liquid, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or
at any point in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single
reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
      18.   Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides
or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud
or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      19.   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
other disposal system permits;
      20.   Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the superintendent can
cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special
agreement by the city (except that no special waiver shall be given from
categorical pretreatment standards);
      21.   The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any
person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank
waste or other wastewater, unless said person has first obtained testing and
approval as may be generally required by the city and paid all fees assessed
for the privilege of said discharge;
      22.   Any hazardous wastes, as defined in rules published by the state or
in federal regulations 40 CFR part 261;
      23.   Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the federal
insecticide fungicide rodenticide act (FIFRA);
      24.   Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the city NPDES permit;
providing, that it specifically allows the discharge to surface waters of
sewage sludge pollutants;
      25.   Any garbage that has not been properly ground.
   C.   Discharge Prohibited: Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited
by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they
could be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-2: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
The national categorical pretreatment standards as amended and promulgated by
EPA pursuant to the act and as found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts
405 through 471, are hereby incorporated and shall be enforceable under this
chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-3: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by
all users which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent than federal requirements and limitations, or those in this
chapter, or in other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-
2008)
9-4A-4: LOCAL LIMITS:
   A.   Daily Maximum Allowable Discharge Limits: The following pollutant
limits are established to protect against pass- through and interference. No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following daily
maximum allowable discharge limits:
Arsenic (As)          0.03 mg/l
Cadmium (Cd)          0.0372 mg/l
Chromium (Cr)         0.7403 mg/l
Copper (Cu)           0.6456 mg/l
Cyanide (CN)          0.2835 mg/l
Lead (Pb)             0.3372 mg/l
Mercury (Hg)          0.008 mg/l
Nickel (Ni)           0.6277 mg/l
Oil/grease (nonpolar) 200 mg/l
Silver (Ag)           0.43 mg/l
Zinc (Zn)             Allocated to industry in permit by mass proportion method
 
(Ord. 2139, 2-2-2016, eff. 2-2-2016)
   B.   Point Of Applicability: The above limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW (end of the pipe). All concentrations for
metallic substances are for "total" metal, unless indicated otherwise. The
superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to (or in place of) the
concentration based limitations above. Where a user is subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more
stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall apply. (Ord. 2078, 6-
3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-5: CITY RIGHT OF REVERSION:
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial waste
acceptance permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting
out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. Such agreement
shall be in writing and in no case will a special agreement waive compliance
with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment requirement.
However, users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR section 403.15. They may also request a variance from
the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority in accordance
with 40 CFR section 403.13. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-7: DILUTION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users that he
believes may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-8: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time
limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the superintendent, whichever is
more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable
to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the
city under the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   In addition, the superintendent may establish best management
practices (BMPs) for particular groups of users. These BMPs may include, but
are not limited to, types or methods of pretreatment technology to be used,
methods of source control, minimum maintenance requirements, spill prevention
practices, or other requirements as deemed necessary.
   B.   Failure To Maintain: If a failure to maintain any GRS results in
partial or complete blockage of the building sewer, private sewer system
discharging to the city sewer system, or other parts of the city sewer system,
or adversely affects the treatment or transmission capabilities of the POTW, or
requires excessive maintenance by the city, or poses a possible health hazard,
the discharger responsible for the facilities shall be subject to the remedies
herein, including cost recovery, enforcement and penalties. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-
2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-9: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Specified: Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical
pretreatment standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard
is effective, unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate
standard. The city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any
existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any
categorical user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than
the federal categorical pretreatment standards.
   B.   New Sources And Users: New sources and new users are required to comply
with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time (not
to exceed 90 days from the beginning of discharge). New sources and new users
shall install, have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution
control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before
beginning to discharge.
   C.   Industrial Waste Acceptance Permit: Any industrial waste acceptance
permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond
any deadline date established in EPA's categorical pretreatment standards. Any
other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more
stringent local limit which is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be
provided with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial waste acceptance
permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-
2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-10: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   A.   Restrictions May Be Imposed: Whenever deemed necessary, the
superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow
periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific
sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste
streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Discharge Storage And Flow Control Facility: Each user discharging into
the POTW greater than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day or greater than ten
percent (10%) of the average daily flow into the POTW, whichever is less, shall
install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage
and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty four
(24) hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least ten percent
(10%) of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a
rate of discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the
superintendent. An industrial waste acceptance permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.
   C.   Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the superintendent
and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as
needed, by the user at its expense.
   D.   Combustible Gas Detection Meter: Users with the potential to discharge
flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved
combustible gas detection meter.
   E.   Chemical Storage: Pollutants, chemicals, substances, or wastewater as
defined in
9-4A-1 shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW accidentally or otherwise. All substances that may be
defined by
9-4A-1 shall:
      1.   Be properly labeled, with legible and easily accessible labels;
      2.   Be contained by proper spill containment; or
      3.   Have pretreatment processes that would mitigate any spilled
substance.
   F.   The city may require the facility to add additional spill containment,
spill kit, or other means of mitigating spills in any chemical storage area
that the city determines to be inadequate to effectively protect the sewer and
treatment plant.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4A-11: GREASE REMOVAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
All FSEs and NFDs shall have an adequate grease removal system installed and
exercise proper kitchen best management practices to ensure that excess
concentrations of FOG are not discharged to the POTW.
   A.   New Construction: All new construction FSEs and NFDs shall submit
plumbing plans for all potential grease discharging lines, all GRSs, and
connecting piping to the superintendent or his designee for approval prior to
construction. The plumbing shall be installed in accordance with the approved
plans. Failure to submit plans or construct is accordance with approved plans
is a violation of this chapter:
      1.   All new user food service establishment single occupancy buildings
shall install properly sized interceptor style grease removal systems. Where
bona fide space or gradient limitations make the use of an interceptor style
GRS impractical, and with prior approval of the superintendent, an FSE may
install properly sized trap style GRSs. All kitchen drains and any other drains
that may carry grease laden waste shall be connected to this GRS (except the
dishwasher if a trap style GRS is installed). If a trap style GRS is installed,
the kitchen may not have a garbage disposal/garbage grinder/macerator or
similar unit installed.
      2.   All new construction multi-tenant buildings (strip centers) shall
include a separate waste line for all leasable spaces that discharges to a
common one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallon or larger interceptor. When a
space is leased, sold or rented to an FSE or NFD, all kitchen drains and any
other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall be connected to this waste
line; no domestic sewage may be connected to this line. The property owner
shall be responsible for proper maintenance of this interceptor in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   All new user non-FSE FOG discharger single occupancy buildings shall
install a properly sized GRS. Interceptor style GRSs are recommended, but trap
style GRSs are permissible. All kitchen drains and any other drains that may
carry grease laden waste shall be connected to this GRS (except the dishwasher
if a trap style GRS is installed). If a trap style GRS is installed, the
kitchen may not have a garbage disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or similar
unit installed.
      4.   Any FSE or NFD undertaking a "substantial remodel", as defined in
section
9-4-1-3 of this chapter, will be considered to be new construction for the
purposes of this chapter.
   B.   Existing Users:
      1.   Any existing FSE without a functional GRS shall be required to
install one. The type of GRS required will be determined by the superintendent,
taking into account cost, available space and gradient, whether the user is in
a grease impact area, and any other pertinent information. Where feasible, all
kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall be
connected to this GRS (except the dishwasher if a trap style GRS is installed).
If a trap style GRS is installed, the kitchen may not have a garbage disposal,
garbage grinder, macerator or similar unit installed.
      2.   Any existing NFD without a functional GRS may be required to install
one. The type of GRS required will be determined by the superintendent, taking
into account cost, available space and gradient, whether the user is in a
grease impact area, and any other pertinent information. Where feasible, all
kitchen drains and any other drains that may carry grease laden waste shall be
connected to this GRS (except the dishwasher if a trap style GRS is installed).
If a trap style GRS is installed, the kitchen may not have a garbage disposal,
garbage grinder, macerator or similar unit installed.
   C.   Grease Removal System Maintenance:
      1.   All grease removal systems shall be maintained to ensure proper
operation. At a minimum, interceptor style GRSs shall be cleaned at least once
every ninety (90) days, and trap style GRSs cleaned at least once per week.
These required frequencies may be extended with the approval of the
superintendent. Grease removal systems must be cleaned whenever the combined
thickness of the floating greases and settled solids is equal to, or greater
than, twenty five percent (25%) of the total liquid depth in the GRS.
      2.   All facilities performing maintenance on GRSs shall maintain log
books and pumping records. These should be readily available for review by the
control authority.
      3.   When cleaned, an interceptor style GRS must be completely pumped
out, all solids removed, solidified grease scraped from the interior and the
structure and all internal plumbing inspected for damage and corrosion. The GRS
shall be refilled with water prior to being placed back into operation. If
repairs are required, they shall be performed within seven (7) days.
      4.   Trap style GRSs may be maintained by the FSE or NFD. When cleaned,
the trap must have surface grease and oil removed, settled solids removed, all
sides scraped, removable parts removed and cleaned, be inspected for damage and
corrosion, and be properly reassembled. If repairs are required, they shall be
performed within seven (7) days.
      5.   The material that is removed in the process of cleaning a GRS shall
not be discharged back into the GRS, any part of the POTW, any private sewer,
any drainage piping or storm sewer system. All materials removed shall be
handled and disposed of in accordance with federal, state, county and local
laws, rules and regulations.
      6.   In addition to the maintenance required above, automatic grease
removal systems shall be maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
guidelines.
   D.   Grease Removal System Additives:
      1.   No user may use an additive of any type for the GRS without the
approval of the superintendent. The superintendent will adopt procedures for
the approval of additives.
      2.   No vendor may sell, attempt to sell or otherwise distribute any
additive in the city without prior approval of the additive by the
superintendent. Any vendor selling, or attempting to sell, or otherwise
distributing any additive intended for use in a GRS that has not been approved
for use by the superintendent is in violation of this chapter and is subject to
all enforcement actions contained herein.
   E.   Grease Removal System Sizing:
      1.   Trap style grease removal systems shall be sized in accordance with
the standards in the adopted plumbing code.
      2.   The minimum size for an interceptor style grease removal system
shall be determined using the following formula:
      Size (gallons) = 5D X 0.5HR X LF
      Where D = number of seats in dining area, FSEs that typically sell
takeaway meals shall use a D of 50; HR = the number of hours of operation per
day; and LF = the loading factor. The loading factor will be 0.5 except when
the FSE or NFD is in a grease impact area or when a garbage disposal, garbage
grinder, macerator or similar unit is installed; then a factor of 1.0 will be
used.
      3.   In no case shall an interceptor smaller than one thousand (1,000)
gallons be installed without prior approval of the superintendent. If a garbage
disposal, garbage grinder, macerator or similar unit is installed, the minimum
size is one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons to adequately retain the
added settleable solids loading.
      4.   The maximum size for an interceptor shall be one thousand five
hundred (1,500) gallons. If the calculated minimum size is larger than this,
two (2) interceptors of approximately equal size shall be installed in series.
If the calculated minimum size is larger than three thousand (3,000) gallons,
two (2) 1,500-gallon interceptors shall be installed in series.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4A-12: ACCIDENTAL SPILL PREVENTION PLANS:
The superintendent may require any user to develop and implement an accidental
spill prevention plan (ASPP) or slug control plan. Where deemed necessary by
the city, facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug discharges of
pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. An
accidental spill prevention plan or slug control plan showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city
for review and approval before implementation. The city shall determine which
user is required to develop a plan and require said plan to be submitted within
thirty (30) days after notification by the city. Each user shall implement its
ASPP as submitted or as modified after such plan has been reviewed and approved
by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the
city shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility
as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Plan Requirements: Any user required to develop and implement an
accidental spill prevention plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      2.   Description of stored chemicals;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the standards in sections
9-4A-1 through
9-4A-4 of this article;
      4.   Significant industrial users are required to notify the POTW
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug
discharge; and
      5.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
chemicals (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   B.   Notice Of Accident: Users shall notify the city wastewater treatment
plant immediately after the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of
substances regulated by this chapter. The notification shall include location
of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions. Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss
or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the
city on account thereof under state or federal law.
   C.   Written Report Of Accident: Within five (5) days following an
accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be
taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any
other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by
this chapter or other applicable law.
   D.   Signage: Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the
user's premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or
accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or
discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4A-13: SEPTIC TANK WASTES:
   A.   Acceptance; Permit Required: Septic tank waste may be introduced into
the POTW only at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant
area, and at such times as are established by the superintendent. Such wastes
shall not violate this section or any other requirements established or adopted
by the city. Industrial waste acceptance permits for individual vehicles to use
such facilities shall be issued by the superintendent.
   B.   Location; Consent; Analysis: Septic tank waste haulers may only
discharge loads at locations specifically designated by the superintendent. No
load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent. The
superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards. The superintendent may require the
hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   C.   Waste Tracking Form: Septic tank waste haulers must provide a waste
tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name
and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, sources
of waste and volume and characteristics of waste.
   D.   Fees: Fees for dumping hauled wastes will be established as part of the
user fee system as authorized in section
9-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4A-14: RV DUMPING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Acceptance: RV sewage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
designated receiving structures throughout the city. Such wastes shall not
violate this section or any other requirements established or adopted by the
city. Dump sites are in locations specifically designated by the
superintendent. No load may be discharged outside of the designated sites. The
superintendent may require the hauler to provide a waste analyses on any load
prior to discharge. The superintendent may halt discharge without prior notice.
Any wastes that violate this section will be subject to the administrative
enforcement remedies in 9-4F.
   B.   Maintenance And Cleanliness: The discharger is responsible for the
maintenance and cleanliness of the designated RV dumping sites. The site shall
be clean and free of sewage waste after each discharger. At no point shall
sewage waste touch the ground while discharging. Refusal of maintaining or
cleaning the city’s dump sites shall be subject to the administrative
enforcement remedies in 9-4F.
(Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
ARTICLE B. INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCEPTANCE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9-4B-1: Permit Required
9-4B-2: Industrial Waste Acceptance Permitting
9-4B-3: Application For Permit
9-4B-4: Signatory And Certification Requirement
9-4B-5: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
9-4B-6: Contents Of Permit
9-4B-7: Appeals
9-4B-8: Term Of Permit
9-4B-9: Modification Of Permit
9-4B-10: Transfer Of Permit
9-4B-11: Revocation Of Permit
9-4B-12: Reissuance Of Permit
9-4B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining an industrial waste acceptance permit (IWA) from the
superintendent. The permit must be enforceable and contain all elements as
required by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B). Any violation of the terms and
conditions of an industrial waste acceptance permit shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter and subjects the IWA permittee to the sanctions set forth in
this chapter. Obtaining an IWA permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all city, federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
   B.   The superintendent may require other users, including liquid waste
haulers, to obtain IWA permits (as necessary) to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-2: INDUSTRIAL WASTE ACCEPTANCE PERMITTING:
   A.   Existing SIU: Any SIU that was discharging wastewater into the POTW
prior to the effective date hereof and that wishes to continue such discharges
in the future shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days after notification by
the superintendent submit a permit application to the city in accordance with
section
9-4B-3 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to
continue after one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date hereof,
except in accordance with an industrial waste acceptance permit issued by the
superintendent.
   B.   New Source And New User: At least ninety (90) days prior to the
anticipated start up, any new source, which is a source that becomes a user
subsequent to the proposal of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard,
and any new user considered by the city to fit the definition of SIU shall
apply for an IWA permit and shall be required to submit to the city at least
the information listed in subsections 9-4B-3A through 9-4B-3E of this article.
A new source or new user cannot discharge without first receiving an industrial
waste acceptance permit from the city. New sources and new users shall also be
required to include in their application information on the method of
pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New
sources and new users shall give estimates of the information requested in
subsections 9-4B-3D and 9-4B-3E of this article.
   C.   Extrajurisdictional Users: Any existing user who is located beyond the
city limits and who is required to obtain an IWA permit shall submit an
industrial waste acceptance permit application as outlined in section
9-4B-3 of this article. New source and new users who are located beyond the
city limits and who are required to obtain an industrial waste acceptance
permit shall comply with subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008,
eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All users required to obtain an IWA permit must submit, at a minimum, the
following information. The superintendent shall approve a form to be used as a
permit application. Categorical users submitting the following information
shall have complied with 40 CFR section 403.12(b).
   A.   Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of
the facility, including the name of the operator and owners.
   B.   Permits: The user shall submit a list of all environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
   C.   Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of
the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification
of the operation carried out by such industrial user, including a list of all
raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; number and type of
employees; hours of operation; each product produced by type, amount, process
or processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials
processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of
discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or
manufacturing processes. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection
manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
   D.   Flow Measurement:
      1.   Categorical user: The user shall submit information showing the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from each of the following:
         a.   Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
         b.   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 CFR section 403.6(e).
      2.   Noncategorical user:
         a.   The user shall submit information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the
following:
Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or
individual manufacturing process flow as required by the superintendent.
         b.   The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
   E.   Measurements Of Pollutants:
      1.   Categorical User:
         a.   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for
each regulated or manufacturing process.
         b.   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by
the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the city) of regulated
pollutants (including standards contained in sections
9-4A-1 through
9-4A-4 of this chapter, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated or
manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in
article D of this chapter.
         c.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
         d.   Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR section 403.6(e) for a categorical user
covered by a categorical pretreatment standard, this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
      2.   Noncategorical User:
         a.   The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for
its wastewater discharge.
         b.   In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass
where required by the city) of regulated pollutants contained in sections
9-4A-1 through
9-4A-4 of this chapter, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical
procedures outlined in article D of this chapter.
         c.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
         d.   Where the superintendent developed alternate concentration or
mass limits because of dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data
shall be submitted as part of the application.
   F.   Certification: The user shall submit a statement, worded as specified
in section
9-4B-4 of this article, which has been reviewed by an authorized representative
of the user, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether the
applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
   G.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The user's schedule shall conform with the
requirements of section
9-4C-4 of this chapter. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later
than the compliance date established pursuant to section
9-4A-9 of this chapter.
      1.   Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified
by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40
CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR
403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this subsection,
the information required by subsection F of this section and this subsection G
shall pertain to the modified limits.
      2.   If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal
allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)),
and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the
user submits the report required by subsection F of this section and this
subsection G, then a report containing modified information shall be submitted
by the user within sixty (60) days after the new limit is approved.
   H.   Additional Information May Be Required: The user shall submit any other
information as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the
industrial waste acceptance permit application.
   I.   Incomplete, Inaccurate Applications: Incomplete or inaccurate
applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for
revision. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-4: SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT:
All IWA permit applications and user reports must be signed by a responsible
officer or manager, or sole proprietor or general partner as applicable, or
duly authorized representative.
   A.   Responsible Officer Or Manager: For the purpose of this section, a
"responsible officer" or "manager" means:
      1.   A president, vice president, secretary or treasurer of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
      2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operating
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions
which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations
and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete
and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures. This authorization must be made in
writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and
submitted to the approval authority prior to or together with the report being
submitted of the user and contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting
false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
   B.   Duly Authorized Representative; Written Authorization: A duly
authorized representative is an individual designated by the responsible
officer, manager, sole proprietor or general partner in writing. The written
authorization must be submitted to the city and also specifies either an
individual or a position having the responsibility of the overall operation of
the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or
a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company. If an authorization in this section is
no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the city prior
to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete IWA
permit application, the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue
an industrial waste acceptance permit. Upon a determination to issue, the
permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished. The superintendent may deny any application
for an industrial waste acceptance permit. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-6: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
IWA permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by
the superintendent to prevent pass- through or interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and
protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Required Conditions: Industrial waste acceptance permits must contain
the following conditions:
      1.   A statement that indicates industrial waste acceptance permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
      2.   A statement that the industrial waste acceptance permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
industrial waste acceptance permit;
      3.   Applicable pretreatment standards in part 403 and requirements,
including any categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and any special
state or local requirements; as well as any federal BMP’s, if applicable;
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of
technical reports, compliance schedules, and recordkeeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state
and local law;
      5.   Development and implementation of best management practices to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-
monitoring results indicate noncompliance;
      7.   Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
      8.   Requirement to report immediately to the city all discharges,
including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the POTW;
      9.   Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit results to the city within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation;
      10.   A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule;
      11.   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW
to be necessary.
   B.   Optional Conditions: Industrial waste acceptance permits may contain,
but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
      3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine discharges;
      4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      7.   A statement that compliance with the industrial waste acceptance
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the industrial waste acceptance permit;
      8.   Any special agreements the superintendent chooses to continue or
develop between the city and user;
      9.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4B-7: APPEALS:
Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms
of an industrial waste acceptance permit within fourteen (14) days of its
issuance.
   A.   Timely Submission: Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall
be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   Petition: In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
industrial waste acceptance permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
industrial waste acceptance permit.
   C.   Stay Of Permit: The effectiveness of the industrial waste acceptance
permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   City Failure To Act; Final Determination: If the city fails to act
within twenty (20) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be
denied. Decisions not to reconsider an industrial waste acceptance permit, not
to issue an industrial waste acceptance permit, or not to modify an industrial
waste acceptance permit, shall be considered final administrative actions for
purposes of judicial review.
   E.   District Court Complaint: Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of
the final administrative industrial waste acceptance permit decision must do so
by filing a complaint with the Bingham County district court within forty two
(42) days of the final administrative decision. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-
2008)
9-4B-8: TERM OF PERMIT:
Industrial waste acceptance permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. An industrial waste acceptance permit may
be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the
superintendent. Each industrial waste acceptance permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-9: MODIFICATION OF PERMIT:
The superintendent may modify the industrial waste acceptance permit for good
cause including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
industrial waste acceptance permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the city POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial waste acceptance
permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the industrial waste acceptance permit application or in any required report;
   G.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.13;
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial waste
acceptance permit; or
   I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-10: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
   A.   Notice: Industrial waste acceptance permits may be reassigned or
transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least
thirty (30) days advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent
approves the industrial waste acceptance permit transfer. The notice to the
superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner and/or
operator which:
      1.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
      2.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
      3.   Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing
industrial waste acceptance permit beginning on the date of the transfer.
   B.   Failure To Provide Advance Notice: Failure to provide advance notice of
a transfer renders the industrial waste acceptance permit voidable as of the
date of facility transfer.
   C.   New Owner Considered Existing User: Provided that the notice required
above occurred and that there were no significant changes to the manufacturing
operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be considered an existing
user and will be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the
previous owner's permit. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Reasons: Industrial waste acceptance permits may be revoked for, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed
conditions;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the industrial waste acceptance permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      5.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      6.   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises
and records;
      7.   Failure to meet discharge limitations;
      8.   Failure to pay fines;
      9.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      10.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      11.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the industrial waste
acceptance permit application;
      12.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
      13.   If the city has to invoke its emergency provision as cited in
section
9-4F-7 of this chapter; or
      14.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the industrial waste acceptance permit or this chapter.
   B.   Void Of Permit: Industrial waste acceptance permits shall be voidable
upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All industrial
waste acceptance permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance
of a new industrial waste acceptance permit to that user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008,
eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4B-12: REISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A user who is required to have an industrial waste acceptance permit shall
apply for industrial waste acceptance permit reissuance by submitting a
complete industrial waste acceptance permit application, in accordance with
section
9-4B-3 of this article, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing industrial waste acceptance permit. A user whose
existing industrial waste acceptance permit has expired and who has submitted
its reapplication in the time period specified herein shall be deemed to have
an effective industrial waste acceptance permit until the city issues or denies
the new industrial waste acceptance permit. A user whose existing industrial
waste acceptance permit has expired and who failed to submit its reapplication
in the time period specified herein will be deemed to be discharging without an
industrial waste acceptance permit.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
ARTICLE C. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9-4C-1: Baseline Monitoring Reports
9-4C-2: Final Compliance Report (Initial Compliance Report)
9-4C-3: Periodic Compliance Report
9-4C-4: Compliance Schedules For Meeting Applicable Pretreatment Standards
9-4C-5: Notification Of Significant Production Changes
9-4C-6: Hazardous Waste Notification
9-4C-7: Notice Of Potential Problems, Accidental Spills, Slug Loads
9-4C-8: Noncompliance Reporting
9-4C-9: Notification Of Changed Discharge
9-4C-10: Reports From Unpermitted Users
9-4C-11: Recordkeeping Requirements
9-4C-1: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Required: Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR section 403.6
(a)(4) (whichever is later), existing categorical users currently discharging
to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the
city a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of this
section. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit
to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of
this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new
source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants discharged.
   B.   Information Required: Users described above shall submit the
information set forth below:
      1.   Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      2.   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic
process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes.
      4.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR section 403.6(e).
      5.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
article D of this chapter.
         c.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in article D of this chapter.
      6.   Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      7.   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in section
9-4C-4 of this article.
      8.   Signature And Certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with section
9-4B-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-2: FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT (INITIAL COMPLIANCE REPORT):
   A.   Required: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance of an exiting significant industrial user with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this chapter, in federal
categorical standards, or in an IWA permit, or, in the case of a new source or
a new user considered by the city to fit the definition of SIU, within ninety
(90) days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, the affected user shall submit to the city a report containing the
information outlined in subsections 9-4B-3D through 9-4B-3F of this chapter.
   B.   Production Rate: For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the city in accordance with procedures established in 40
CFR section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-3: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT:
   A.   Required: Any user that is required to have an industrial waste
discharge permit and performs self-monitoring shall submit to the city by
January 14 and July 14 of each year, unless required on other dates or more
frequently by the city, a report indicating the nature of the effluent over the
previous six (6) month reporting period. The frequency of monitoring shall be
as prescribed within the industrial waste discharge permit. At a minimum, users
shall sample their discharge at least once per six (6) month period beginning
January 1 and July 1 of each year.
   B.   Information Required: The report shall include a record of the
concentrations (and mass if specified in the industrial waste acceptance
permit) of the pollutants listed in the industrial waste acceptance permit that
were measured and a record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken
at the designated sampling locations and shall also include any additional
information required by this chapter or the industrial waste acceptance permit.
Production data shall be reported if required by the industrial waste
acceptance permit. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently
than what was required by the city or by this chapter, using methodologies in
40 CFR part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge during the reporting period.
   C.   Production Data: Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the city or by unit production limits specified in the
applicable categorical standards, shall report production data as outlined in
subsection 9-4C-2B of this article.
   D.   Flows: If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or
nonregulated flows, the user will be responsible for providing flows from the
regulated process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated flows.
   E.   When Actual Measurement Not Feasible: Flows shall be reported on the
basis of actual measurement; provided, however, that the city may accept
reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques if the
city determines that an actual measurement is not feasible.
   F.   Samples: Discharges sampled shall be representative of the user's daily
operations and samples shall be taken in accordance with the requirements
specified in article D of this chapter.
   G.   Nonpermitted Users: The city may require reporting by users that are
not required to have an industrial waste acceptance permit, in accordance to 40
CFR 403.12(h), if information or data is needed to establish a sewer charge,
determine the treatability of the effluent, or determine any other factor which
is related to the operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
   H.   Monitoring: The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if
requested by the user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring
needed to prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section.
If the city agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it may
charge the user for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city
for the sampling and analyses. Any such charges shall be added to the normal
sewer charge and shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under
no obligation to perform periodic compliance monitoring for a user. (Ord. 2078,
6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-4: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES FOR MEETING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Increments Of Progress: The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g.,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
   B.   Time Limit: No increment referred to in subsection A of this section
shall exceed nine (9) months.
   C.   Progress Report: Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date
in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse
between such progress reports. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-5: NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCTION CHANGES:
Any user operating under an industrial waste acceptance permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the city within two (2)
business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production
level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with
the existing limits contained in its industrial waste acceptance permit. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-6: HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION:
   A.   Required: Any user that is discharging more than fifteen (15) kilograms
of hazardous wastes, as defined in 40 CFR section 261 (listed or characteristic
wastes) in a calendar month, or any facility discharging any amount of acutely
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR section 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) is
required to provide a onetime notification in writing to the city, to the EPA
region 10 office of air, waste and toxic director, and to the state department
of environmental quality. Any existing user exempt from this notification shall
comply with the requirements contained herein within thirty (30) days of
becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes in
a calendar month or any discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the city sewer
system.
   B.   Content Of Notification: Such notification shall include:
      1.   The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
      2.   The EPA hazardous waste number; and
      3.   The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
   C.   Additional Information: If an industrial user discharges more than one
hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar per month to the sewer
system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the
extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:
      1.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
      2.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste streams discharged during that calendar month; and
      3.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste streams
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
   D.   Exception: These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements.
   E.   Identification Of Additional Hazardous Wastes: Whenever the EPA
publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new
characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the city of the
discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of
such regulations.
   F.   Reduction Program: In the case of any notification made under this
section, an industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-
2008)
9-4C-7: NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, ACCIDENTAL SPILLS, SLUG LOADS:
Any user shall notify the city immediately of all discharges that could cause
problems to the POTW, including any slug loads, as defined in section
9-4-1-3 of this chapter. The notification shall include the concentration and
volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact
should also be noted during the notification. Any user who discharges a slug
load of pollutants shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW,
in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city under state or
federal law. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-8: NONCOMPLIANCE REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The
user shall also repeat the sampling within five (5) days and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware
of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if:
   A.   The city performs the same sampling as the user at a frequency of at
least once per month; or
   B.   The city performs the same sampling as the user between the time when
the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city
receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-9: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE:
All users promptly shall notify the city in advance of any substantial change
in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including
significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the
listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted
initial notification under 40 CFR section 403.12(p). (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff.
6-3-2008)
9-4C-10: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain an industrial waste acceptance permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the city as the superintendent may require.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4C-11: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and
make available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of the persons
taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses including documentation associated with best management practices.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years.
This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning the user or POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified
of a longer retention period by the superintendent. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff.
6-3-2008)
ARTICLE D. SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
9-4D-1: Sampling Requirements For Users
9-4D-2: Analytical Requirements
9-4D-3: City Monitoring Of User's Wastewater
9-4D-1: SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS FOR USERS:
   A.   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants,
twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow
proportional composite sampling techniques unless time proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be
representative of the discharge and the decision to allow alternative sampling
must be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities.
Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR part
136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a
twenty four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: For cyanide, total phenols and sulfides, the samples may be composited
in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the city, as appropriate.
   B.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety (90)
day compliance reports, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds
for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities
for which historical sampling data are available, the city may authorize a
lower minimum. For the reports required by 40 CFR section 403.12(e) and (h),
the city shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess and
assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements.
   C.   Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist, immediately downstream from the regulated or
manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by
the city and specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For
categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater
prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations
necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR section
403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted its
local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment
standards.
   D.   All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling,
and methods of analysis and shall certify that the waste stream sampled is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the
user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required in
its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it
must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of
its self-monitoring report. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4D-2: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the EPA. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4D-3: CITY MONITORING OF USER'S WASTEWATER:
The city will follow the same procedures as outlined in sections
9-4D-1 and
9-4D-2 of this article. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE E. COMPLIANCE MONITORING
SECTION:
9-4E-1: Inspection And Sampling
9-4E-2: Monitoring Facilities
9-4E-3: Search Warrants
9-4E-4: Vandalism
9-4E-1: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter, and any industrial waste acceptance permit
or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with
all requirements thereof. Users shall allow the superintendent ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
   A.   Permitting Entrance: Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the superintendent will be permitted
to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
   B.   Devices For Monitoring: The superintendent shall have the right to set
up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
   C.   Removal Of Obstructions: Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe
and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the
superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access
shall be borne by the user.
   D.   Delays: Delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-
2008)
9-4E-2: MONITORING FACILITIES:
   A.   Required; Location: Each user shall provide and operate at its own
expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurements of each sewer discharge to the city. Each monitoring facility
shall be situated on the user's premises, except, where such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the city may concur with
the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area;
providing, that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles. The superintendent, whenever applicable, may
require the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other
locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line or a wastewater
treatment system).
   B.   Maintenance Of Facility: There shall be ample room in or near such
sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, including the sampling and measuring equipment, shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the
expense of the user.
   C.   Agreement For Maintenance By City: The superintendent may enter into an
agreement to maintain the sampling and metering devices for the facility, once
such devices meet the standard set forth by the superintendent. The cost of
such maintenance shall be borne by the industry through monthly billing. Such
billing rates shall be comprised of the replacement cost of the equipment over
a reasonable time period, plus reasonable inflation, divided by the life
expectancy of the device in months.
   D.   Monitoring Equipment: The superintendent may require the user to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction
standards and specifications.
   E.   Calibration Of Devices: All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations
to ensure their accuracy. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4E-3: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to
verify compliance with this chapter or any industrial waste acceptance permit
or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
welfare of the community, then the superintendent shall seek issuance of a
search and/or seizure warrant from the Bingham County district court. Such
warrant shall be served at any hour that flow is being discharged from the
facility by the superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer of
the city or of the county. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4E-4: VANDALISM:
No person shall wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or
equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this
requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this chapter. (Ord.
2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE F. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
SECTION:
9-4F-1: Notification Of Violation
9-4F-2: Consent Orders
9-4F-3: Show Cause Hearing
9-4F-4: Compliance Orders
9-4F-5: Cease And Desist Orders
9-4F-6: Administrative Fines
9-4F-7: Emergency Suspensions
9-4F-8: Termination Of Discharge (Nonemergency)
9-4F-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation via
certified letter. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff.
6-3-2008)
9-4F-2: CONSENT ORDERS:
The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to
be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect
as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
9-4F-4 and
9-4F-5 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a consent
order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-3: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The superintendent may order via a certified letter a user which has violated
or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste
acceptance permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, to appear before the superintendent and show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate
any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the
order. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in
the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance
of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
   A.   When the superintendent finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may
issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   B.   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-
2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) a day for each violation, imprisonment not to exceed six
(6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Such fines shall be assessed on
a per violation, per day basis.
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half
percent (11/2%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought
for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the superintendent to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine
amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the superintendent shall convene a hearing on the matter within
thirty (30) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4F-7: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal
notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice
and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of
the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
   A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings in section
9-4F-8 of this article are initiated against the user.
   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under sections
9-4F-3 and
9-4F-8 of this article.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008,
eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4F-8: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE (NONEMERGENCY):
   A.   In addition to the provisions in section
9-4B-11 of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      1.   Violation of industrial waste acceptance permit conditions;
      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
      4.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
      5.   Violation of the pretreatment standards in article A of this
chapter.
   B.   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section
9-4F-3 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of
this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE G. JUDICIAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
SECTION:
9-4G-1: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
9-4G-2: Supplemental Enforcement Action
9-4G-1: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   A.   Injunctive Relief: When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this chapter, an industrial
waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the Bingham County
district court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the industrial waste acceptance permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city may
also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable
relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   B.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city
for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation,
per day, imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
      2.   The superintendent may recover reasonable attorney fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
      3.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
      4.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   C.   Criminal Prosecution:
      1.   A user which has wilfully or negligently violated any provision of
this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code.
      2.   A user which has wilfully or negligently introduced any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title
1, chapter 4 of this code. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause
of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
      3.   A user which knowingly made any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, industrial waste
acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsified, tampered with,
or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
      4.   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   D.   Remedies Nonexclusive: The provisions in section
9-4-3 and article F of this chapter, and this article, are not exclusive
remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement in response to
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city
enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008; amd. 2012 Code, Ord. 2188, 10-1-2019)
9-4G-2: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
   A.   Performance Bonds: The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue
an industrial waste acceptance permit to any user which has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous industrial waste acceptance
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the
city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the superintendent to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
   B.   Liability Insurance: The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue
an industrial waste acceptance permit to any user which has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous industrial waste acceptance
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its
discharge.
   C.   Water Supply Severance: Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial waste acceptance permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
   D.   Public Nuisances: A violation of any provision of this chapter, an
industrial waste acceptance permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, hereby is declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to all applicable provisions of
this code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any
costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
   E.   Informant Rewards: The superintendent may pay up to one hundred dollars
($100.00) for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user.
In the event that the information provided results in an administrative fine or
civil penalty levied against the user, the superintendent may disburse up to
ten percent (10%) of the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a
single reward payment may not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   F.   Contractual Awards: Contractor listing users which have not achieved
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not
eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to
the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held
by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards
or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 2078, 6-
3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
ARTICLE H. AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
9-4H-1: Upset
9-4H-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
9-4H-3: Bypass
9-4H-1: UPSET:
   A.   Upset Defined: For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an
exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the user. An "upset" does not include noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
   B.   Affirmative Defense: An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense
to an action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards
if the requirements of subsection C of this section are met.
   C.   Conditions: A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW and
treatment plant operator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within 5 days):
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Judicial Determination: Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards.
   F.   Production Control Required: Users shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of their treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost
or fails. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4H-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in subsections 9-4A-1A and
9-4A-1B3 through B7 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or
have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference and
that either: a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-
through or interference; or b) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not
change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff. 6-3-2008)
9-4H-3: BYPASS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
    BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   Bypass Permitted: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this
section.
   C.   Notice Of Bypass:
      1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the POTW at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass,
if possible.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case by
case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
   D.   Bypass Conditions:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this
section.
      2.   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 2078, 6-3-2008, eff.
6-3-2008)
CHAPTER 5
SANITARY SERVICE SYSTEM
SECTION:
9-5-1: Short Title
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Mandatory System; Waste Collection Accumulation; Unlawful Practices;
Exceptions
9-5-4: License, Contract Or Franchise
9-5-5: Sanitary Containers
9-5-6: Precollection Practices
9-5-7: Points And Frequency Of Collection; Curbside Or Alley Collection Service
9-5-8: Rates, Fees, Charges And Deposits
9-5-9: Waste Vehicles; Inspection
9-5-10: Collection Days And Hours
9-5-11: Special Collections
9-5-12: Separation And Recycling
9-5-13: Annexations
9-5-14: Penalty
9-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MUNICIPAL SANITARY SERVICE
SYSTEM OF THE CITY. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular, and words in the singular number include the plural. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ASHES: The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible
materials.
BULKY WASTE: Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture
and other waste materials, other than construction debris, dead animals,
hazardous materials or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those
allowed for cans.
CAN: A receptacle approved by the city.
CITY: The city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Business, industrial and institutional premises and
activities, as distinct from residential or multi-family premises.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operation.
CONTRACTOR: The person or entity authorized by the city to operate, conduct,
and maintain a municipal solid waste collection and removal system of the city.
COUNTY: The county of Bingham, state of Idaho.
CUSTOMER: An occupant or owner of any premises, including household, apartment,
business, institution or other establishment in the city for which waste
service is, or has been, provided.
DEAD ANIMALS: Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10)
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or
killed for human use.
FRANCHISEE: Any person authorized by the city of Blackfoot, or employed by the
city of Blackfoot, to collect, handle, transport and dispose of waste and/or
recyclable materials and who has executed a franchise agreement with the city
of Blackfoot.
GARBAGE: Any and all dead animals of less than ten (10) pounds, in weight,
except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste
(animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation,
processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage,
transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits,
grains or other animal or vegetable matter, including, but not by way of
limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or
easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract
flies or rodents; except in all cases any matter included in the definitions of
"bulky waste", "construction debris", "dead animals", "hazardous materials",
"rubbish" or "stable matter".
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article
which is designated by the United States environmental protection agency, or
appropriate agency of the state to be "hazardous", as that term is defined by
or pursuant to federal or state law.
INSPECTOR: The authorized employee or employees of the city of Blackfoot, or
some individual designated by the city council as having the duty of
enforcement of this chapter.
MANDATORY: Every resident, business, entity or owner of a residential unit
within the city is required to use the collection and disposal system
established by the city.
OWNER: The person owning the real property where waste is created or
accumulated.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, public
agency or any other legal entity.
PREMISES: Land and all buildings and structures thereon, including, but not
limited to, single- or multi-family dwellings, rooming house, apartment houses,
hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, restaurants, drive-
in establishments, schools, kindergartens, and other places of habitation,
offices, shops or establishments or places of conducting a business, trade,
profession or occupation.
PROHIBITED WASTE:
   A.   Includes any wastes that have any of the following general
characteristics:
      1. Extreme temperature;
      2. Harmful vapors;
      3. The presence of corrosive, flammable, explosive or toxic chemicals;
      4. Any materials with physical or other properties which render
collection operations hazardous; or
      5. Any materials which create a risk to the environment or public health
and safety.
   B.   In addition to wastes with the general characteristics described above,
prohibited wastes include:
      1. Liquid wastes, both bulk and contained;
      2. Tires;
      3. Any material regulated by the state of Idaho or the United States
environmental protection agency (40 CFR 260-268) as hazardous waste;
      4. Any equipment or machines containing refrigerants;
      5. Infectious wastes generated from business sources, such as hospitals,
clinics, medical, surgical, dental, nursing homes, veterinarian offices, and
laboratories. Generators of infectious waste are required to sterilize, package
or otherwise process the infectious waste so that it may be collected without
hazard to collection personnel and the general public; and
      6. Dead animal remains in an amount exceeding ten (10) pounds, excluding
animal carcasses if broken down and placed into plastic waste bags and into a
lidded, airtight and watertight container.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE: Wastes that can decay and stink or become putrid.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Products, including paper, cardboard, metal, glass or
other substance capable of being reprocessed into consumer materials, which
have served the purpose for which they were originally manufactured or produced
and have passed through their end usage as consumer items, and which have been
discarded or placed for collection by their owner, whether or not such products
have monetary value.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible waste (except sewage), including
garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENT: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge,
custody or control of any premises, residential or commercial, where waste is
created or accumulated.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied
by a person or group of persons comprising not more than three (3) families. A
residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light
and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether
single- or multi-level construction, consisting of three (3) or less continuous
or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a residential
unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit
may be billed separately as a residential unit. Each separate rental unit, in
the case of a multi- family dwelling, shall be considered as a residential unit
and billed separately.
RUBBISH: All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead
plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and
other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass,
ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any
and all other waste materials not included in the definitions of "bulky waste",
"construction debris", "dead animals", "garbage", "hazardous materials" or
"stable matter".
SEWAGE: Water carried wastes from residences, commercial or industrial
establishments, business buildings and other premises, containing polluted
matter subject to treatment at the sewage treatment plant.
SOLID WASTE: Any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish, or any combination thereof.
STABLE MATTER: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
WASTE: Shall include "ashes", "bulky waste", "construction debris", "dead
animals", "garbage", "prohibited waste", "putrescible waste", "recyclable
materials", "hazardous materials", "refuse", "rubbish", "sewage", "solid waste"
and "stable matter", as such terms are defined in this section. (Ord. 2089, 1-
5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-3: MANDATORY SYSTEM; WASTE COLLECTION ACCUMULATION; UNLAWFUL PRACTICES;
EXCEPTIONS:
In order to maintain the public health, safety and aesthetics of the city, all
owners and/or occupants are required to pay for, and are provided, certain
waste collection services. There hereby is established a system of waste
collection, transportation and disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying any
waste over the streets or alleys of the city, or to dump or dispose of the
same, unless and until such person has a franchise, license or contract as an
authorized representative of the city.
   A.   All waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of as provided by this chapter, and no person shall collect or convey
over any of the streets, alleys or public ways in the city, or dispose of any
waste accumulated in the city, except as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Every person who is an owner or occupant of premises within the city
limits shall use the waste collection and disposal system herein provided and
shall deposit or cause to be disposed of in accordance with this chapter all
waste which is accumulated on such premises; provided, that nothing herein is
to be construed to prohibit any owner from transporting and disposing of waste
accumulated on his own premises, subject to all regulations herein contained.
An individual or entity may be granted a special exception from the mandatory
system use by the city council in extreme circumstances upon application and a
showing before the city council that the city, its licensee or franchisee
cannot reasonably accommodate the collection of the individual's or entity's
waste. Upon being granted the exception, the waste collector must comply with
the license, contract and franchise provisions of this chapter. The fact that
another waste collector is willing to collect the waste for a price less than
the price set by the city shall not be a factor in determining whether the
city, its licensee or franchisee can reasonably accommodate the collection of
the individual's or entity's waste. All owners or occupants of premises within
the city limits will be charged the minimum collection charge, regardless of
whether they actually use the collection system provided by the city.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, or to cause, the
accumulation in or about any premises or upon any street, alley or public way
of the city adjacent to such premises, owned or occupied by him, any waste.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or leave, or permit to remain,
anywhere in the city, any waste, except as provided in this chapter.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any waste in such
a manner that it can be blown away by the wind or cause littering of public or
private premises, streets, alleys and public ways of the city.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to burn any waste outside of any building at any
time in the city, unless a permit has been obtained therefor.
   G.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting and transporting waste upon, on and over the streets, alleys and
public ways of the city, unless such person has received a license, contract or
franchise therefor.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit into the waste system,
dirt or earth debris from construction or building renovation, rocks, stones,
automobile bodies and parts, washing machines, refrigerators, hot water tanks,
stoves, tree trunks and stumps, and other similar materials, dead animals,
furniture, building materials, such as mortar, plaster, scrap lumber, broken
concrete, and brick, waste oils and lubricants from garages, service stations,
machine shops, restaurants and other similar establishments. Such material
shall be collected and disposed of by the building contractor, person, owner,
occupant of the premises, or by the person responsible for same. (Ord. 2089, 1-
5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-4: LICENSE, CONTRACT OR FRANCHISE:
   A.   City Authorized To Enter Into Franchise Agreement: The city may enter
into a license, contract or franchise agreement with an individual or entity to
collect, transport, convey and dispose waste upon, on or over the streets,
alleys and public ways of the city. The mayor and city council have the sole
authority to select and approve all persons who shall enter into a franchise or
license agreement; contract to perform all services pertaining to sanitary
collection and disposal under the provisions of this chapter; to establish
reasonable fees for licenses; and may establish reasonable rules and
regulations governing the conduct and operation of such licensee or contractor.
All franchise holders shall be bound by and comply with the provisions of this
chapter wherever applicable and shall comply with all requirements set forth by
the city council and shall observe and faithfully perform the conditions and
provisions of the license and the ordinances and rules and regulations of the
city.
   B.   Commercial Service: Commercial waste service is provided to residents
of the city by the city. Nevertheless, in some circumstances, the city may not
be able to provide the service needed by a commercial entity. In those
situations, upon the approval of the mayor and city council, such commercial
entity may use the services of the city appointed franchisee, licensee or
contractor. Collection of solid waste within the city limits without a valid
franchise or license agreement is a violation of this chapter, subject to the
penalties contained in section
9-5-14 of this chapter. Beginning February 1, 2003, all residential customers
and commercial entities in the city shall use the city services or the city
duly authorized franchisee or licensee for waste service.
   C.   Residential Premises Service: Residential premises waste service is
provided to residents of the city by the city.
   D.   Franchise Required To Collect: Collection of waste within the city
limits without a valid franchise or license agreement is a violation of this
chapter, subject to the penalties contained in section
9-5-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-5: SANITARY CONTAINERS:
   A.   Sanitary containers for residential accounts shall be as set forth by
the city council.
   B.   Sanitary containers for commercial accounts shall be as set forth by
the city council.
   C.   It shall be the duty of resident or owner of any premises at all times
to keep, or cause to be kept, containers, as defined above, and to deposit or
cause to be deposited therein, all waste, except as otherwise herein provided.
   D.   All containers shall be: 1) equipped with close fitting covers; or 2)
securely tied; or 3) otherwise closed to prevent the contents to be blown by
the wind or otherwise littered.
   E.   Waste or recyclable materials shall not be compacted in a container to
the extent of obstructing free and easy removal from the container.
   F.   Residents and owners shall restrain their animals from spreading waste
or recyclable materials left for collection or from interfering with pick up
personnel during collection. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-6: PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES:
   A.   Liquids Drained: All waste, before being placed or deposited in
sanitary containers for collection, shall have drained from it all free liquids
and may be wrapped and placed in paper or plastic bags.
   B.   Trimmings, Clippings: Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar
materials shall be cut to a length not to exceed four feet (4') and securely
tied in bundles no more than two feet (2') diameter before being deposited in
the can for collection.
   C.   Grass Clippings, Leaves: Grass clippings, leaves and garden debris,
except sod, dirt and rocks, may be placed in the collection can.
   D.   Removal Of Containers; Nuisances Prohibited: At other than commercial
and alley pick up, all containers shall be removed from the curb line of
streets and public ways within twenty four (24) hours and unauthorized
accumulation of waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
thereby prohibited.
   E.   Prohibited Wastes:
      1.   Waste collection service is intended to collect normal commercial,
industrial, residential and multi-family premises wastes. It is a violation of
this chapter for any person to deposit or relinquish for collection or disposal
any prohibited wastes identified herein.
      2.   Customers who are a source of prohibited wastes shall make
appropriate arrangements to collect and dispose of the waste.
   F.   Taking Of Solid Waste Or Recyclables:
      1.   All waste placed for collection shall be owned by and be the
responsibility of the customer until the time of collection. At the time of
collection, all trash and recyclable material become the property of the city
or franchisee.
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to take, examine,
uncover, snoop in, separate, gather, collect or salvage materials deposited in
waste containers, except with the express permission of the generator of the
waste.
   G.   Theft Of Collection Services:
      1.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person, except for the
owner, occupant or invitee, to place or deposit any materials in or around a
waste receptacle provided for the use of a specific business or premises, or in
or around the can or container at a residence without permission from such
owner or occupant.
      2.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to place waste at a
premises within the city limits that is not generated at the commercial,
residential or multi-family premises.
   H.   Disposal Of Waste: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
throw, discard or deposit any waste in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
vacant ground, or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or
other watercourse. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-7: POINTS AND FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION; CURBSIDE OR ALLEY COLLECTION
SERVICE:
   A.
      1.   The sanitation department shall have the authority to designate the
location where refuse containers and/or “roll away” cans shall be placed for
collection. The sanitation department will only place refuse containers and/or
“roll away” cans in a location that is not within a city right-of-way and that
is convenient for effective, efficient, and safe collection of refuse by the
sanitation vehicles. The sanitation department may allow placement of
containers in city alleyways, if placement on private property is not feasible,
as determined by the sanitation department.
      2.   The sanitation department will only place refuse containers on
surfaces such as asphalt or gravel that allow for the sanitation vehicles to
move freely and safely. All locations must have adequate overhead clearance
from wires, tree branches, eaves, or other overhead obstructions. If a suitable
location is not available for refuse containers, customers will be required to
utilize a sufficient number of “roll away” cans to accommodate the amount of
refuse produced by the customer.
      3.   Refuse containers and/or “roll away” cans shall not be placed on
sidewalks or other public property, except on the day of collection by the
sanitation department.
      4.   Large construction dumpsters may only be placed for up to five (5)
working days on the city street in the parking lane directly in front of the
customer’s residence or business. Dumpsters are not allowed on street locations
where parking is prohibited.
   B.   Treatment Of Containers; Spillage: All containers shall be replaced,
upright where found. Containers and lids shall not be placed or thrown on
streets, alleys, highways or on adjoining property. The collector shall not
permit receptacles to be thrown from the truck to the pavement or parkway nor
in any other way permit damage to occur by rough or improper handling thereof.
Space, private ground, public streets, alleys or ways about the containers and
the collection truck shall be left free from solid waste spilled during
collection. The collector shall be responsible for removal of such spillage,
but shall not be responsible for cleaning up conditions created by the resident
around such containers.
   C.   Frequency Of Collection: Waste accumulated at residences shall be
collected at least once a week.
   D.   Commercial And Business Places: Waste accumulated at the premises of
commercial and business places shall be collected at least once each week,
unless the city provides for alternative collection on a special exception
basis.
   E.   Greater Frequency Of Collection: If residential or commercial users
desire a greater frequency of collection, such residential or commercial user
may pay an additional fee, rate or charge to be fixed and approved by the city.
(Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010; amd. Ord. 2187, 10-1-2019)
9-5-8: RATES, FEES, CHARGES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Authority Of City To Prescribe: The rates, fees or charges for the
collection and disposal of waste and refuse by: 1) owners, tenants, lessees or
occupants of premises; or 2) licensed or franchised collectors, shall at all
times be subject to the right of the city to prescribe and regulate the rates,
fees and charges made for services rendered or to be rendered. The city shall
bill and collect all fees and charges.
   B.   Failure To Pay: Failure to pay an account within ten (10) days may
subject the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant to withdrawal or suspension of
service, as well as withdrawal or suspension of water and sewer service, and
such civil remedies provided by law.
   C.   Deposit After Termination Of Service: In the event that waste or water
service has been suspended or terminated by the city for nonpayment of fees,
the city shall, prior to reinstating said service, require an advance deposit
equal to three (3) months projected service charge for said account.
   D.   Deposit For Containers: The city shall have the authority to authorize
its waste contract hauler, if any, to collect a deposit prior to delivery of
temporary box containers.
   E.   Administration Of Funds: The proceeds from the collection of fees and
charges herein provided shall be placed in a special fund to be known as the
"solid waste collection account", and all expenses of the city in the operation
of the sanitary collection system shall be paid out of such fund and any
surplus remaining therein at the end of each fiscal year may be transferred by
the city council to the general fund. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-9: WASTE VEHICLES; INSPECTION:
The contractor, if any, will furnish a sufficient number of personnel, trucks
and equipment to collect and dispose of waste collected in the city. Said
equipment shall be maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary condition at
the expense of the contractor. The contractor shall furnish vehicles especially
designed for the collection and hauling of waste and waste products. All waste
vehicles shall be closed and watertight, front, rear or side loading, commonly
known as packers, for collecting solid waste. The equipment shall be clean,
uniformly painted and marked and identified, subject to review and approval by
the city. All vehicles will be licensed, lighted and safety inspected for
highway operations. No roadside littering from packer vehicles or from loading
practices will be allowed. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-10: COLLECTION DAYS AND HOURS:
The days for collection shall be set by the city council. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010,
eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-11: SPECIAL COLLECTIONS:
The contractor shall provide for the special collection from commercial and
residential units, bulky waste, construction debris, stable matter and any
other refuse as agreed between the city council and the contractor. (Ord. 2089,
1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-12: SEPARATION AND RECYCLING:
The city reserves the right to, and may at its option, require the separation
of waste, require the deposit thereof in separate containers, and prescribe the
method of disposal thereof. The city also reserves the right to issue further
regulations for the placement and disposal of recyclable materials. Any
contractor shall cooperate at all times with efforts to promote recycling of
consumer products in the separation, transportation and deposit of identified
recyclable materials. Any extra work caused by said handling of recyclable
materials over and above the contract price, will be the subject of prior
separate contractual negotiations between the city and the contractor. (Ord.
2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-13: ANNEXATIONS:
In the event that the city annexes additional areas during the term of this
contract, the city's right to collect waste or recyclable material within the
city shall extend to any part of the newly annexed area. Service to begin
ninety (90) days after annexation has received city council approval. (Ord.
2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010)
9-5-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, including any owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of
premises, violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2089, 1-5-2010, eff. 1-5-2010;
amd. 2012 Code)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
10-1-1: Administrative Code Adopted; Building Department Established
10-1-2: Terms Defined
10-1-3: Future Codes Adopted
10-1-1: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED; BUILDING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The administrative code and the building department for the city hereby are
adopted by the city, for the administration, organizational and enforcement
rules and regulations for the technical codes which regulate site preparation
and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of
buildings, structures and buildings service equipment within the city. One copy
of the administrative code is on file and is open for inspection to the public,
being marked and designated as the administrative code, current edition as
adopted by the state, published by the International Conference Of Building
Officials. (2003 Code § 4-01-01; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-2: TERMS DEFINED:
   A.   Whenever "the governing body" or "local jurisdiction" is referred to in
this chapter, or adopted codes, it shall be deemed to be referring to the city
of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of the state of Idaho.
   B.   Whenever the term "administrative authority", "authorized official",
"responsible official", "building official", "chief inspector", "code
enforcement officer" or other similar designation is used herein or in any of
the technical codes, it shall be construed to mean the building official
designated by the appointing authority of this jurisdiction. (2003 Code §§ 4-
01-03, 4-01-04)
10-1-3: FUTURE CODES ADOPTED:
All subsequent editions and/or supplements to the administrative code, as
adopted by the state legislature, hereby automatically are adopted by the city
as they may become available. (2003 Code § 4-01-06; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
10-2-1: Building And Residential Codes Adopted
10-2-2: Terms Defined
10-2-3: Installation Of Manufactured Homes
10-2-4: Future Codes Adopted
10-2-5: Penalty
10-2-1: BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES ADOPTED:
Certain documents, one copy of which is on file and open for inspection to the
public, being marked and designated as the building code, current edition as
adopted by the state, published by the International Conference Of Building
Officials, but excepting therefrom the requirements for automatic sprinkler
systems in three-unit and four-unit group R buildings, and adopting the
residential code, current edition as adopted by the state, be and the same are
hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all
buildings and structures within the jurisdiction of the city, and providing for
the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such codes, published
by the International Conference Of Building Officials, and the secondary
publications referenced above, all of which are on file in the city, are
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this
chapter. (2003 Code § 4-02-01; amd. 2012 Code)
10-2-2: TERMS DEFINED:
   A.   Whenever "the governing body" or "local jurisdiction" is referred to in
this chapter, or adopted codes, it shall be deemed to be referring to the city
of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of the state of Idaho.
   B.   Whenever the term "authorized official", or "building official" is
referred to in the codes adopted by this chapter, such reference and
designation shall be deemed to refer to and describe the "senior building
official" of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of
the state of Idaho. (2003 Code §§ 4-02-05, 4-02-06)
10-2-3: INSTALLATION OF MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes, as defined by state law and inspected by the department of
housing and urban development (HUD), shall not be subject to the enforcement
provisions of the aforesaid building code, but shall be regulated and inspected
as prescribed in Idaho Code title 44, chapter 22. The owner, or an agent of the
owner, must apply for and receive, an installation permit prior to placing any
manufactured home on their property. No structural modifications may be made to
any manufactured home or manufacturer's installation instructions, unless a
written site specific structural analysis from a state certified engineer or
architect has been approved, verifying the modification's compatibility with
the manufactured home. All additions or alterations to any manufactured home
must comply with all building code requirements. The building official or
appointed representative hereby is authorized to permit, inspect and collect
fees, as established by the governing body, for manufactured homes not bearing
a HUD certification label. (2003 Code § 4-02-02)
10-2-4: FUTURE CODES ADOPTED:
All subsequent editions and/or supplements to the building and residential
codes as adopted by the state legislature, hereby automatically are adopted by
the city as they may become available. (2003 Code § 4-02-08; amd. 2012 Code)
10-2-5: PENALTY:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (2003 Code §
4-02-03; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
10-3-1: Property Maintenance Code Adopted
10-3-2: Revisions
10-3-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city
clerk, being marked and designated as the international property maintenance
code of the city, current edition as adopted by the state, for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition
of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code
on file in the office of the city clerk hereby are referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
10-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2071, 6-19-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
10-3-2: REVISIONS:
The following sections hereby are revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: "City of Blackfoot" for [NAME OF JURISDICTION]
Section 103.1 hereby is deleted and replaced with the following:
Section 1.03.1 Authority and Inspections:
1.03.1.1 The building official, his designated representative, code enforcement
officer, police officer, or any authorized representative thereof upon visual
identification, or upon receipt of a complaint from any person, is authorized
and directed to make inspections of property to determine compliance with this
chapter.
1.03.1.2 Unscreened exterior areas may be inspected at any time from a public
right of way with or without the involvement of the owner or occupant in
accordance with legal requirements governing administrative inspections of
private property.
1.03.1.3 Screened exterior areas shall be inspected only during the normal
business hours of the city unless otherwise arranged, and only upon invitation
or with the concurrence of the owner or occupant or when authorized/ordered by
a court.
1.03.1.4 Except in cases of alleged imminent hazards, if the occupant is not
the owner of the premises or dwelling unit to be inspected, the building
official, his designated representative, code enforcement officer, police
officer, or any authorized representative thereof shall provide notice in
writing or by telephone to the owner or designated agent as to the time and
place of inspection. The owner or designated agent may be present for the
inspection. The convenience of the owner or designated agent shall not require
the rescheduling of the inspection.
Sections 1.03.2, 1.03.3 and 1.03.5 hereby are deleted.
Section 104.2 hereby is deleted.
Section 106.3.1 hereby is added as follows:
If the mayor determines that action by the city is required to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare in an area affected by a violation of this
chapter, the mayor may direct that employees of the city, or the city's
contractors or agents, go upon the premises in question and remove, abate, or
destroy the problem. The city shall be entitled to recover its expense by civil
action filed in a court of competent jurisdiction, together with costs and a
reasonable attorney fees. The expense may also be certified to the city clerk
and transmitted to the county treasurer, and be collected by special assessment
upon the property to the extent provided by law pursuant to Idaho Code sections
50-334 and 50-1008. If the certificate is recorded at the office of the county
recorder, it shall become a lien against the property to the extent provided by
law.
Section 106.6 hereby is added as follows:
Additional Violations And Penalties
1.06.6.1 Any owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, or other person having
lawful control over a structure or parcel of land who causes, allows,
facilitates, aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter or
who fails to perform any act or duty required by this chapter or who allows a
lessee or a tenant to violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter or the failure to
perform any act or duty required by this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
1.06.6.2 The owner of record, as recorded in the records of Bingham County, of
the property upon which a violation of this chapter exists shall be presumed to
be the person having lawful control over a structure or parcel of land. If more
than one person shall be recorded as the owner of the property, said persons
shall be jointly and severally presumed to be persons having lawful control
over a structure or parcel of land. This presumption shall not prevent
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter against any person specified
elsewhere in this chapter.
1.06.6.3 It shall not be a defense for an owner of record to plead that any act
or omission made punishable by this chapter was at the time the violation
occurred within the control of a lessee or tenant pursuant to a lease or rental
agreement.
1.06.6.4 Prosecution of an offense, under this section, shall not preclude the
city from seeking a civil remedy for failure to comply with this chapter.
Section 111 Amend section 111 by replacing "board of appeals" with "city
council" throughout section, and replace "board" with "city council" throughout
section.
Section 111.2 hereby is deleted.
Section 202 Amend definition of garbage to also include useless waste or
material, trash, rubbish, refuse or litter.
Section 302.4 Insert: six inches (6") for grass and twelve inches (12") for
weeds and other plant growth.
Section 302.8.1 hereby is added as follows:
Inoperative, Unauthorized, And Unregistered Vehicles And Materials
Section 302.8.1.1 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for
removal of certain nuisances created by vehicles and other materials when
stored improperly on public streets or private property and to distinguish
between the lawful use of public streets for parking of motor vehicles and the
public nuisance created by unlawful storage or parking of prohibited items.
Section 3.02.8.1.2 Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter:
   A.   Inoperative Vehicle: Any vehicle which, in its current state, whether
due to broken, defective, or missing parts, including missing or flat tires,
missing doors, missing or badly damaged windshields, or broken or defective
parts which are essential for movement, is not capable of being used as a
regular means of transportation.
   B.   Unauthorized: Anything other than a lawfully registered motor vehicle
and its lawfully connected trailer, including, but not limited to, the
following: any snowmobile, any boat, any trailer which is not connected by
means of a lawful hitch to an operating, lawfully registered motor vehicle, any
camper shell or camper not mounted on a vehicle, any storage containers,
excluding city authorized garbage containers when located in conformance with
city regulations, any vehicle reported stolen and not yet recovered, and any
recreational vehicle which remains parked on a street longer than authorized in
this code.
   C.   Unregistered Vehicle: Any vehicle which is not lawfully and currently
registered as provided in Idaho Code title 49, chapter 4; or any vehicle which
does not bear current annual Idaho license plates or decals; or any vehicle
which does not bear current license plates issued by another state and is not
lawfully and currently registered in that state.
Section 3.02.8.1.3 Use Of City Streets Authorized For Parking Registered,
Operative Motor Vehicles; Other Uses Prohibited And Declared Public Nuisances:
   A.   The parking, both short term and long term of lawfully registered,
operative motor vehicles is allowed at curb side areas of the streets of the
city of Blackfoot; provided, that the motor vehicles are not parked in
violation of pavement or curb markings or regulatory signs or traffic devices;
and provided, that they are parked in conformance with parking method
regulations set out elsewhere in this code.
   B.   The use of the streets as a storage location for unregistered or
inoperative motor vehicles, unauthorized items such as camper shells, boats,
unhitched trailers, storage containers, or other materials is prohibited and
the owner(s) may be issued a misdemeanor citation for violating the
prohibition. The continued presence of such unlawfully stored items is inimical
to the well being of the citizens and is hereby declared a public nuisance. All
such items shall be subject to removal as provided hereinafter, the costs of
which, including storage, shall be borne by the owner(s).
Section 3.02.8.1.4 Removal From Public Right Of Way:
The police department is authorized to cause the immediate removal of any
unregistered or unauthorized vehicle, any unauthorized materials, or any
vehicle reported as stolen and not yet recovered found parked or left on any
street or right of way. The department is also authorized to cause to be
removed any vehicle parked on the right of way which is found to be
inoperative, pursuant to notification and removal procedures set forth in Idaho
Code title 49, chapter 18; provided, however, that upon notification to the
police department that a motor vehicle has become disabled while being
operated, such inoperative vehicle may be left parked against the curb area of
a public right of way for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours for
effecting repairs or arranging for removal.
Section 3.02.8.1.5 Use Of Private Property For Storage Of Unregistered Or
Inoperative Vehicles Or Vehicle Parts Prohibited And Declared A Public
Nuisance:
The long term presence on private property outside the confines of enclosed
buildings, of inoperative, wrecked, discarded, partially dismantled, junked,
unused, or unregistered vehicles or vehicle parts contributes to blight and
deterioration of neighborhoods and is detrimental to public health, safety, and
welfare due to factors such as broken glass, standing water, accumulation of
rusted parts, potential environmental damage, and the potential for breeding of
vermin, and is hereby deemed a public nuisance. No person in charge or control
of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or
otherwise, shall allow any such vehicle to remain in the open on such property
longer than seventy two (72) hours. Persons violating this prohibition may be
issued a misdemeanor citation and the city may pursue other legal remedies for
removal of the vehicles. This prohibition shall not apply to a vehicle on the
premises of a lawfully operated auto salvage business, auto repair business,
towing and storage business, auto sales business, or governmentally operated
auto storage area, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise,
nor to vehicles for which a repair or restoration permit has been issued as
provided hereinafter.
Section 3.02.8.1.6 Temporary Exceptions For Repair And Restoration Permits:
The code enforcement staff are hereby authorized to issue permits for either
restoration work on an inoperative vintage or classic car or repair of one
inoperative vehicle and a salvage vehicle and such vehicle parts as may be
necessary for repair under the conditions established in this section. Code
enforcement staff is authorized to deny such permits to an owner if the
property on which the work will be done is not in compliance with property
maintenance regulations set out in this ordinance. Code enforcement staff is
also authorized to revoke any permit if the owner violates the terms of the
permit or property maintenance provisions in this ordinance and does not
correct the violations within the time prescribed.
   A.   Repair Permit: The code enforcement staff may issue a thirty (30) day
permit to allow the owner of a vehicle to repair that vehicle on his
residential premises by salvaging parts/equipment from another vehicle owned by
him, without storing and/or working on the vehicles in an enclosed building.
There shall be no cost for the permit. Members of the code enforcement staff
are authorized to issue one 30-day extension if requested by the permittee in
order to complete the repair, provided permittee is in compliance with the
terms of the permit and the property maintenance provisions in this ordinance.
If no enclosed building is available, storage and work on the vehicles should
be accomplished within the confines of a carport or an area screened from
public view. When not in an enclosed building and not undergoing actual repair
work, both vehicles must be under a car cover which has been specifically made
to fit the contours of and cover the entire body of the vehicle; blankets,
tarpaulins, or other such makeshift coverings are not allowed. Vehicle parts,
equipment, and tools must be neatly stacked and covered when work is not taking
place. At the expiration of the permit or its extension period, the salvage
vehicle must be removed from the premises or the code enforcement staff may
cause a misdemeanor citation to be issued and may also pursue other legal
remedies to effect the removal. Nothing herein shall be construed to allow any
person to perform such work in order to sell the repaired vehicle to another
party. 
   B.   Restoration Permit: The code enforcement staff may issue a one year
permit to allow the owner of a vehicle to undertake a project to restore a
vehicle as either a "classic" car (a vehicle at least 30 years old) or an
"Idaho old timer" (a vehicle manufactured prior to January 1, 1943) to its
original condition without storing the vehicle and working on it within an
enclosed building. If possible, work must be performed within the confines of a
carport or within a screened area. If not kept in an enclosed building, the
vehicle must be covered with a car cover as described in subsection A of this
section whenever work is not taking place. Members of the code enforcement
staff are authorized to issue one 180-day extension if requested by the
permittee in order to complete the repair, provided permittee is in compliance
with the terms of the permit and the property maintenance provisions in this
chapter. At the expiration of the permit or its extension period, if the
vehicle is not fully restored to working condition, the owner must either store
the vehicle in a fully enclosed building or remove the vehicle from the
property. Failure to do so may result in issuance of a misdemeanor citation and
the city may pursue other legal remedies to effect the removal.
Section 304.14 Insert: June 1 to September 30.
Section 602.3 Insert: October 1 to May 30.
Section 602.4 hereby is deleted.
Chapter 9 hereby is added as follows:
Chapter 9
Conflict Of Ordinances
Section 901 In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date hereof, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall control.
Section 902 It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant deed or other private agreement.
Section 903. In cases where two (2) or more provisions of this chapter
disagree, the most stringent or restrictive shall control.
(Ord. 2071, 6-19-2007)
CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
10-4-1: Mechanical Code Adopted
10-4-2: Terms Defined
10-4-3: Future Codes Adopted
10-4-4: Penalty
10-4-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
Certain documents, one copy of which is on file in the city office and open for
inspection to the public, being marked and designated as the international
mechanical code, including appendix chapter A of the current edition as adopted
by the state, published by the International Conference Of Building Officials,
be and is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating,
ventilation, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other
miscellaneous heat producing appliances in the city; providing for the issuance
of permits and the collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such international mechanical
code, published by the International Conference Of Building Officials, on file
in the office of city hall, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if set out in this chapter. (2003 Code § 4-05-01; amd. 2012 Code)
10-4-2: TERMS DEFINED:
   A.   Whenever "the governing body" or "local jurisdiction" is referred to in
this chapter, or adopted codes, it shall be deemed to be referring to the city
of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of the state of Idaho.
   B.   Whenever the term "authorized official", or "building official" is
referred to in the codes adopted by this chapter, such reference and
designation shall deem to refer to and describe the "senior building official"
of the city of Blackfoot, Bingham County, a political subdivision of the state
of Idaho. (2003 Code §§ 4-05-04, 4-05-05)
10-4-3: FUTURE CODES ADOPTED:
All subsequent editions and/or supplements to the international mechanical code
as adopted by the state legislature, hereby automatically are adopted by the
city as they may become available. (2003 Code § 4-05-07)
10-4-4: PENALTY:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (2003 Code §
4-05-02; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
10-5-1: Fire Code Adopted
10-5-2: Enforcement
10-5-3: Penalty
10-5-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The international fire code, current edition as adopted and amended by the
state or the state fire marshal, is adopted as the official fire code for the
city. In addition thereto, all subsequent editions and/or supplements to the
international fire code as adopted by the state fire marshal be, and the same
hereby are, automatically adopted by the city as they may become available.
(2003 Code § 3-03-04; amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by all officers of the police force
and the fire department of the city. (2003 Code § 3-03-04)
10-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted, or
who shall fail to comply with such provisions, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. (2003 Code § 3-03-04; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose And Applicability
10-6-2: Signs Exempt From Permit Requirements
10-6-3: Prohibited Signs
10-6-4: General Sign Regulations
10-6-5: Specific Sign Type Standards
10-6-6: Table Of Permanent Sign Standards
10-6-7: Sign Permits And Sign Design Incentives
10-6-8: Nonconforming Signs And Sign Plans Approved Under Prior Code
10-6-9: Sign Installation, Maintenance, And Enforcement
10-6-10: Violations
10-6-11: Downtown Sign Design Standards And Procedures
10-6-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and
welfare by regulating signs in keeping with the following objectives:
      1.   To improve the visual environment and promote economic development
while providing adequate standards for the display of signs;
      2.   To allow for maximum creativity while enhancing the quality of
signs;
      3.   To ensure that the design, construction, installation, repair, and
maintenance of signs protect public safety from potential hazards, especially
those along public rights-of-way and near intersections;
      4.   To ensure those City rights-of-way are used in a manner consistent
with the public interest;
      5.   To minimize incompatibility between signs and their surroundings;
      6.   To regulate signs by the City's policies and consistent with the
U.S. and Idaho Constitutions; and
      7.   To protect the right to free speech by the display of messages on a
sign through content-neutral regulations.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   All signs and sign support structures shall conform to the
requirements of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
      2.   No sign shall be displayed in the City limits until the City has
issued a permit for it unless it is exempt from a permit according to section
10-6-2 of this chapter.
      3.   No permit shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the
proposed sign meets the requirements of this chapter.
      4.   All sign face changes including repairs and/or sign face
replacements, except for changing or replacing text on changeable copy signs,
require a permit.
      5.   Minimum submittal requirements and sign permit applications are
available in the administrative manual. Fees for permits and installation shall
be established and from time to time revised by resolution of the City Council.
      6.   When a sign permit is requested for a parcel where nonconforming,
illegal, or prohibited signs exist, no sign permit shall be issued until all
such signs are removed or brought into conformance with this chapter.
   C.   Savings And Severability:
      1.   Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that
advertising or business signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations
applicable to such signs.
      2.   If any clause, section, or other part of the application of this
chapter shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional or invalid, it is the intent of the City that such clause,
section, or other part of the application of this section shall be considered
eliminated and not affect the validity of the remaining clauses, sections, or
applications which shall remain in full force and effect.
   D.   Conflicts With Other Provisions: Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed a waiver of the provisions of any other ordinance or regulation
applicable to signs. Signs located in areas governed by several ordinances or
applicable regulations shall comply with all such ordinances and regulations.
If there is a conflict between this chapter and any other ordinance or
regulation, the more stringent shall apply. Nothing in this chapter is intended
to conflict with the provisions of the Idaho Outdoor Advertising Act.
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023)
10-6-2: SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
The following non-illuminated signs may be erected in compliance with this
chapter without the issuance of a sign permit. Such signs may be allowed in
addition to all other signs permitted and shall conform to setbacks, height,
and other applicable requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Public Signs: Public signs are exempt from the standards and permit
requirements specified in this chapter, but shall be consistent with the design
standards specified in this chapter to the extent practicable and shall not
include any signs expressly prohibited by this chapter in section
10-6-3 of this chapter.
   B.   Yard Signs: Yard signs are allowed and are exempt from the standards
and permit requirements specified in this chapter, provided such signs:
      1.   Shall not exceed two (2) per property at any one time;
      2.   Shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet per sign in the Residential
Zoning Districts, and shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet per sign in
all other zoning districts; and
      3.   Shall not exceed a height of four feet (4') in the Residential
Zoning Districts, and shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8') in all other
zoning districts.
   C.   Flags: Any flag affixed to a permanent flagpole or affixed to a
building, not including feather flags, is allowed and is exempt from the sign
permit requirement provided the area of the flag shall not exceed thirty two
(32) square feet in the Residential Districts. In Mixed-Use and Nonresidential
Zoning Districts, flags and flag structures may extend up to five feet (5')
over the maximum height allowed in the underlying zoning district.
   D.   Window Signs: Window signs are allowed and are exempt from the sign
permit requirement.
   E.   Signs Located Inside A Building: Signs located inside a building are
allowed and are exempt from the sign permit requirement provided any interior
indication within six feet (6') of any window shall not have any flashing or
moving lights, including video monitors and electronic message signs.
   F.   Integral Signs: An inscription carved into stone or similar material
that is integral to a building, such as is commonly found on cornerstones or
stamped into sidewalks, is allowed and is exempt from the sign permit
requirement. Such necessary signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in
area.
   G.   Temporary/Portable Signs: For the purpose of this code temporary sign
is a sign intended to display either commercial or noncommercial messages of
transitory or temporary nature. Portable signs or any signs or any sign not
permanently embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or
sign structure that is permanently embedded in the ground, are considered
temporary signs.
      Temporary signs must be in compliance with the following standards:
      1.   Types: Temporary signs shall be limited to the following: Banners,
feather flags, portable signs, A-frame signs, Inflatable signs such as balloons
and inflatable figures, and wind driven signs.
      2.   Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
      3.   Height: All signs above three (3) feet in height from ground level
must meet the setback requirements within the city code and adopted city
standards pertaining clear view of intersecting streets and ways, section
7- 2-4.
      4.   Right Of Way Areas: Temporary signs are not allowed in any state-
owned right of way areas, but are allowed in city-owned right of way areas only
under the conditions listed below:
         a.   Portable Signs And Banners On Public Property: Where buildings
have been built legally to the property line, portable signs and banners are
allowed subject tot he following standards:
            (1)   Portable signs may be allowed on public property only if
there is not adequate space to display a sign on private property.
            (2)   Portable signs or banners on public property shall be
installed to provided adequate space to accommodate pedestrian maintenance
access and minimize potential hazards for pedestrians and vehicles.
            (3)   Portable signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage
except for multi-tenant buildings or developments, one (1) additional portable
sign may be allowed on any street frontage for buildings having more than
twenty-five feet (25') of street frontage.
            (4)   Banners shall be attached flat to a building wall or flat to
an approved seating enclosure on public property.
      5.   Temporary Sign Placement And Maintenance:
         a.   Signs must be maintained in a neat, clean, repaired condition.
         b.   Signs that are tattered, torn or in disrepair or allowed to blow
freely shall not be allowed under any circumstances and shall be removed
immediately.
         c.   Temporary signs shall be placed on property of the business which
is being advertised. No temporary signs as defined in this section shall be
permitted to be placed off premise without written approval of landowner.
         d.   Temporary signs shall not be placed at locations which impede the
vision or travel of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic.
         e.   Areas within residential zones where placement is in the area
between the curb or swale area and a detached sidewalk with permission of
homeowner and sign is no taller than three (3) feet.
      6.   In residential areas that have no curb, sidewalk or designated swale
area, temporary signs shall be within property boundaries.
      7.   Signs advertising a one (1) time event shall be removed within
forty-eight (48) hours of the events.
   H.   Traffic Control Signs: Official traffic control signs , to include
wayfinding signs. (Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023; Ord. 2264, 3-
4- 2025)
10-6-3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
   A.   Distracting, Interfering, Or Confusing Signs:
      1.   Signs that cause visual obstruction or interfere with motor vehicle
traffic or a traffic-control device, including any sign that obstructs clear
vision in any direction from any street intersection or driveway.
      2.   Signs employing a lighting or control mechanism that causes radio,
radar, or television interference.
      3.   Signs that obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening used
or required as a means of egress or ingress, or for emergency purposes, or that
interferes with any openings required for light or ventilation.
      4.   Signs in rights-of-way or on other public property unless
specifically permitted or provided for in this chapter.
   B.   Neon Or LED Lighting: Neon or LED lighting not within the lettering or
logo of a sign shall be subject to section
10-6-4, "General Sign Regulations", of this chapter and provisions regarding
outdoor lighting.
   C.   Portable Signs:
      1.   Portable signs, except as authorized in section
10-6-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Signs on parked vehicles or trailers unless:
         a.   Such vehicle or trailer is operational, currently registered with
current tags, and parked in a functional parking space or behind a primary
building;
         b.   Such signs are not located on top of a vehicle, except for
delivery vehicles; and
         c.   Such signs are not electronic message signs.
   D.   Roof-Mounted Signs: Roof signs or any portion of a sign or sign cabinet
or frame extending above the parapet or roof eave, except for historic signs on
historic landmarks.
   E.   Posters, Handbills, And Painted Signs:
      1.   Signs attached to utility poles or other poles or structures, except
bus stop signs, within public rights-of-way.
   F.   Off-Premises Signs: Off-premises signs, except transit-stop signs.
   G.   Abandoned Or Inoperable Signs:
      1.   Inoperable, unsafe, malfunctioning, unrepaired, or dilapidated
signs.
      2.   Unused or abandoned signs, including any pole, post, or structure
supporting such sign.
   H.   Signs Within The Sight Distance Triangle: To preserve sight distance,
an unobstructed view shall be maintained within sight distance triangles as
follows:
      1.   Sight distance requirements are addressed in this chapter and the
City standards.
      2.   No signs, except traffic signs, shall exceed a height of thirty six
inches (36") above the grade of the lower roadway within a sight distance
triangle.
      3.   Sign projection or overhang across a sight distance triangle shall
be permitted only when the bottom of the sign surface is a minimum of nine feet
(9') above the grade of the higher roadway. Sign supports not complying with
this section shall not be located within a sight distance triangle. (Ord. 2182,
5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023; Ord. 2264, 3-4- 2025)
10-6-4: GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS:
   A.   Signs For Single-Tenant Buildings:
      1.   The number and size requirements for each type of sign allowed for
single-tenant buildings are indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
      2.   Wall sign length shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of building
frontage.
      3.   Signs shall be appropriately scaled and compatible with buildings
and other features of the site in terms of color, materials, design, and
illumination.
   B.   Signs For Multiple-Tenant Buildings:
      1.   Sign Locations: Signs for multiple-tenant buildings are allowed only
within the designated sign areas as shown on an approved sign permit
application.
      2.   Individual Tenant Signs:
         a.   Freestanding Signs: No individual tenant in a multiple-tenant
building or development is allowed a separate freestanding sign. The total sign
area allowed for freestanding signs on a multiple- tenant property is indicated
in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
         b.   Wall And Projecting Signs:
            (1)   Individual tenants in multi-tenant buildings are permitted
wall and projecting signs as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Approved wall area is based on the length of
the exterior wall(s) of individual tenant spaces.
               (A)   In instances where a building contains tenants without an
exterior wall, additional sign area for such interior tenants in the building
may be included on a shared exterior sign. Such sign shall not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet.
               (B)   Additional sign standards are as specified in section
10-6-5 of this chapter and in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
               (C)   Wall sign length shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of
building frontage associated with the respective tenant.
               (D)   Signs shall be appropriately scaled and compatible with
buildings and other features of the site in terms of color, materials, design,
and illumination.
   C.   Signs Within Historic Districts, Mixed-Use Downtown, And The Blackfoot
Urban Renewal Agency (URA) Boundaries: All signs within a local or national
registered historic district, any Mixed Use District, or the urban renewal
agency boundaries ("URA boundaries"), shall be appropriate and compatible with
buildings and other features of the site in terms of color, materials, and
design. Signs shall also comply with adopted design guidelines for local
historic districts, Mixed Use Districts, and URA boundaries, as applicable. See
section
10-6-11, "Downtown Sign Design Standards And Procedures", of this chapter.
   D.   Signs In Downtown Breezeways, Rights-Of-Way And Other Public Property:
The Blackfoot Urban Renewal Agency or the City may install banners and signs
attached to light and utility poles in the breezeways, rights-of-way, and other
public property within the URA boundaries.
   E.   Signs Located In Or Extending Into Or Over Public Property: Signs
allowed under this chapter that are located on or extend into public property
require approval of a revocable use of public places permit. Temporary signs
allowed on City property are exempt.
   F.   Sign Color: High intensity colors and fluorescent pigments shall not be
used on any sign, sign cabinet or frame, or support structure except as sign
trim or on a sign logo not exceeding five percent (5%) of the sign area and
compatible with the primary building design and color.
   G.   Sign Illumination:
      1.   Signs may be illuminated pursuant to section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
      2.   Illumination of signs shall comply with the outdoor lighting
standards.
      3.   Signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) nits (candela/square meter)
between one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise
and one thousand (1,000) nits during other times. Signs shall include automatic
dimmer controls to adjust brightness levels.
      4.   Exposed neon and exposed LED lighting on any portion of a building
or structure except within the lettering or logo on a freestanding or wall
sign, is subject to the provisions for outdoor lighting. Exposed neon and
exposed LED lighting is prohibited on signs within or adjacent to and facing a
Residential Zoning District unless otherwise exempted in this chapter.
      5.   Signs within or adjacent to and facing a Residential Zoning District
shall be located, shielded, and screened to prevent direct light or glare onto
adjacent uses or properties.
   H.   Sign Measurement And Location:
      1.   Sign Height: The height of a sign shall be measured from the average
grade at the base of a sign to the highest point of the sign, including all
support structures. For freestanding signs located on a slope or berm, the
height of the sign shall be measured from the average grade established between
the base of the sign and the lot line; or where the lot line is more than six
feet (6') from the base of the sign, between the base of the sign and a point
six feet (6') down slope from the sign. (Figure 6.2)
   FIGURE 6.2
   SIGN HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1903.png]
 
      2.   Sign Area:
         a.   Single-Faced Signs: The area of a sign shall include the entire
area within a continuous single perimeter enclosing the limits of the text,
symbols, photographs, logos, and display faces, including any frame or other
material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed. The area
shall exclude support structures on which a sign is placed.
         b.   Double-Faced Signs: All signs other than wall signs may be back-
to-back (2 sign faces), and each face may have an area not to exceed the
maximum stated for each respective type of sign.
         c.   Three-Dimensional Signs: The sign area of a three-dimensional
sign shall be calculated by adding the area of two (2) adjacent vertical faces
of the smallest cube that can encompass such sign. (Figure 6.3)
   Area 1 + Area 2 = Total Sign Area
   FIGURE 6.3
   THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGN MEASUREMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1905.png]
 
      3.   Sign Location: Signs shall be located as specified in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Attached signs shall be located only in
approved sign wall areas as follows:
         a.   All Buildings: Approved sign areas shall be located consistent
with building architecture and shall not detract from key building features.
Signs shall be aligned on single-tenant and multi-tenant buildings within
consistent sign bands, except that signs at customer entrances or on other
prominent building features shall be located consistent with architectural
features.
         b.   Single-Tenant Buildings: For a building containing one tenant,
any exterior facade wall that is facing an abutting public street or alley or
any exterior wall facing a customer parking lot of the use.
         c.   Multi-Tenant Buildings:
            (1)   Any exterior facade wall of an individual tenant that has a
public entrance and exit;
            (2)   Any exterior facade wall of an individual tenant that faces
an abutting public street or alley, or the customer parking lot of the
building; and
            (3)   Any approved location for a shared exterior wall directory
sign.
   I.   Discontinued Use Or Change In Use:
      1.   Whenever the approved use of a property or tenant space is
discontinued for more than ninety (90) days, all signs and sign support
structures on that subject property and/or tenant space shall be removed. Any
new use established on the subject property shall comply with this chapter.
      2.   Whenever a permit is requested to change a sign or sign face, the
sign and support structure shall also comply with this chapter. Individual sign
faces on a multi-tenant freestanding sign are exempt. (Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019;
amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023; Ord. 2264, 3-4-2025)
10-6-5: SPECIFIC SIGN TYPE STANDARDS:
   A.   Wall Signs: Wall signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Additionally:
      1.   Wall signs may project out from the facade on which the wall sign is
attached up to a maximum of twelve inches (12").
      2.   Wall signs shall not extend beyond the height of a building parapet
or top of wall.
      3.   An increase in wall sign area up to twenty five percent (25%) shall
be allowed for buildings that are located three hundred feet (300') or more
from the street frontage that the wall sign is facing.
      4.   Cabinet signs are prohibited in the Residential Zoning Districts.
      5.   Creative wall sign designs are encouraged. Also see section
10-6-7 of this chapter for sign design incentives.
   B.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Additionally, projecting signs:
      1.   Shall provide a minimum clearance of eight feet (8') between the
sign and the sidewalk over which the sign is located.
      2.   May project out from the facade on which the projecting sign is
attached up to a maximum of five feet (5').
      3.   Shall not extend beyond the height of a building parapet or top of
wall.
      4.   Projecting cabinet signs are prohibited in the Mixed-Use Zoning
District.
      5.   Creative projecting sign designs are encouraged. Also see section
10-6-7 of this chapter for sign design incentives.
   C.   Awning Signs: Awning signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Additionally:
      1.   Awning signs shall be stitched to or otherwise incorporated directly
into the awning. No portion of such sign shall be riveted or otherwise fastened
to the frame or directly to the awning.
      2.   Plastic, vinyl, acrylic or similar awning signs are prohibited.
      3.   Creative awning designs are encouraged. Also see section
10-6-7 of this chapter for sign design incentives.
      4.   Awning frames shall comply with Building Code requirements.
   D.   Canopy Signs: Canopy signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
      1.   Canopy signs shall be integrated into the canopy design (figure
6.4).
      2.   Individual sign lettering may be placed on top of a first story
canopy attached to a building entrance provided the letters do not interfere
with key architectural elements (figure 6.4).
      3.   Cabinet signs attached to a canopy are prohibited.
      4.   Creative canopy sign designs are encouraged. Also see section
10-6-7 of this chapter for sign design incentives.
      5.   Fuel pump canopies shall also comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   FIGURE 6.4
   CANOPY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1907.png]
 
   E.   Blade Signs: Blade signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Additionally:
      1.   Blade signs shall not extend beyond the edge of an awning, canopy,
arcade, gallery, or other structure. (Figure 6.5)
      2.   Blade signs shall provide a minimum clearance of eight feet (8')
between the sign and the sidewalk over which the sign is located. (Figure 6.5)
      3.   Blade signs shall not count against the overall maximum signage
allowed.
      4.   Creative blade sign designs are encouraged and cabinet signs are
prohibited as blade signs.
   FIGURE 6.5
   BLADE SIGN STANDARDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1909.png]
 
   F.   Changeable Copy Signs - Wall: Changeable copy wall signs are allowed as
indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter. Changeable copy wall signs may project up to
a maximum of twelve inches (12") from the facade on which they are attached.
Changeable copy signs that project more than twelve inches (12") shall be
considered projecting signs and shall meet the standards in this section and in
section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
   G.   Changeable Copy Signs - Freestanding: Freestanding changeable copy
signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
   H.   Standards Applicable To All Freestanding Signs (except for Tall
Commercial Signs as set forth in this Chapter):
      1.   Freestanding Sign Separation:
         a.   Freestanding signs on adjacent lots or development parcels for
different uses on the same street frontage shall be separated by the maximum
distance practicable to minimize impacts on the visual environment, allow for
adequate sign visibility, and to comply with the sight distance standards. The
applicant shall submit scaled plans (and digital images and photo simulations
when requested by the City) depicting the location of existing and planned
freestanding signs.
         b.   Freestanding signs on the same lot or parcel on intersecting
street frontages shall be separated by at least two hundred feet (200') as
measured by a straight line between signs.
      2.   Setbacks from any property line shall be a minimum of five feet
(5'), subject to sight distance requirements.
      3.   Freestanding Sign Design:
         a.   All freestanding signs, except for freestanding post signs, shall
be of a monument design including a monument base attached to the ground with
no space between any sign cabinet and the monument base.
         b.   Monument bases shall be constructed of brick, stone, wood or
metal material consistent and compatible with an exterior material and color of
the primary building.
         c.   For monument signs with a sign cabinet, the monument base shall
be equal or greater in depth and length than the sign cabinet. Sign cabinets
for freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty four inches (24") in depth.
         d.   Freestanding signs, including cabinets and faces, shall be
consistent and compatible with the design of the building, structures, and
other features of the development.
         e.   Cabinet signs are prohibited in the Mixed Use and Residential
Zoning Districts.
         f.   Creative freestanding sign designs are encouraged.
         g.   All freestanding signs and structures thirty feet (30') above
ground or greater shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as
specified in the most current City-adopted edition of the International
Building Code with adjustments in pressure for height as outlined in the
International Building Code and seismic design category “D”.
         h.   Design and construction with plastic material shall be in
accordance with the most current City-adopted edition of the International
Building Code.
   I.   Freestanding Post Signs:
      1.   Freestanding post signs are allowed as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter provided such signs are:
         a.   Freestanding post signs may be supported by a single pole or post
so long as the engineering complies with all applicable building codes;
         b.   Designed to be compatible with the design of buildings within the
development;
         c.   Constructed of durable wood or metal materials; and
         d.   Externally illuminated using ground mounted lights, if
illumination is proposed.
   J.   Transit-Stop Signs:
      1.   Signs on transit-stop shelters and benches are permitted on street
rights-of-way and adjacent private property when there is not adequate space
for a shelter or bench in the right-of-way.
      2.   Signs on transit-stop shelters are limited to three (3) sign faces
per shelter not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet per sign face. Sign
faces shall not extend above the roof eaves of a shelter or beyond the outside
dimensions of the shelter. Sign faces shall be mounted flush to the shelter and
shall face a public street right-of-way.
      3.   Signs on transit-stop benches are limited to one sign face per bench
not to exceed twelve (12) square feet per sign face. Sign faces shall not
extend more than two feet (2') above the bench seat and shall not extend beyond
the width of the bench.
      4.   Lighting of signs on transit-stop shelters is allowed. Lighting of
signs on transit-stop benches is not allowed. Sign lighting on transit-stop
shelters shall be constant, and shall not flash, blink, or change color.
      5.   Electronic message signs are prohibited on transit-stop shelters and
benches. Sign lighting on transit-stop shelters shall comply with the sign
illumination standards.
   K.   Drive-Through Facility Signs: Uses with a drive-through facility may
have additional freestanding signage as indicated in section
10-6-6, table 6.1 of this chapter.
Such additional drive-through facility signs:
      1.   Shall be limited to one face.
      2.   Shall be of a consistent design and shall use similar colors and
materials as other freestanding signs on the property.
   L.   Electronic Message Signs: Electronic message signs are allowed pursuant
to the following:
      1.   Shall only be allowed as part of a freestanding monument and wall
signs and only in the Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts;
      2.   The electronic message portion shall not exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the allowed monument or wall sign area;
      3.   Only static electronic messages are allowed; and
      4.   Each electronic message shall remain on the screen for a minimum of
fifteen (15) seconds. Messages will change only through a fade or dissolve
transition and the transition shall not exceed 0.3 seconds between messages.
   M.   Historical Signs: Signs that are individually or as part of a building
designated by the City as a historic landmark are allowed to be retained
provided that:
      1.   The sign is kept in good repair;
      2.   The sign does not constitute a hazard to public safety; and
      3.   Only static electronic messages are allowed; and
      4.   Each electronic message shall remain on the screen for a minimum of
fifteen (15) seconds. Messages will change only through fade or dissolve
transition and the transition shall not exceed zero point three (0.3) seconds
between messages.
   N.   Tall Commercial Signs Near I-15 Interchange: There shall be a Tall
Commercial Sign Zone Overlay as depicted in the map set forth below. Within
that area near the I-15 Interchange, the following provisions shall control
tall commercial signage:
      1.   Setbacks shall be twenty-five feet (25') from any property line
unless the parcel is adjacent to a residential zone, then the setbacks shall be
fifty feet (50') from any property line.
      2.   A tall commercial sign may have a sign area of thirty-five (35)
square feet if it is less than or equal to forty feet (40') tall, and a sign
area of three hundred fifty (350) square feet if it exceeds forty feet (40')
tall.
      3.   All other provisions in Title 10, Chapter 6, Signs, not modified
herein shall apply as required.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ebe7ceec8af63974c18ca59227c8cf4cb548a324/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2131.png]
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2200, 12-1-2020; Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023; Ord.
2264, 3-4-2025)
10-6-6: TABLE OF PERMANENT SIGN STANDARDS:
Types of signs permitted in the respective zoning districts of the City are
indicated in table 6.1 of this section. If a specific sign style or type is not
included in the following table it is prohibited in the respective zoning
district(s).
   TABLE 6.1
          Zoning                       Total Sign
Sign Type Districts     Number Of      Area Per      Sign Height, Illumination
          Where Allowed Signs, Maximum Approved Wall Maximum      Allowed
                                       Area, Maximum
               Zoning                    Total Sign
               Districts    Number Of    Area Per     Sign Height, Illumination
Sign Type      Where        Signs,       Approved     Maximum      Allowed
               Allowed      Maximum      Wall Area,
                                         Maximum
Attached                                                        
signs:
                                                                   Externally
                                                                   illuminated
                            1 per                     Below the    or reverse
 Wall         Residential  building     32 sq. ft.   floor of the pan channel
                                                      second story with halo
                                                                   illumination
                                                                   only
                            Single-
                            tenant: 1
                            per sign
                            wall - total
                            includes
                            projecting
                            signs; plus
                            1 additional
                            sign for
                            each 100
                            linear feet
                            of sign wall
                            (no cabinet
                            signs        Single-      Below top of
                            allowed for  tenant: 1    wall, for
                            additional   sq. ft. per  single-
                            signs)       linear foot  story
                                        of sign      buildings,
                            Multi-       wall;        or below
                            tenant: 1    maximum 200  second story
                            per sign     sq. ft. for  for multi-
                            wall for     any 1 sign   story
             Commercial   each tenant              buildings.   Yes
                            with an      Multi-       See this
                            exterior     tenant: 1    chapter
                            public       sq. ft. per  regarding
                            entrance -   linear foot  signs on
                            total        of sign      multi-story
                            includes     wall;        buildings.
                            projecting   maximum 200  No cabinet
                            signs; plus  sq. ft. for  sign shall
                            1 additional any 1 sign   be located
                            sign for                  above 20 ft.
                            each tenant
                            with an
                            exterior
                            public
                            entrance for
                            each 100
                            linear feet
                            of sign wall
                            (no cabinet
                            signs
                            allowed for
                            additional
                            signs)
                            Single-
                            tenant: 1    Single-
                            per sign     tenant: 1
                            wall - total sq. ft. per
                            includes     linear foot
                            wall signs   of sign wall
                                        up to 20 sq.
                            Multi-       ft.
 Projecting   Commercial   tenant: 1                20 ft.       Yes
                            per sign     Multi-
                            wall with an tenant: 1
                            exterior     sq. ft. per
                            public       linear foot
                            entrance -   of sign wall
                            total        up to 20 sq.
                            includes     ft. per
                            wall signs   tenant
                             
                                         0.5 sq. ft.
                                         per linear
                                         foot of
                                         awning; 1    Only allowed Externally-
 Awning       Mixed Use/   1 per awning sq. ft. per  on first     illuminated
               Commercial                linear foot  floor        only
                                         of awning    awnings
                                         when used in
                                         place of a
                                         wall sign
                                         0.5 sq. ft.
                                         per linear
                            1 per        foot of                   Only sign
                            attached     canopy; 1    Only allowed may be
               Mixed Use/   canopy; 1    sq. ft. per  on first     illuminated;
 Canopy       Commercial   per detached linear foot  floor or     no other
                            canopy per   of attached  detached     parts of
                            street       canopy when  canopies     canopy
                            frontage     used in
                                         place of a
                                         wall sign
                            1 per tenant                           Externally-
 Blade        Mixed Use/   per tenant   4 sq. ft.    Below second illuminated
               Commercial   building                  story        only
                            entrance
                            1 per sign                30 ft. or
 Changeable   Mixed Use/   wall - total 32 sq. ft.   top of wall, Yes
  copy- wall   Commercial   includes                  whichever is
                            wall signs                less
Freestanding                                                    
signs:
                            1 per street
                            frontage, up                           Externally-
               Multifamily  to a total                             illuminated
  Freestanding and          of 2 signs                             or reverse
 monument     Commercial   per          32 sq. ft.   6 ft.        pan channel
  sign         only         subdivision                            with halo
                            or                                     illumination
                            development                            only
                            access
                                         Single-
                                         tenant: 35
                                         sq. ft. in
                                         multi-
                                         family; 50   1 to 10
                            1 per street sq. ft.      tenants: 6
                            frontage     otherwise    ft. in
                            plus an                  multi-
                            additional   2 to 10      family; 12
                            sign for     tenants: 50  ft.
                            each 660 ft. sq. ft. in   otherwise
             Commercial   of street    multi-                   Yes
                            frontage;    family; 80   More than 10
                            total        sq. ft.      tenants: 6
                            includes     otherwise    ft. in
                            other                    multi-
                            freestanding More than 10 family; 15
                            signs        tenants: 50  ft.
                                         sq. ft. in   otherwise
                                         multi-
                                         family; 100
                                         sq. ft.
                                         otherwise
                            1 per street
                            frontage
                            plus 1
                            additional   35 sq. ft.
                            sign for any (less than   40 ft.
               Multifamily  street       or equal to  100 ft. - in
 Freestanding and          frontage in  40 ft. tall) tall         Yes
  post         Commercial   excess of    350 sq. ft.  commercial
               only         600 ft.;     (greater     sign overlay
                            total        than 40 ft.  zone
                            includes     tall)
                            other
                            freestanding
                            signs
                            1 - total
                            includes
                            other
                            freestanding
                            signs.
                            Freestanding
                            changeable   32 sq. ft.   6 ft. in
  Freestanding              copy signs   in multi-    multi-
 changeable   Commercial   must be      family; 48   family; 12   Yes
  copy                      located a    sq. ft.      ft.
                            minimum of   otherwise    otherwise
                            750 feet
                            from the
                            next closest
                            freestanding
                            changeable
                            copy sign.
 Transit stop Contract                                          
               regulated
                            Up to 2
                            additional
  Drive-                    freestanding
 through      Commercial   signs along  32 sq. ft.   6 ft.        Yes
  facility                  the drive-
                            through
                            lanes
               See
 Electronic   subsection                                        
  message      10-6-5L of
               this chapter
               See
 Historical   subsection                                        
               10-6-5M of
               this chapter
 
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2223, 5-3-2022; Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023)
10-6-7: SIGN PERMITS AND SIGN DESIGN INCENTIVES:
   A.   Sign Permits:
      1.   Signs Requiring A Permit: All permanent and temporary signs not
exempt from a permit shall not be erected, displayed, altered, relocated, or
replaced until the City has issued a sign permit. The applicant and sign owner
are responsible for demonstrating compliance with the sign standards.
      2.   Expiration Of A Sign Permit: If a sign authorized by any permit has
not been erected within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the
permit approval and an extension has not been granted, the sign permit shall be
deemed expired.
   B.   Sign Design Incentives:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of these sign design incentives is to encourage
an applicant to develop creative signs for a property or development.
      2.   Applicability: These sign design incentives are available in all
Mixed Use and Non-Residential Districts. Signs in the Mixed Use Zoning District
that are also within the URA boundaries are subject to downtown sign design
standards approval.
      3.   Eligible Sign Design Incentives: The following sign designs are
eligible for an increase in sign area beyond what is allowed, or flexible sign
placement of wall signs on multi-story building:
         a.   Wall, projecting, or freestanding cabinet sign with routed metal
face and opaque background - twenty percent (20%) increase in sign area.
         b.   Wall, projecting, canopy or freestanding signs using individual
pan channel lettering - thirty percent (30%) increase in sign area and
placement of one sign per sign wall above first story.
         c.   Wall, projecting, canopy or freestanding signs using reverse pan
channel lettering with halo illumination - a fifty percent (50%) increase in
sign area and placement of one sign per sign wall above first story.
         d.   Wall, projecting, canopy or freestanding signs with external
illumination using gooseneck or similar fixtures (not including cabinet signs)
- a fifty percent (50%) increase in sign area.
      4.   Review Criteria: Signs eligible for design incentives shall comply
with the following criteria:
         a.   The design represents a creative design in which sign colors,
materials, design, size, height, placement, illumination, and number of signs
are appropriate and compatible with the buildings, structures, and other
features on the site.
         b.   Nonconforming signs and sign support structures on the building
and property shall be removed.
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023)
10-6-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND SIGN PLANS APPROVED UNDER PRIOR CODE:
   A.   Legal Nonconforming Signs: A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall
be removed or shall comply with the current sign standards when any one of the
following conditions occurs:
      1.   Whenever the property's use is discontinued or changed;
      2.   Whenever a site plan is submitted for changes to the site
improvements such as additional parking area, reconfigured landscaping, or
building additions;
      3.   Whenever fifty percent (50%) or more of the total area of the sign
has changed. Periodic changes to changeable copy and electronic message signs
are exempt;
      4.   Whenever the sign is damaged more than fifty percent (50%) of its
total replacement value or sign area, or the sign is destroyed or becomes
obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance of the Municipality or
to the extent that the sign becomes a hazard or a danger;
      5.   Whenever there is a request for a building permit to make
improvements to the facade of the building on which the nonconforming sign is
located; or
      6.   Whenever public improvements are made, or are planned to imminently
be made in the right-of-way or City property and such improvement is or will be
affected by the location of the sign.
   B.   Modifications To Existing Structural Support(s) Of Nonconforming Signs:
Modifications to existing structural supports of nonconforming signs that
require a permit are not allowed, except to bring the signs into conformance
with the current sign standards.
   C.   Sign Plans Approved Under Prior Code:
      1.   Continuation Of Nonconforming Signs: Signs approved under prior
codes, including master sign plans, but not complying with current sign
standards, are nonconforming. Existing signs may continue under the provisions
regarding maintenance and enforcement.
      2.   Exception: Signs approved as part of a master sign plan which has
not lapsed under prior codes but not yet installed may be installed up to only
one year from the adoption of this Development Code.
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023)
10-6-9: SIGN INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE, AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Conformance To Building Code Required: All signs and sign structures
shall conform to this chapter and other provisions of this Code.
   B.   Inspections And Engineering Design:
      1.   All signs shall be subject to inspection by the appropriate agents
of the City for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Footing and foundation inspections are required for all permanent
freestanding signs. Any permanent freestanding sign over six feet (6') in
height requires engineered plans stamped by an Idaho licensed structural
engineer.
      3.   Any sign that projects over a pedestrian area or any public right-
of-way requires engineered plans stamped by an Idaho licensed structural
engineer.
   C.   Signs With Electrical Wiring - Conformance To Electrical Code: All
signs containing electrical wiring are subject to the provisions of the
Electrical Code, as adopted by the City.
   D.   Maintenance Required: All signs shall be maintained and shall be kept
in good repair.
   E.   Signs Believed Unsafe - Authority To Require Certification Of Safety:
When, in the opinion of the City, reasonable cause exists that a proposed or
existing sign structure is unsafe, the applicant shall furnish a certificate
from a registered structural engineer certifying its safety.
   F.   Abandoned Or Inoperable Signs And Sign Support Structures: Unused or
abandoned signs and sign support structures shall be removed within ninety (90)
days following the termination of the reason for the sign, except for historic
signs on historic landmark properties.
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023)
10-6-10: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or employee or agent,
to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign or cause or permit the same to be
done in violation of this chapter.
   B.   Signs placed in the right-of-way contrary to this chapter are a
violation of this Development Code and the City may remove such illegal signs
without notice.
   C.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating or permitting a violation of
this chapter commits a separate offense for each day or part of a day after a
written warning has been sent and a ten (10) day compliance deadline has past,
and the violations exists. Notice is sufficient if sent by mail to the address
listed in Binghanm County records. (Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-
2023; Ord. 2264, 3-4-2025)
10-6-11: DOWNTOWN SIGN DESIGN STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Downtown Sign Design Standards Adopted: The downtown sign design
standards are hereby adopted and on file in the City. In the event of a
conflict between the downtown sign design standards and this section, this
section shall govern. In the event of a conflict between the downtown sign
design standards and other provisions of this chapter, the downtown sign design
standards shall govern.
   B.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of the downtown sign design
standards is to promote economic vitality and enhance property values and the
visual environment in the downtown, protect and promote the historic character
of the downtown through appropriate sign design, and encourage unique,
creative, and innovative signs that are compatible and coordinated, making the
downtown more unified.
   C.   Downtown Design Board (DDB): If created by City Council, the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   Composition: The City Council may create a Downtown Design Board
(DDB). If the City Council does create such a board, the DDB shall be composed
of those appointed by City Council to serve as the voting members of the DDB
Board of Directors (DDB Board). The DDB bylaws, to be adopted, may provide that
the DDB Board is comprised of seven (7) voting members appointed by the City
Council and two (2) ex officio members. The bylaws shall also provide that one
DDB Board member is a member of the City Council, and the remaining board
members are people who reside in, or represent businesses located in, the
downtown area.
      2.   Executive Director: The Executive Director ("Director") of the DDB
shall be the person appointed by the DDB Board, with approval by the City
Council, to be the Executive Director of the DDB. This officer is an employee
and the Chief Executive Officer of the DDB and has general supervision over its
functions, and is not a member of the DDB Board.
      3.   Design Advisory Committee: The DDB shall appoint a Design Advisory
Committee (DAC) to advise the DDB and the Director on any sign- or other
design-related matters at the request of the DDB or the Director.
   D.   Downtown Sign Compliance Certificate Required: The City shall not issue
a sign permit under this chapter for display within the downtown area unless it
has received a certificate of compliance with the downtown sign design
standards pursuant to this chapter. No such certificate of compliance shall be
issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the proposed sign meets the
requirements of the downtown sign design standards. All sign and face changes
in the downtown area, except changeable copy changes on marquee signs and
handbill display changes, require a new sign permit, including a new
certificate of compliance. Minimum submittal requirements and applications for
compliance certificates are available at the City offices. Fees for compliance
certificates shall be established, and from time to time revised, by resolution
of the DDB.
   E.   Exemptions: Any permit exempt from the permit requirements of this
chapter is also exempt from this section. Any permanent window sign to be
displayed in the downtown area, or any changes to such a window sign requires
DDB approval.
   F.   Certificate Procedure:
      1.   Application Submittal And Review:
         a.   For all signs subject to review under the downtown sign design
standards, an application shall be submitted to the Director at the DDB
offices.
         b.   The Director shall review the application for completeness and
conformity with the downtown sign design standards. The Director may request
individual written comments from DAC members at any time, without convening the
full DAC.
      2.   Director Action: Within seven (7) days of the DDB's receipt of a
complete application, the Director shall take one of the following actions:
         a.   Approve a certificate of compliance for the application, with or
without conditions.
         b.   Deny a certificate of compliance for the application.
         c.   Request an advisory opinion from the DAC. An opinion shall issue
only if it is approved by majority vote, and shall be supported by written
findings. The DAC shall issue its opinion within seven (7) days of the
Director's request, and the Director shall take action within seven (7) days
thereafter. After receiving such an opinion, the Director shall have options
listed in subsections F2a, F2b and F2d of this section.
         d.   Refer the application to the DDB. In this case, the DDB shall
decide, by majority vote, at the next regular monthly DDB meeting, but in no
event more than forty five (45) days after the DDB's receipt of the complete
application, whether the application conforms to the downtown sign design
standards, and accordingly whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
a certificate of compliance for the application. A tie vote of the DDB results
in a denial.
      3.   Notice To Applicant: The Director shall send written notice to the
applicant within seven (7) days of any decision to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the certificate, or refer the application to the DDB.
      4.   Appeal: The applicant may appeal to the DDB a Director's decision to
approve with conditions or deny a permit application by letter to the Director
within fourteen (14) days of the Director's decision. In such case, the DDB
shall review the Director's decision de nova under the procedure provided in
subsection F2d of this section. On appeal, the DDB shall decide whether to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit. No appeal is permitted
from a DDB decision, except as provided by State law.
      5.   Waiver Of Appeal: The applicant may waive appeal rights in writing
to expedite the City's decision making process on the sign permit.
   G.   Modifications: The applicant may request a modification, a right to
deviate from the downtown sign design standards, in a letter with the
application stating all reasons for the modification. For any application
requesting such a modification, the Director shall first obtain an advisory
opinion from the DAC pursuant to subsection F2c of this section. Otherwise, the
process shall be as stated in subsection F of this section. The Director or DDB
shall approve a certificate of compliance, with or without conditions, for an
application requesting modifications only if each deviation from the downtown
sign design standards meets either the criterion in subsection G1 of this
section or all criteria in subsections G2 through G4 of this section, as
follows:
      1.   Special circumstances exist on the subject property such that the
strict application of the downtown sign design standards would result in undue
practical difficulties for the applicant.
      2.   The modification is consistent with the purposes of the downtown
sign design standards and will not adversely impact surrounding properties.
      3.   The modification represents a creative alternative design in which
sign colors, materials, design, size, height, illumination, and number of signs
are appropriate and compatible with the buildings, structures, and other
features on the site.
      4.   The proposed signs will not negatively affect the visual character
of the area, cause future modification requests, or contribute to degradation
of the visual environment through sign proliferation.
(Ord. 2182, 5-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2239, 6-6-2023)
CHAPTER 7
PARKING LOT MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
10-7-1:    Parking Lot And Landscaping Maintenance
10-7-2:    Notice To Abate
10-7-3:    Removal Of Debris Or Repair Of Areas; Cost Of Lien
10-7-4:    Penalty
10-7-1: PARKING LOT AND LANDSCAPING MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The property owner(s) and/or tenant(s) shall have a continued
obligation to maintain the required landscaping and buffering elements,
publicly accessible parking lot surfaces, private access drives as provided,
and all striping, signing, etc. in good condition.
      1.   Landscaping shall be kept alive and maintained in a healthy and
orderly manner. No litter or debris shall be allowed to accumulate on or around
parking lots or landscaping areas.
      2.   Publicly accessible parking lot surfaces shall be kept free of
holes, pot holes and substantial deterioration.
      3.   Striping shall be clearly visible.
      4.   Parking lot directional signs shall be kept in place and clearly
legible.
   B.   Publicly accessible parking areas for five (5) or more spaces shall be
marked with paint lines, curbs, or in some similar manner approved by the
planning and zoning commission and shall be maintained in a clearly visible
condition.
   C.   The mayor shall have the authority to prohibit the use of the area for
parking purposes unless and until proper maintenance, repair or rehabilitation
is affected.
(Ord. 2276, 9-2-2025)
10-7-2: NOTICE TO ABATE:
   The city shall notify any owner of property herein described to remove or
otherwise correct the objectionable matters herein legislated against, which
notice shall be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such
owner, as listed within the Bingham County property tax records, notifying him
that he has a period of ten (10) days from and after receipt of such notice
within which to correct or otherwise remove the objections set forth in said
notice.
(Ord. 2276, 9-2-2025)
10-7-3: REMOVAL OF DEBRIS OR REPAIR OF AREAS; COST OF LIEN:
   Upon failure of the owner of said premises to comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter, then and in that event the city shall have the
right to remove such objectionable matters and/or repair such areas and assess
the cost thereof against the premises abutting the parking lots and/or
landscaping areas. The city will invoice the owner of said premises a
reasonable dollar amount for the repair and maintenance. In the event said
invoice is not paid within thirty (30) days, the city shall have the right to
assess the cost against the property as a municipal property tax as set forth
herein. Such assessment shall be certified to the county assessor or other
proper county official having charge of the making of such assessment roll, and
such assessment shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the
same manner as other municipal taxes are collected. The assessment of costs
against the property shall not prohibit the city from also pursuing criminal
remedies as set forth in this section.
(Ord. 2276, 9-2-2025)
10-7-4: PENALTY:
   Unless otherwise stated herein, a violation of any provision in this chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. 2276, 9-2-2025)
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose And Authority
11-1-3: Definitions
11-1-4: Prior Rights And Permits
11-1-5: Other Laws; Private Restrictions
11-1-6: Zoning Maps
11-1-7: Enforcement
11-1-8: Penalty
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be cited as the CITY OF BLACKFOOT ZONING ORDINANCE, and shall
also be known as title 11 of this code. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.1)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the city as follows:
   A.   To protect property rights and enhance property values.
   B.   To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to
the public at a reasonable cost.
   C.   To ensure that the economy of the state and localities is protected and
enhanced.
   D.   To ensure that the important environmental features of the state and
localities are protected.
   E.   To encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry and mining
lands for production of food, fiber and minerals.
   F.   To encourage urban and urban type development within incorporated
cities.
   G.   To avoid undue concentration of populations and overcrowding of land.
   H.   To ensure that the development of land is commensurate with the
physical characteristics of the land.
   I.   To protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and
disasters.
   J.   To protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
   K.   To avoid undue water and air pollution. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.2)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, each of the terms defined shall have the meaning given
in this section, unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context.
All words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the
singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the singular,
unless the natural construction of the sentence indicates otherwise; the word
"building" shall include the word "structure"; and the word "shall" is
mandatory, not directory.
ACCESS: The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have
safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property, use or parking
space.
ACCESS AISLE: An accessible pedestrian space between elements, such as parking
spaces, seating and desks that provides clearances appropriate for use of the
elements by physically disabled people.
ACCESSIBLE: Describes a site, building, facility, or a portion thereof, that
can be approached, entered and used by physically disabled people.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous, unobstructed path connecting all accessible
elements and spaces in a building or facility. Exterior accessible routes may
include parking access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps and lifts.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See definition of Building, Accessory.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
premises that does not alter the essential characteristic of the use considered
as a whole and as related to other uses permitted in the same district.
ACCESSWAY: An unobstructed way of specified width containing a drive or roadway
that provides vehicular access within a mobile home park and connects to a
public street.
ADMINISTRATION, PLANNING: See definition of Director, Planning.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: Any premises in which the dissemination, sale or rental of
books, magazines, newspapers, movie films, videotapes, devices, slides or other
photographic or written reproduction showing specified sexual activities: a)
human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and b) explicit
acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy is conducted as a
principal use of the premises, or as an adjunct to some other business
activity, but which constitutes the primary or a major attraction to the
premises. This definition does not apply to the availability for sale of any
material displayed in such a way that only the name of the material appears to
the public and does not include specified sexual activities on either cover of
the material that is open to public viewing.
ADULT DAY FACILITY: Any facility where adults regularly receive care,
maintenance and supervision, unaccompanied by a guardian or custodian,
regardless of whether the facility provides any instruction. The use excludes:
a) care of operator's legal wards or relatives; b) occasional personal guests;
and c) any facility providing overnight custodial services for lodging and/or
boarding.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: Any premises in which motion pictures, slides,
videotapes or similar photographic reproductions showing specified sexual
activities: a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; b)
explicit acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy are shown to
an audience that pays a fee or other consideration for the viewing. Such a use
is regarded as the principal use of the premises.
ADULT PERFORMANCES BUSINESS: Any premises in which primary entertainment
consists of the actions or performances of actors, employees or other persons
portraying conduct described in the definition of "adult bookstore", and in
which such entertainment is the principal use of the premises or an adjunct to
some other business activity, but which constitutes the primary or a major
attraction to the premises, and wherein fees of any kind are charged, and where
such entertainment is conducted on a regular basis. Such a use is to be
regarded as a principal use for the purposes of the regulations contained in
this title.
AGRICULTURE: Tilling of soil, aquaculture, raising crops, livestock, farming,
dairying and animal husbandry, including all uses customarily accessory and
incidental thereto; but excluding hogs, slaughterhouses, fertilizer works,
boneyards and commercial feedlots.
AIR RIGHTS: The rights to use the space above a property as a separate
negotiable part of the property that can be sold or leased independently. The
air rights can be utilized in two (2) ways: a) for a separate development over
and above the existing use or structure; or b) as transferable development
rights for development above another property. Air rights projects often
involve the utilization of surplus air space above public or quasi-public
structures such as streets, highways, railroads and railroad yards. The
technique of transferring air rights to another property is sometimes utilized
to preserve historic landmarks in densely occupied urban areas. Condemnation or
purchase of air rights is also used to preserve approach safety for designed
areas around airports.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water that is used or intended for use by aircraft
and including the necessary appurtenant structures or facilities located
thereon.
ALLEY: A public way providing the secondary means of access to abutting
property and not intended as a traffic thoroughfare.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change, other than incidental repairs, that would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams and girders.
ALTERNATE HEARING PROCEDURE: In the event a hearing request would involve
notification of two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, notice
of such application and hearing thereon may be given in lieu of notice by mail,
in the following manner: by commercial advertisement published for three (3)
consecutive issues in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation
within the city, the first of such publications not to be less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the date set for hearing on said application, which
advertisement shall not be less than three inches by six inches (3" x 6") in
size.
ANNEXATION: The process by which the city's corporate boundary is expanded to
incorporate additional property pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-222.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure that is
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit, including complete
kitchen and sanitary facilities permanently installed.
APARTMENT, HIGH RISE: A multiple-family building having floors used for human
occupancy located more than seventy five feet (75') above the lower level of
fire department vehicle access.
APPEAL: A request for a review of any decision or interpretation of any
provision of this title.
AREA OF CITY IMPACT: Idaho Code section 67-6526, the local planning act,
requires that cities and counties adopt a map identifying an area of city
impact within the unincorporated area of the county. The area of city impact
shall be defined considering the trade area of the city, geographic factors and
areas that can be reasonably expected to be annexed to the city in the future.
The enabling legislation provides three (3) options of planning and regulating
development within the area of the city impact, including exclusive use of the
city plan and ordinances, exclusive uses of the county plan and ordinances, or
application of any mutually agreed upon plan and ordinance.
ATTACHED: Anything physically connected to a building or structure so as to
become an integral part thereof. The term includes components of a structure
joined together by a common wall, floor or ceiling or a fully enclosed hallway.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Premises used primarily for the retail sale and
delivery to the vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and lubrication oils, tires and
incidental vehicular accessories, and providing vehicular lubrication and
related services, including minor motor vehicle repairs.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed
buildings, on which one or more motor vehicles not in operating condition are
standing more than thirty (30) days or on which used motor vehicles, or parts,
thereof, are dismantled or stored.
AWNING: A projecting cover extending over a door, window or wall section with
supports attached to the building and used as cover, protection, or as
decoration.
BACKYARD COMPOSTING: The activity of decomposing organic matter generated on
any area of land or lot by a homeowner, tenant, occupant or property owner.
Backyard composting shall process materials generated primarily on site.
Backyard composting shall be operated in a nuisance free manner. No commercial
purpose may be associated with backyard composting.
BALCONY: A platform enclosed by a parapet or a railing, projecting from an
exterior wall of a building and open to the sky.
BASEMENT: The story or level of a building that is partially or totally below
ground level.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: A type of hotel providing overnight accommodations
and breakfast food service. If designed to accommodate twelve (12) or fewer
guests, it shall be considered a type of boarding or rooming house rather than
a hotel.
BLOCK: The space along one side of a street between the two (2) nearest
intersecting streets, or between an intersecting street and a right of way,
waterway or other similar barrier, whichever is lesser, excluding alleys.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of House, Boarding Or Rooming.
BOOKSTORE, ADULT: See definition of Adult Bookstore.
BUFFER AREAS (ZONES): A parcel of land established to separate incompatible
adjacent land uses, such as a commercial use and a residential use. The area
may be only ten feet (10') to twenty five feet (25') wide, and include walls,
fences, screen plantings, or earthen mounds (berms) to insulate the adjoining
properties from noise, traffic or visual intrusions. Some ordinances require
commercial and industrial districts to install a buffer area wherever the
property line abuts a residential district. The term may also be used more
broadly to describe any zone that separates two (2) unlike zones, such as a
transitional multiple-family or professional business zone between the central
business district and a single-family zone. (Related term: Transitional Uses.)
BUILDABLE AREA: The space within the setback lines remaining on a lot after the
minimum open space requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the
land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings, that
is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building that is subordinate to, and the use of which is
incidental to, that of the principal building or use on the same lot; but not
including any building containing a "dwelling unit", as defined in this
section.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building enclosed by a permanent roof and by
exterior walls pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building located on its own lot and physically separated
from other buildings by required yards and/or open space.
BUILDING, EXISTING: Any building erected prior to the effective date hereof, or
one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
BUILDING, GOVERNMENT: A building owned or used by the Federal, State, County or
City government, or any political subdivision, agency or instrumentality
thereof.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building that does not conform to the requirements
of this title.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot upon which it is situated. Every dwelling in any residential district is a
principal building.
BULK: The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of buildings
and other structures as to size, height, coverage, shape, location of exterior
walls in relation to lot lines, to the centerlines of the streets, to other
walls of the same building and to other buildings or structures; and to all
open spaces relating to the building or structure.
BUSINESS: The purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction involving the
handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or
livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, offices,
recreation or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use for offices or
professions and trades rendering services.
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT: Idaho Code section 50-2601 et seq., authorizes
incorporated cities to create business improvement districts. The purpose of
these districts includes the creation and maintenance of parking facilities,
operation of transportation services, general physical improvements and the
general promotion of retail trades and/or public events held within the
districts. The City may levy special assessments on all benefiting businesses
located within the district in order to finance eligible activities.
CANOPY: A permanent rooflike shelter extending from part or all of a building
face and constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass, fabric or
plastic.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP): A community plan that matches the costs of
future projects such as water, sewers, roads and schools to anticipated
revenues. It is a governmental timetable for constructing permanent
improvements and includes timing of the projects, their costs and the methods
for financing. CIPs are usually prepared for five (5) or six (6) years, updated
annually and coordinated with the comprehensive planning process. (Related
terms: Comprehensive Plan, functional plans.)
CARPORT: A structure open on at least two (2) sides used to house or protect
motor vehicles that are owned or operated by the occupants of the principal
building.
CELLAR: A storage room or rooms located under the main floor or floors of a
building and which are partly or totally below ground level.
CHILDCARE FACILITY:
   A.   Any facility, where the owner intends to run a childcare facility and
receives monetary income as compensation where children regularly receive care,
maintenance and supervision, usually unaccompanied by the child's parents,
guardian or custodian, and regardless of whether the facility does or does not
provide any instruction. Preschools are classified as childcare facilities.
      1.   Exclusions - A childcare facility does not include locations being
used for the following purposes:
         a.   The sole care of the operator’s children (whether related by
blood or marriage) or legal wards;
         b.   Personal guests;
         c.   Any home, place or facility providing overnight custodial
services for lodging and/or boarding for the occupants therein;
         d.   A facility used for children aged twelve (12) years and over.
   B.   There are three (3) types of childcare facilities, all requiring a
conditional use permit:
      1.   Family Daycare Home: A childcare facility for six (6) or fewer
children. They are an accessory use to residential uses and require a home
based business permit.
      2.   Group Daycare Facility:
         a.   A childcare facility for seven (7) to twelve (12) children within
the operator's residence.
         b.   A childcare facility for seven (7) to twelve (12) children that
is outside the operator's home.
      3.   Child Daycare Center:
         a.   Small Child Daycare Center: A childcare facility providing for
thirteen (13) to twenty (20) children.
         b.   Large Child Daycare Center: A childcare facility providing for
twenty-one (21) or more children.
CITY: The City of Blackfoot, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the City.
CLINIC: A building, other than a "hospital", as defined in this section, used
by two (2) or more licensed physicians for the purpose of receiving and
treating patients.
CLUB, FRATERNAL: The social use of a building or of any premises by a nonprofit
association, where such use is restricted to enrolled members and their guests.
COMMERCE: See definition of business.
COMMERCIAL AREA: An area for the purchase, sale, exchange or other transaction
involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity
for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings,
offices, recreation or amusement enterprises or professions and trades
rendering services.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
COMMON AREA: Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated for
public use, that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of
the residents of the development. It may include complementary structures and
improvements.
COMMON DRIVEWAY: A shared access that serves up to four (4) separate single-
family residential parcels, each having public street frontage.
COMPOST: A humuslike material, produced from composting, that has been
stabilized to a degree that is potentially beneficial to plant growth and that
is usable as a soil conditioner, topsoil, growing medium amendment, or other
similar uses to buffer the soil pH, improve soil aggregation and tilth, reduce
erosion, enhance water infiltration and retention, increase soil porosity and
aeration, slow the rate of temperature change in soil, provide food for soil
microorganisms, or enhance availability of micronutrients in soils.
COMPOSTING: See definition of backyard composting.
COMPOSTING FACILITY: A facility where organic matter that is derived primarily
from off site is to be processed by composting and/or is processed for
commercial purposes. Activities of a composting facility may include
management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing, storage,
marketing or use of compost.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A policy plan for the Blackfoot area known as the Blackfoot
Comprehensive Plan, that has been adopted by the City Council.
CONDEMNATION AND EMINENT DOMAIN: A. Condemnation is the taking of private
property by a government unit for public use when the owner will not relinquish
it through sale or other means. The power to take the property is based on the
concept of eminent domain, which is the legal right of a government to acquire
or "take" private property for public use or public purpose upon paying just
compensation to the owner.
   B.   Condemnation is commonly used to acquire property for highways, street
widening, parks and utility construction. Property has also been condemned
under eminent domain powers for private use in the public interest, such as
urban renewal where the public purpose is the removal of dilapidated
structures.
   C.   The terms "eminent domain" and "condemnation" are often used
interchangeably, although condemnation may also mean the demolition by public
authority of an unsafe structure where no compensation is paid to the owner and
the condemned property does not become public land. (Related terms: Inverse
Condemnation, Taking, Police Power.)
CONDITIONAL USE: A use which, because of special requirements or
characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after
review by the planning and zoning commission and granting of conditional use
approval imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use compatible with
other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. Conditional uses are issued
for uses of land and, unless otherwise specified or restricted as a condition,
may be transferable from one owner of the land to another.
CONDITIONAL USE CONCEPT PLAN: A concept conditional use is an approval of a
generalized development plan that does not include the details of proposed
development. A detailed conditional use approval must be obtained for each
phase of a concept conditional use.
CONDOMINIUM: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely
by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the
undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
CONSENT: A written document executed by the landowner or the landowner’s
authorized agent explicitly agreeing to annexation. Written consent to annex
lands must be recorded in the county recorder’s office to be binding upon
subsequent purchasers, heirs, or assigns of lands addressed in the consent.
CONSENT, IMPLIED: Valid consent to annex is implied for the area of all lands
connected to a water or wastewater collection system owned and operated in its
entirety by the city if the connection was requested in writing by the owner or
the owner’s authorize agent prior to July 1, 2024, or if the connection was
completed before July 1, 2008.
CONTIGUOUS: Sharing a common border. For the purpose of this section, land is
not contiguous if the only common border is along a shoestring connection.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
COVERED PARKING: A carport that provides full overhead protection from the
elements with ordinary roof coverings. Canvas, lath, fiberglass, plastic and
vegetation are not ordinary roof coverings and cannot be used in providing a
covered parking space.
DAYCARE CENTER: See definitions of Childcare Facility and Adult Day Facility.
DEDICATION: A. The assignment of private property to a specific public use and
its acceptance for such use by the appropriate governmental agency. Dedications
for roads, parks, open space, school sites and other public uses are
increasingly required as a condition for approval of a development. Where costs
are high or a "fee simple" transfer is unnecessary, the owner may, where
authorized, dedicate a portion of the rights through an easement or other form
of less than fee transfer. Such easements may include dedications for scenic,
nonaccess, pedestrian, utility, drainage, floodway, air space and other
purposes.
   B.   Where land dedication is not appropriate, a cash payment (fee in lieu
of) may be authorized. Both are methods to assess the developer with more of
the public costs of the new development. (Related terms: Easement, Conservation
Easement, Open Space, Covenant, Dedication, Development Impact Fees,
Subdivision Regulations.)
DEDICATION (FEE IN LIEU OF): As provided in the definition of "dedication", as
defined in this section, this technique involves cash payments as a substitute
for dedications that are authorized under subdivision regulations when
requirements for mandatory dedication of land are inappropriate. The conditions
under which such payments will be allowed must be spelled out in the
regulations. (Related terms: Dedication, Subdivision Regulations, Development
Impact Fees.)
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
   A.   When a piece of property is purchased, the purchaser also acquires a
number of rights toward the use of that property, such as the right to build a
home, a right to develop commercially, a right to remove gravel or other
materials, a right to use water, a right to raise crops. Which of these rights
are purchased with each property depends on the zoning, other applicable
regulations and the terms of the purchase.
   B.   Acquisition of development rights is a method for controlling urban
growth and conserving natural resources. Essentially, the concept involves
buying the future development potential for land and permits the owner to
continue the existing use, usually agriculture, in urbanizing areas. Hence, a
county or city could acquire a fee or any lesser interest necessary
(development rights) to conserve selected open space, timber or agriculture
lands. A county or city could also acquire fee title to such property and
convey or lease the property back to its original owner using covenants or
contractual agreements to limit the future use of the property. (Related term:
Transferable Development Rights.)
DIRECTOR, BUILDING: The director of the building department of the city.
DIRECTOR, PLANNING: The director of the city planning and zoning department
charged with the administration of the city planning and zoning documents. The
director is directly responsible to the mayor and city council. This definition
includes the planning director's designated representative. This definition
also includes references to the planning administrator, zoning administrator,
planning official, zoning director and other similar titles. The planning
director may be the same as the building director.
DISPLAY, OUTDOOR: Placement of items out of doors, i.e., not within a building,
for show and sale to the general public. Examples of this use include garden
supplies placed in commercial parking lots by home and garden stores, or other
stores, during spring and summer time. This use is distinct from outdoor
storage of items or of junk elsewhere defined and may be temporary in nature.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the incorporated portion of the city for which
the use regulations are uniform, as set forth herein.
DRIVE-UP WINDOW: An establishment, whether it be the primary or an accessory
use, other than automobile service station or parking lot, that is designed to
accommodate the motor vehicles of patrons in such manner as to permit the
occupants of such vehicles, while remaining therein, to make purchases or
receive services at a window or service area.
DRIVEWAY: A private access connecting a building such as a house or garage,
with a street.
DUPLEX: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which
include a separate bathroom and kitchen. The two (2) units must be able to
function as dwelling units independently of each other.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, containing one or more dwelling
units. The term "dwelling" does not include a "mobile home", "recreational
vehicle", "motel", "hotel", "guesthouse" or "boarding house", as defined in
this section.
DWELLING, COMBINED RESIDENTIAL: A detached building designed for and occupied
by two (2) families living independently of each other. Combined residential
units shall be built in accordance with the adopted building code.
DWELLING, HIGH RISE: Any structure having floors used for human occupancy
located more than seventy five feet (75') above the lower level of fire
department vehicle access.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, containing three (3)
or more dwelling units, excluding attached single-family townhouse units
located on individual lots.
DWELLING, RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE: A residential area designed for or occupied by a
single-family residence on a small acreage allowing a certain number of
livestock.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for use and occupancy by no more
than one family.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed for, or used as, a residence for not
more than one family, including all necessary household employees of such
family, and constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, with a
single kitchen permanently installed. A dwelling unit may be occupied by a
family (related by blood or marriage), or by up to five (5) unrelated
individuals. The term does not imply or include such types of occupancy as a
lodging or boarding house, club, sorority, fraternity or hotel.
EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for a specific purpose or purposes.
FEEDLOT: A lot or parcel on which livestock are fed intensively in order to
fatten for market. This definition does not include short term holding pens for
auction facilities or meatpacking establishments.
FILLING STATION: Building and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries,
tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and
where in addition the following services may be rendered and sale made, and no
other:
   A.   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and
distributor parts;
   B.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
   C.   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose, fan belts, brake
fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper
blades, grease retainers, wheel bearing, mirrors and the like;
   D.   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
   E.   Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing
materials;
   F.   Greasing and lubrication.
FIRING RANGE: A controlled area of activity, indoors or outdoors, specifically
designed for the discharging of firearms at targets.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross or horizontal areas of the several
floors, including the exterior walls of a building or portion thereof.
FLOOR AREA, NET: That portion of the gross floor area of the building occupied
by listed use or uses, and shall include hallways, storage and packaging space,
dressing or rest rooms and laboratory or work rooms; provided, however, that
floor space within the building reserved for parking or loading of vehicles,
and basement space used only for building maintenance and utilities, shall be
excluded.
FRONTAGE: A piece of land that fronts on a city street or other designated
right of way.
FUNERAL HOME, MORTUARY: A facility in which deceased human bodies are kept and
prepared for burial or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An enclosed accessory building or an accessory portion of a
principal building designed for shelter or storage of vehicles, owned or
operated by the occupants of the principal building.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, except a private garage, used or
designed to be used for the storage of motor vehicles. (See definitions of
Repair, Major Motor Vehicle and Repair, Minor Motor Vehicle.)
GRADE: The elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior wall of a building or structure. If a berm has been created adjacent
to the structure, or if the structure is built on top of a berm, grade will be
considered the lowest point of the berm.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED: The curb line grade at the lot lines established by the
city engineer, or otherwise established by law.
GUESTHOUSE: A detached structure, being an accessory to a single-family
dwelling with not more than two (2) bedrooms, having no kitchen facilities and
which shall be used or designed for use primarily by guests or servants for
sleeping quarters. A guesthouse shall not be used as a rental dwelling.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A type of housing for persons convicted of nonviolent crimes who
are in the later stages of serving a sentence and are being transitioned back
into free society.
HANDICAPPED HOME: Homes for the mentally or physically handicapped with no more
than eight (8) resident patients and no more than two (2) resident staff, where
all state and local licensing and standards of operation requirements have been
met.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of
the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the average
height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
HELIPAD, HELIPORT: A level area or pad where helicopters land and take off,
either at ground level or on a rooftop.
HOME, CONVALESCENT: A building housing any facility, however named, whether
operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide skilled nursing
care and related medical services for two (2) or more individuals suffering
from illness, disease, injury or deformity, or requiring care because of old
age.
HOME, NURSING: See definition of Home, Convalescent.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling
unit, including, but not limited to, handicrafts, dressmaking, millinery,
laundering, preserving, printing and/or graphic arts or desktop publication,
offices, teaching of classes, and other like occupations.
HOME, REST: See definition of Home, Convalescent.
HORTICULTURE: The activity of growing fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental
plants.
HOSPITAL: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of
facilities for the medical or surgical care of patients twenty four (24) hours
a day. The term "hospital" does not include clinic, convalescent or boarding
homes, or any institution operating solely for the treatment of mentally ill
persons, drug addicts, liquor addicts or other types of cases necessitating
forcible confinement of patients.
HOSPITAL, LARGE ANIMAL: Any building, or portion thereof, designed or used for
the care of the following animals: cattle, sheep, goats, horses, hogs, large
exotic cats or similar animals.
HOSPITAL, SMALL ANIMAL: Any building, or portion thereof, designed or used for
the care of the following animals: dogs, cats, primates, birds, waterfowl,
reptiles, rodents and similar animals.
HOTEL: A building containing six (6) or more bedrooms where overnight lodging
without individual cooking facilities is offered to the public for
compensation, primarily for the accommodation of transient guests.
HOUSE, APARTMENT: Any building, or portion thereof, that is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or that is occupied as the
home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each
other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats
and apartments.
HOUSE, BOARDING OR ROOMING: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where
lodging or lodging and meals are provided for compensation to six (6) to twelve
(12) persons who are not members of the householder's family.
HOUSING, ELDERLY: Multiple-family housing constructed for occupancy by elderly
individuals or families (households with 1 or more members 65 years of age or
older).
INFILL SITE: Any vacant lot or parcel within developed areas of the city, where
at least eighty percent (80%) of the land within a three hundred foot (300')
radius of the site has been developed, and where water, sewer, streets, schools
and fire protection have already been developed and are provided. Annexed areas
located on the periphery of the city limits shall not be considered as infill
sites.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof, on which more than two (2) dogs
or five (5) cats, or a combination of two (2) dogs and five (5) cats, are
maintained, harbored, possessed, bred, or cared for. This definition shall not
apply to a litter of puppies or a litter of kittens under six (6) months of age
and kept and housed with the mother.
KITCHEN: Any room or portion thereof within a building designed and intended to
be mainly used for cooking or preparation of food.
LANDOWNER: A person owning real property in the area proposed for annexation.
LANDSCAPING: The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas with materials
and treatment generally including naturally growing elements such as grass,
trees, shrubs, and flowers. This treatment may also include the use of logs,
rocks, fountains, water features and contouring of the earth.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: An open off street hard surfaced area of land other
than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the standing,
loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue
interference with public streets and alleys.
LOT: A unit of land constituting a part of a block of a recorded subdivision so
recorded for transfer of ownership.
LOT AREA: The square footage enclosed within the boundary of a lot or parcel.
The flagpole or stem portion of a flag lot shall not be considered part of the
lot area. Lot area shall be determined exclusive of land that is used for
public or private streets, highways, alleys, roads and rights of way.
LOT, AUTOMOBILE SALES: Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles,
trailers, mobile homes or trucks in operating condition are displayed in the
open for sale or trade, and where no repair or service work is done.
LOT, CORNER: A lot that is bounded on two (2) or more sides by street lines;
where the angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or buildings
and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The distance between front and rear lot lines measured in the mean
direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTED: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two (2)
parallel or approximately parallel streets. On a double fronted lot, both
street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT, FLAG: A lot or parcel of land that includes a narrow projection or
"flagpole" to the public right of way. The flagpole, which shall not be
considered as part of the lot area, serves as a private or privately shared
access to the buildable area of the lot or parcel.
LOT, FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot that abuts a public right of way or other
access.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE: The boundary property line encompassing a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A. The front lot line for a regular shaped lot is the property
boundary that abuts a public or private street. The front lot line for an
undeveloped corner lot is either one of the property boundaries that abuts a
public or private street, as selected by the property owner.
   B.   The front lot line for a flag lot may be either: 1) the closest line,
parallel or most nearly parallel to the public or private street, at the end of
the flagpole; or 2) a line perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the public
or private street, at the end of the flagpole, depending upon which orientation
provides for the closest matching of like yards of adjoining properties.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary line of a lot that is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the rear lot line, the
following shall apply:
   A.   In the case of a lot with a rear boundary formed by a single line that
is parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line, such rear boundary is the
rear lot line.
   B.   In the case of a lot with a rear boundary formed by two (2) or more
lines, the rear lot line shall be a line at least ten feet (10') in length
within the lot, furthest removed from and most parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any property line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING: A lot of record that does not meet the dimensional
requirements of this title.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that has been recorded in the records of Bingham County.
LOT OF RECORD, ORIGINAL: A lot or parcel created and of record prior to the
effective date of the original zoning ordinance of the city.
LOT, PARKING: An open, graded and surfaced area, other than a street or public
way, to be used for the storage, for limited periods of time, of operable
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and available to the public,
whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT WIDTH (AVERAGE): A. The distance between the side lot lines, measured in
one of the following manners, whichever is applicable:
1. In the case of a regular shaped lot, the width shall be measured along the
front lot line; or
2. In the case of an irregular shaped lot, the width shall be the average
distance between the side lot lines, with the average distance to be measured
at ten foot (10') intervals for the first one hundred feet (100') of the lot
depth beginning at the front lot line; or
3. In the case of regular shaped flag lot, the width shall be measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the inside end of the flagpole; or
4. In the case of an irregular shaped flag lot, the width shall be the average
distance between the side lot lines, with the average distance to be measured
at ten foot (10') intervals for the first one hundred feet (100') of the lot
depth beginning at the front lot line.
   B.   In addition to the above manners of measurement, in no instance shall
the dimension of a lot at its front setback line be less than the minimum
average lot width required for the zoning district in question.
LOUNGE: See definition of Tavern.
MANUFACTURE: An area for the manufacturing, assembling, fabricating,
processing, packing, repairing or storage uses that have not been declared a
nuisance by statute, resolution of the planning and zoning commission or city
council, or any court of competent jurisdiction.
MAPS, ZONING: The map or maps incorporated into this title designating zoning
districts.
MOBILE HOME, CLASS A: A manufactured dwelling unit with all the following
characteristics:
   A.   Mass produced in a factory.
   B.   Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation
and use when connected to required utilities.
   C.   Built on a chassis.
   D.   Designed for long term residential use by a family, containing kitchen,
bath and sleeping facilities.
   E.   Multisectional with total square footage minimum equal to one thousand
(1,000) square feet.
   F.   Constructed after June 15, 1976, and certified as meeting the mobile
home construction and safety standards of the U.S. department of housing and
urban development.
   G.   Has a nonmetallic, wood shake or asphalt shingle roof with a minimum
pitch of two to twelve (2:12) (2 inches of rise to 12 inches of run).
   H.   Has an eave of a minimum of six inches (6"), or eave and gutter
combination with a minimum of six inches (6") attached to the entire perimeter
of the roof.
   I.   Has horizontal metal lap siding, vinyl siding, simulated wood siding or
wood siding.
   J.   Has a foundation that is similar in appearance and durability to
masonry foundation of site built dwellings and that surrounds the entire
perimeter of the structure, completely enclosing the space between the siding
and the finished grade.
   K.   Is permanently affixed, with running gear and towing hitch removed, and
set upon a foundation base having an anchoring system that is totally concealed
under the structure.
   L.   Meets all standards and regulations contained in section
11-4-15 of this title.
MOBILE HOME, CLASS B: Manufactured building with the following characteristics:
   A.   Mass produced in a factory.
   B.   Designed and constructed for transportation to a site for installation
and use when connected to required utilities.
   C.   Built on a chassis.
   D.   Designed for long term residential use by a family, containing a
kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities.
   E.   Does not meet all definitional characteristics described in the
definition of Mobile Home, Class A, subsections E through K.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot or parcel of land, developed as a
planned unit development and designed primarily for placement of mobile homes
located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a permanent or semipermanent
basis.
MODEL HOME: A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a residential
development under construction; said home being used for on site sales and not
for general real estate business. Also termed a subdivision sales office.
MORTUARY: See definition of Funeral Home, Mortuary.
MOTEL: A building, or group of buildings, on the same premises, whether
detached or attached, containing sleeping or dwelling units independently
accessible from the outside, with garage space or parking space located on the
premises and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. The term includes, but is
not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as auto courts,
motor lodges, tourist courts or by any other title or sign intended to identify
them as providing lodging to motorists.
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKED, ABANDONED: Any automobile, truck or other vehicle that is
inoperable and to which no repair or maintenance is attempted for any period
exceeding thirty (30) days.
NET LEASABLE FLOOR AREA (Applying To Parking Ratio): The entire square foot
area of floor space of a building that is enclosed and subject to heating and/
or air conditioning, less:
   A.   Any space used and occupied by central mechanical and/or electrical
equipment, elevators, escalators, conveyors, dumbwaiters, lifts, chutes, trash
disposal units, and fuel storage spaces; and
   B.   Public rights of way and other similar enclosed spaces open to the
public, such as public washrooms, corridors, stairwells or elevator lobbies.
NUISANCE: Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of property,
endangers personal health or safety, or is offensive to the senses may be
considered a nuisance. There are many types of nuisances, and the law can be
invoked to determine when, in fact, a nuisance does exist and should be abated.
Nuisance law forms part of the basis for zoning. The separation of uses through
zoning (e.g., industrial from residential areas free from pollution, noise,
congestion and other characteristics of industrial areas) had its origins in
nuisance law.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT: The approval to occupy a building that is granted after
zoning and building requirements and conditions of approval, if any, have been
met or bonded for.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE: An open area for passive or active recreation developed,
designated and protected for the benefit and private use of the employees or
residents within a planned development or residential development.
ORGANIC MATTER: Plant materials, including leaves, grass, brush, weeds, tree or
shrub trimmings, garden debris, and vegetative kitchen garbage.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of equipment, materials, supplies, etc., in an
outdoor area as an accessory to a primary use.
PARCEL: Contiguous land in the ownership of one person or party.
PARK: A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for
outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
PARK, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any area, tract, plot or site of land whereupon two
(2) or more recreational vehicles or travel trailers are placed, located and
maintained for temporary living quarters on a temporary basis.
PARKING COURT: A clustered parking area located off the main roadway and near
the building that it serves. Except for emergency vehicles, parking court
design precludes cut through vehicular travel.
PARKING LOT: See definition of Lot, Parking.
PARKING SPACE: Usable space within a public or private parking area or a
building, that meets the parking standards of this title, exclusive of access
drives, aisles or ramps, for the storage of one passenger automobile or
commercial vehicle.
PATHWAY: Any sidewalk, route, lane, path, corridor, open space or trail
designated to move people by nonmotorized means for transportation or
recreation, including micropathways.
PERSON: A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also
includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land that is planned and developed as a unit
under single ownership or control, containing one or more uses, buildings and
common open space or recreational facilities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A. This is a development that is preplanned in
its entirety with the subdivision and zoning controls applied to the project as
a whole rather than to individual lots. Therefore, densities are calculated for
the entire development, usually permitting a tradeoff between clustering of
housing and provision of common open space.
   B.   The PUD is usually characterized by a unified site design and while
most commonly used for residential development, the technique is also
frequently applied to other forms of development such as shopping centers and
industrial parks. Occasionally, a PUD may have a mix of uses.
   C.   The PUD also refers to the process of site plan review, in which public
officials have considerable involvement in determining the nature of the
development. This technique includes aspects of both subdivision and zoning
regulations. A PUD is usually administered through a special permit. (Related
terms: Flexible Zoning, Cluster Development, Mixed Use Zoning, Zero Lot Line.)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The entity performing planning and zoning
duties for the city, which may be the city council itself, a planning
commission, a zoning commission, or a planning and zoning commission.
PLAT: A map representing a subdivision of a parcel of land into lots, blocks
and streets or other divisions and dedications. A preliminary plat is an
approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision. A final plat is the final
drawing for records with the county auditor and containing all requirements set
forth in applicable state and local regulations. Plats are regulated by Idaho
Code section 50-1301 et seq., and local ordinances. (Related terms:
Subdivision, Short Plat, Lot Of Record, Site Plan.)
POLICE POWER: The right of government to regulate personal conduct and the use
of land in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, as provided
by the state constitution. The use of police power by a unit of government must
follow "due process" and be "reasonable", but the government does not have to
pay compensation for related losses. In this last respect, it differs from the
government's use of the power of eminent domain that involves taking of
property where just compensation is mandatory. The degree to which such
exercise of police power becomes, in effect, a taking of property, is a
question of longstanding and has arisen again lately in connection with the
growth management and environmental controls being imposed by many communities.
(Related terms: Zoning, Condemnation And Eminent Domain, Taking, Inverse
Condemnation.)
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings, as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
QUASI-PUBLIC: Is essentially a public use, although under private ownership or
control.
QUORUM: A majority of the authorized members of a board or commission.
RECREATION CENTER: A commercial or nonprofit bowling alley, roller rink or
similar use designed for amusement or recreation.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): A portable vehicle or structure used primarily for
hobbies, vacations, extended travel, camping, sports and aquatic use. RVs may
be self-propelled, towed or transported by trailer. RVs may include, but are
not limited to, motor homes, converted buses, camping and travel trailers,
light duty trailers and transporters, horse and cattle trailers, boats, rafts
and their trailers, and off street vehicles such as snowmobiles, dune buggies,
all- terrain vehicles (4 wheels) and any type of three (3) or four (4) wheeled
sport racing/drag vehicle.
REPAIR: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for
the purpose of its maintenance. The words "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply
to any other change in a structure such as would be required by additions to or
remodeling of such structure.
REPAIR, MAJOR MOTOR VEHICLE: General repair, engine, transmission or drive
train rebuilding, repair or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor
vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair; and overall painting of motor vehicles or trailers.
REPAIR, MINOR MOTOR VEHICLE: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor
service to motor vehicles, but not including any operation specified under the
definition of Repair, Major Motor Vehicle.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, among others, such uses
as cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom and dining room.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right to pass over the property of others. It usually refers
to the land required for the traffic lanes, plus shoulders on both sides of
highways, railroads, bikeways and hiking trails. In short, it is the land
purchased by or dedicated to the public for traffic purposes. The pathways over
which utilities and drainageways run are usually referred to as easements.
(Related terms: Easements, Dedication.)
SCHOOL: An institution conducting regular academic instruction at elementary,
secondary and college levels.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE COMMERCIAL: A school, regardless whether it is operated for
profit, primarily devoted to instruction, in dance, music, drama, art,
languages, martial arts training, etc.
SCHOOL, TRADE OR VOCATIONAL: An institution or facility conducting instruction
in the technical or trade skills, such as business, secretarial training,
medical or dental technician training, beauticians, barbers, electronics,
automotive technician training, etc.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE: A building or group of buildings, or portions thereof,
that are designed or used exclusively for storage of excess property of an
individual, family or business. Buildings are divided into individually
accessed units. This shall not be deemed to include the day to day operations
of businesses of any kind.
SERVICE DRIVE: A privately owned and maintained drive that provides access to
parking lots and spaces, loading spaces, drive-up windows or other areas that
need a provision of access. A service drive meets the zoning ordinance
specifications and is approved by the planning director or the planning and
zoning commission. Types of service drives include: individual private
driveways, common driveways, entry drives, drive-through lanes and parking
aisles.
SERVICE STATION: Premises where gasoline, motor oils, lubricants and grease for
the operation of motor vehicles are retailed directly to the public on the
premises, and including tires, accessories, services and minor motor vehicle
repairs.
SETBACK: The space on a lot or parcel required to be left open and unoccupied
by buildings or structures, either by the requirements of this title, or by
delineation on a recorded subdivision map.
SHOPPING CENTER, REGIONAL: A group of commercial establishments, planned,
developed, owned and managed as a unit related in location, size and types of
shops to the trade area that the unit serves. It provides on site parking in
definite relationship to the type and size of stores. The major tenant is one
or more full line department stores. Size of the center can range between three
hundred thousand (300,000) square feet to over one million (1,000,000) square
feet of gross leasable area.
SIGN: Any display or device consisting of attached or painted letters, symbols
or designs, and including any moving parts, lighting, sound equipment,
framework, background material or structural support, which display or device
is intended to communicate business identification, an advertisement,
announcement, direction or other message or attract, distract, hold, direct or
focus public attention. "Sign" shall not include commodities and their attached
labels and price tags.
SITE PLAN: A scale drawing showing proposed uses and structures for a parcel of
land as required by the applicable regulations. It includes lot lines, lot
area, streets, parking spaces, private roadways, walkways, topographic
features, reserved open space, buildings and other structures, major landscape
features, and the location of proposed utility easements. A site plan is a more
detailed representation of a proposed development than shown in a plan, and may
also include density and statistical data. (Related terms: Plat Site Plan
Review, Planned Unit Development, Flexible Zoning.)
SITE PLAN REVIEW: The process whereby local officials, usually the planning and
zoning commission and staff, review the site plan of a development to assure
that it meets the stated purposes and standards of the zoning and other
regulations, provides for necessary public facilities, such as roads and
schools, and protects and preserves desirable features and adjacent properties
through the appropriate location of structures and the use of landscaping. Site
plan review is required in connection with many flexible land use regulation
techniques. The process often allows considerable discretion to be exercised by
local officials since it may deal with hard to define aesthetic and design
considerations. (Related terms: Site Plan, Flexible Zoning, Planned Unit
Development.)
SPECIAL EXCEPTION OR SPECIAL USE: A special approval granted by the city
council for a use that is not identified as an allowed or conditional use
within the zoning district, subject to conditions set forth in this title.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or structure for the keeping of
one or more horses or cows, owned and used by the occupant of the premises and
not for remuneration, hire or sale.
STABLE, RIDING: A building or structure used or designed for the boarding or
care of riding horses.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above grade,
such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
STREET: The public right of way or private property and related improvements
that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. The term
"street" includes also the terms highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designed to carry through traffic with limited
access to abutting property. Direct lot access is restricted.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designed to intercept traffic from the local street
system and carry it to the nearest arterial street, while providing limited
access to abutting property. Direct lot access is restricted.
STREET, FRONTAGE: A minor street, parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street, that has the primary purpose of providing access to abutting
properties.
STREET, LOCAL: A street designed to provide service to abutting property
usually with unrestricted access.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street approved by the city council in conformance with the
subdivision ordinance, that provides both access and street frontage for
individual lots. Private streets are owned and maintained by private
individuals or entities. Governmental entities do not own nor maintain private
streets.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, except fences, that requires
permanent location on the ground or is attached to something having location on
the ground.
SUBDIVISION: The result of an act of dividing an original lot, tract or parcel
of land into more than two (2) parts for the purpose of transfer of ownership
or development; that shall also include the dedication of a public street and
the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery. However, this definition shall not
apply to any of the following:
   A.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat that does not
reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of each
building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not change the
original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat.
   B.   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a
court decree for the distribution of property.
   C.   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation, as
defined and allowed in Idaho Code.
   D.   Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan.
   E.   The acquisition of street rights of way by a public agency in
conformance with the comprehensive plan.
   F.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundaries that does not result in the change of the present land usage.
(Related terms: Subdivision Regulations, Plat.)
SUBJECT LAND: An area proposed for annexation by a city pursuant to this
section.
SWIMMING POOL: Any facility intended for swimming or recreational bathing that
contains water over twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) deep. This includes
inground, aboveground and onground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
TAVERN: A building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the
premises, not including restaurants where the principal business is serving
food.
TEMPORARY: As this term is used in this title with respect to a temporary
structure, building or use, shall mean a period of six (6) months. Such period
may be extended by the appropriate official, commission or governing board for
up to one year. Extensions of over one year require city council approval,
after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission.
THEATER: A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage
productions, performances or motion pictures.
THEATER, ADULT: See definition of Adult Motion Picture Theater.
TOWNHOUSE: An attached single-family dwelling unit, located on a platted lot
and for which the individual owner may acquire title to the unit and lot.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A vehicular portable structure designed as temporary living
quarters for travel, recreational and vacation uses.
TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designed, arranged or
intended or for which it is occupied, maintained or leased.
USE, SEASONAL: Any temporary use where products are sold in connection with a
holiday season or the growing season. Examples of these uses shall include, but
are not limited to, the following: produce stands, fireworks stands, pumpkin
lots, and Christmas tree lots.
USE, TEMPORARY: Any activity on a site approved by the director for a limited
time of operation. Such uses include seasonal or holiday sales of products or
placement of temporary structures on a lot incidental to construction occurring
on the lot, outdoor display of garden and related supplies, and/or any other
uses which the director may deem as able to function without permanent permits
for a short time as allowed by this code.
UTILITY, PUBLIC: Any person, company or municipal department, duly authorized
to furnish to the public, under public regulations, electricity, gas, steam,
telephone, transportation or water.
VARIANCES: A modification of the requirements of this title as to lot size, lot
coverage, lot width, street frontage, setback requirements, parking
requirements, loading requirements, or other ordinance provisions affecting the
size or shape of a structure, or the placement of the structure upon lots, or
the size of lots.
WAREHOUSE: A building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of merchandise,
stock, vehicles, furnishings, supplies and other trade or business material.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a principal building or group of
buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward,
except as otherwise permitted in this title, and that extends along a lot line
and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed
buildings, on which two (2) or more motor vehicles not in operating condition
are standing more than thirty (30) days, or on which used motor vehicles, or
parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
YARD, FRONT: The yard extending across the full width of the lot adjacent to
the front street line. For corner lots, either street may be designated as the
front. Once chosen, the front yard designation and associated rear and side
yards may not be changed. Building design shall match respective yard types.
YARD, JUNK: An outdoor space where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are stored or handled, including automobile wrecking yards, and yards for used
building materials and places or yards for storage of salvaged building and
structural steel materials and equipment; excluding yards or establishments for
the sale, purchase or storage of used cars or machinery in operable conditions,
and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a part of a
permitted manufacturing operation on the same premises.
YARD, REAR: The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal
building.
YARD SALE: The on premises sale of new or used household or related goods from
a residential lot. Also known as a garage sale or rummage sale. The duration of
yard sales shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours. A maximum of two (2) such
sales shall be permitted from any one residence within the same calendar year.
YARD, SIDE: The yard lying between the nearest wall of the principal building,
accessory building and side lot line, and extending from the front yard or the
front lot line to the rear yard.
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: Single-family dwellings arranged on individual lots
as either detached structures with one or more sidewalls on a side property
line or attached sidewalls on a property line.
ZONE: See definition of district.
ZONING CERTIFICATE: A notation attached to a building permit, occupancy permit
or business license, or issued separately by the City to certify that the
building, structure, use or occupancy specified is in compliance with relevant
zoning regulations and approvals.
(2003 Code § 11-01-03; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2110, 10-2-2012, eff. 10-2-2012;
Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017; Ord. 2265, 3-4-2025; Ord. 2281, 11-4-2025)
11-1-4: PRIOR RIGHTS AND PERMITS:
The enactment of this title shall not terminate or otherwise affect rights,
variances and permits acquired or authorized under the provisions of any
section hereby revised or repealed. Where a building permit and a zoning
certificate have been issued for the construction of a building or structure,
and for an authorized use and occupancy thereof, in accordance with the law
prior to the effective date of this revised ordinance, said building or
structure may be completed in conformance with the approved plans and on the
basis for which the said building permit and zoning certificate had been
issued, provided construction of said building or structure is commenced within
sixty (60) days of the effective date of the building permit and diligently
prosecuted to completion. Detailed conditional use applications based upon
concept plans approved prior to the effective date of this revised ordinance
shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this revised ordinance. Upon
showing an undue hardship, an applicant may be allowed by the planning and
zoning commission to process such detailed conditional use applications under
the terms and conditions of the previous ordinance. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.4)
11-1-5: OTHER LAWS; PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this title to impair or interfere with other regulations
of effective state or local law, or with private restrictions on the use of
land improvements and structures. Where this title imposes greater restrictions
than that imposed by other law or by private restrictions, this title shall
prevail. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.5)
11-1-6: ZONING MAPS:
Zoning maps for the city may be obtained through planning and zoning
department, or the building department. (2003 Code § 11-01-02.3)
11-1-7: ENFORCEMENT:
All departments, officials and employees of the city vested with the authority
to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this title, and shall issue
no permit or license for uses, buildings or purposes in conflict with the
provisions of this title. Any such permit or any business license issued in
conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. The director
of the building department shall maintain a zoning enforcement program to
promote the abatement of violations of this title and to provide assistance in
the prosecution of such violations. It shall be the duty of the director of the
building department, or his authorized agent, to enforce the provisions of this
title pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving,
conversion, alteration, addition, location or razing of any building or
structure. (2003 Code § 11-01-01.6)
11-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed,
continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any violation of any of the
provisions of this title, such person shall be subject to penalty as provided
in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (2003 Code §§ 11-01-02.1, 11-01-02.2; amd.
2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-2-1: Building Department
11-2-2: Building Director
11-2-3: Planning And Zoning Commission
11-2-4: City Council
11-2-5: Certificate Of Occupancy
11-2-6: Hearing Examiner
11-2-7: Adoption Of Impact Area Map
11-2-1: BUILDING DEPARTMENT:
   A.   General Duties: It shall be the duty of the building department to
provide for the administration of this title and the comprehensive plan. The
department shall serve as the technical staff on planning and zoning issues
before the city council and the planning and zoning commission. The department
shall assist the public in compliance with zoning requirements, including the
interpretation of this title and with the preparation and submittal of zoning
applications.
   B.   Specific Duties And Responsibilities: The specific duties and
responsibilities of the department shall be as follows:
      1.   Provide and maintain a continuing program of public information on
zoning matters and provide planning and zoning assistance to the public as
requested.
      2.   Review the standards for those allowed uses that must meet specific
standards prior to approval and provide notice to the applicant and adjacent
property owners, as herein specified.
      3.   Accept, evaluate and submit a written report, including findings of
fact and recommended conclusions of law, to the appropriate authority for all
commission and council level applications.
      4.   Review building permit applications for zoning compliance.
      5.   Provide public notice of all public hearings held for the review of
planning and zoning applications.
      6.   Maintain records and files of all zoning applications and of the
hearings and actions thereon.
      7.   Maintain a vigorous zoning enforcement program to decrease
violations of this title.
      8.   Prepare an annual annexation program for submittal to the planning
and zoning commission and the city council.
      9.   Initiate revisions and amendments of this title and the
comprehensive plan.
      10.   Prepare special studies and plans as appropriate.
      11.   Make interpretations of the provisions of this title and the
comprehensive plan.
      12.   Coordinate zoning and development applications with the appropriate
city departments and agencies.
      13.   Determine the classification of all uses not specifically
identified in this title. (2003 Code § 11-02-01)
11-2-2: BUILDING DIRECTOR:
   A.   Authority Of Decisions: The building director shall be responsible for
all decisions and actions of the building department. The decisions of the
building director shall be final unless an appeal is made as herein provided.
   B.   Determination Of Use: Whenever there is doubt as to the classification
of a use not specifically mentioned in this title, the determination shall be
made by the building director. Such determination shall be based upon a
detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be
required. The building director shall make such investigations as are necessary
to compare the nature and characteristics of the proposed use with those of
listed uses in the various districts, and shall determine that the use is, in
all essentials, pertinent to the objectives of this title, of the same
character as a use listed as allowed or as a conditional use permitted in one
of such specified district or districts. No use added by such administrative
determination shall permit in any district a use that is a conditional use in
such districts or in any less restricted district, nor shall same permit a use
that is an allowed use in a less restrictive district. The determination of the
building director shall be final, unless an appeal is made as herein provided.
(2003 Code § 11-02-02)
   C.   Enforcement Assistance: It shall be the duty of the director of the
building department, or an authorized representative, to help enforce the
provisions of this title, including the following:
      1.   Assist in the enforcement of this title, including making effective
response to citizen inquiries, comments and complaints, and aid in the
prosecution of violators;
      2.   Conduct inspection of buildings and structures in relation to:
         a.   Location on the property with respect to property lines, and
taking appropriate enforcement or remedial action;
         b.   Identifying or assisting in the identification of illegal uses;
         c.   Helping ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this
title and with any applicable conditions of approval from a conditional use
approval.
      3.   Maintain permanent records of all inspections and determinations
made involving the inspections of buildings, structures and the use of lands to
promote continuous compliance with the terms of this title. (2003 Code § 11-02-
03)
11-2-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Members; Appointment: The planning and zoning commission shall consist
of a total of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by
the city council.
      1.   Each commission seat will be for a three (3) year term, with two (2)
commissioners appointed in years one and two (2) and three (3) commissioners
appointed in year three (3).
      2.   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. Should a seat
become vacant mid-term, a new commissioner will be appointed to fill the
remaining term of the vacant seat.
      3.   No person shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms
without specific concurrence by two-thirds (2/3) of the city council adopted by
motion and recorded in the minutes.
   B.   Chairperson: The planning and zoning commission shall appoint one of
its members as chairperson of the commission, who shall hold office as
chairperson for such term as the commission shall so designate, and the
commission may elect a co-chairperson, who shall act as chairperson in the
absence of the chairperson of the commission. (2003 Code § 11-02-04)
   C.   Duties, Jurisdiction And Authority: The duties, jurisdiction and
authority of the planning and zoning commission are: (2003 Code § 11-02-04)
      1.   To prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the future
development of the city and review the provisions of said plan from time to
time, and make a report of its findings and recommendations to the city
council;
      2.   To receive and act upon applications for actions authorized and
specified herein;
      3.   To hold public hearings on applications for annexation, plan
changes, special exceptions, conditional uses, sign exceptions and proposed
zoning reclassifications; provided that this obligation may be delegated to a
hearing examiner, in the manner hereinafter prescribed;
      4.   Following public hearings, to approve, deny or modify conditional
use applications, and to submit to the city council as required hereby, a
report and recommendation on each reclassification, comprehensive plan change,
special exception or annexation application;
      5.   To review and take action on variance applications and appeals of
administrative decisions;
      6.   On its own initiative, to petition the city council requesting an
amendment of this title or the comprehensive plan; provided, that it shall
first have held public hearings thereon in the manner prescribed;
      7.   To initiate, from time to time, a review of the provisions of this
title, and to make a report of its findings and recommendations to the city
council.
   D.   Procedures:
      1.   Compensation; Meetings; Quorum: The members of the planning and
zoning commission shall serve and act without compensation, except that the
city council shall allow their actual and necessary expenses and the city shall
provide the necessary and suitable equipment and supplies to enable the
commission to properly transact and perform its business. A majority of the
members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The commission shall hold meetings each month for at
least nine (9) months of the year, and at such other times as may be called by
the chairperson or by the mayor.
      2.   Meeting Attendance: The members of the commission are expected to
attend scheduled meetings. Members may be excused from attendance due to
personal illness, family emergency or out of town business trips. Commission
members whose attendance at scheduled meetings fall below sixty percent (60%)
without cause within any given year may be removed from the commission by the
mayor, with the approval of the city council. (2003 Code § 11-02-04)
      3.   Deadline For New Applications: The cutoff date for new applications
shall be four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the last Monday of the month before the
next month's regularly scheduled meeting. (2003 Code § 11-02-04)
      4.   Divisions Of Commission And Conduct Of Proceedings: In addition to
its existing jurisdiction and authority, and subject to all provisions of this
code, the commission is authorized by its order to divide the members thereof
into as many divisions (each to consist of not less than 2 members) as it may
deem necessary, and that may be changed from time to time. Any division of the
commission shall have authority to hear and report to the full commission any
of the commission's work, business or functions prescribed by ordinance and
assigned or referred to a division of the commission in the manner and in the
time as required by pertinent provisions of this code.
      5.   Reconsideration: Reconsideration may be entertained on any action
taken by the commission after a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
commission membership, provided such action is taken prior to action by the
city council.
      6.   Conflict Of Interest Prohibited: A member of the commission shall
not participate in any proceeding or action when the member or his employer,
business partner, business associate, or any person related to him by affinity
or consanguinity within the second degree has an economic interest in the
procedure or action. Any actual or potential interest in any proceeding shall
be disclosed at or before any meeting at which the action is being heard or
considered.
      7.   Cases Heard By Hearing Examiner: In cases where a public hearing has
been conducted by a hearing examiner, the proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law, as well as the proposed order, shall be filed in the
building department, which shall forward it to the planning and zoning
commission for a final ruling on the matter. The commission's review shall be
limited to the record created by the hearing examiner and may be placed on the
consent agenda unless a request to review the hearing examiner's decision is
filed pursuant to the provisions of subsection
11-2-6C of this chapter. In such case, review shall be de novo. (2003 Code §
11-02-04) (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2201, 3-2-2021)
11-2-4: CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall be the final legislative authority on all zoning and
land use decisions within the city. The building department staff and all
commissions and committees function at the direction of the city council.
Planning and zoning duties and authority of the city council are as follows:
   A.   Confirm Appointments: The city council must confirm the mayor's
appointments to the memberships of the planning and zoning commission and the
position of hearing examiner.
   B.   Decide Applications: After receiving a recommendation from the planning
and zoning commission, the city council must decide the following applications:
amendments to the comprehensive plan, amendments to this title, annexations,
rezones, special exceptions and subdivision plats.
   C.   Appeals: The city council shall hear and decide appeals of decisions of
the planning and zoning commission. (2003 Code § 11-02-05)
11-2-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Occupancy Certificate: Before occupying or using the property included
in the application, the applicant must obtain an occupancy or use certificate
from the building department. Such department shall inspect the site to verify
that the work has been completed in accordance with the specifications set
forth by the commission, committees or staff in the approval of the
application.
   B.   Temporary Certificate: Should there be substantial performance of the
conditions specified in the approved application, the building department may
issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for one hundred eighty (180) days,
contingent upon the applicant posting a performance bond or other acceptable
surety in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of required
improvements. After the above mentioned one hundred eighty (180) days have
passed, the site shall again be inspected, and if compliance has not been
achieved, the building department shall recommend revocation of the certificate
of occupancy or use and forfeiture of the bond or surety to the city.
   C.   Hearing: Upon such recommendation, the commission shall set the
recommendation for public hearing, with fifteen (15) days' prior written notice
to the applicant/holder. The purpose of the hearing is to determine if
revocation and forfeiture are justified. At such hearing, the applicant/holder
shall be granted the opportunity to show cause why the recommendation of the
building department should not be followed. After receipt of all information,
the commission shall affirm, deny or modify the recommendation of the building
department and mail written notice of their decision to the applicant/holder.
The decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city
council in accordance with the requirements of section
11-3-7 of this title. (2003 Code § 11-02-06)
11-2-6: HEARING EXAMINER:
   A.   Appointment; Duties:
      1.   This section authorizes the planning and zoning commission to use
the services of a hearing examiner pursuant to the authority granted in the
local planning act, specifically Idaho Code section 67-6520.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the examiner to review information provided
by staff and other available sources and to hear public testimony on matters
referred to the examiner. At the conclusion of each hearing, the examiner shall
render a decision or recommendation, as appropriate, and provide findings of
fact and conclusions of law, and a final order.
      3.   Persons filling the position of hearing examiner shall be
experienced in the field of planning and zoning, and shall have legal training
and/or experience. The hearing examiner shall be appointed, and may be
dismissed, and compensation shall be determined, by the mayor with the consent
of the city council.
      4.   The hearing examiner may conduct hearings on the following matters:
         a.   Variances;
         b.   Special exceptions;
         c.   Floodplain review;
         d.   Certain conditional use permits, including planned developments
of less than two (2) acres, agricultural uses, childcare facilities, drive-
through facilities, lot reduction in MDR1 zones, parking reductions, and
nonconforming uses;
         e.   Subdivision plats pursuant to title 12 of this code; and
         f.   Such other matters as the commission may deem appropriate,
including, but not limited to, sign applications.
      5.   The director of the building department will assign matters to a
hearing examiner or to the commission. Generally, applications of a routine
nature that do not require important policy decisions may be heard by a hearing
examiner.
   B.   Procedure Before Hearing Examiner:
      1.   A hearing examiner shall prepare and conduct public hearings as
required by the terms of this title, according to a schedule determined and
approved by the director of the building department. The timing of all hearings
and the public notice provided for such hearings shall be in conformity with
this title and with the local planning act. In addition, notice shall be
provided to the registered neighborhood groups in which the property is
located.
      2.   All applications shall be filed with the building department and
that department shall schedule hearings before the examiner where appropriate,
and provide notice as required by this title and the local planning act. Upon
receipt of an application, the building department staff shall investigate and
analyze such application, and shall forward all such information to the hearing
examiner. A copy of the staff report shall be available for public review at
least five (5) working days prior to the hearing.
      3.   The hearing examiner shall review all information supplied by the
department prior to the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with subsection
11-3-6D of this title and applicable state law. Reasonable time limits may be
established at the outset of the hearing, and both applicant and other members
of the public must be given an opportunity to be heard. All hearings shall be
recorded.
      4.   At the completion of each hearing, the hearing examiner shall
produce a report that includes a summary of such testimony, findings of fact
and conclusions of law, and a final order. Such report shall be filed at the
building department. It shall be available to the applicant and the public no
more than ten (10) working days after the close of each hearing.
   C.   Appeal Of Hearing Examiner's Order:
      1.   An appeal of the hearing examiner's order must be filed with the
building department within fourteen (14) days after the order is filed.
      2.   The basis for appeal must be stated in the petition.
      3.   The procedure for appeals of hearing examiner's orders is set forth
in section
11-3-7 of this title.
(2003 Code § 11-02-07; amd. Ord. 2280, 10-7-2025)
11-2-7: ADOPTION OF IMPACT AREA MAP:
There hereby is adopted as the official map identifying an area of city impact
within the unincorporated area of Bingham County, Idaho, that certain map, as
amended from time to time, by reference made a part hereof as though set forth
herein at length. The area identified on said map as being within the impact
area shall henceforth be deemed to be the impact area of the city, as
contemplated by Idaho Code section 67-6526. (2003 Code § 2-03-08)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-3-1: Purpose
11-3-2: Applications; Building Permit Required
11-3-3: Fees
11-3-4: Determination Of Level Of Review
11-3-5: Levels Of Zoning Review
11-3-6: Public Hearings
11-3-7: Appeals
11-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to define the general procedures for obtaining
zoning approval from the city, the various levels of zoning review and the
requirements for public notice and conduct of hearings. (2003 Code § 11-03-01)
11-3-2: APPLICATIONS; BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Form Of Application: Every person desiring to erect or construct a
building or other structure and every person seeking zoning approval, as herein
defined, shall submit an application to the building director on a prescribed
form, accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as approved by the city
council. Application forms shall be accompanied by supporting information as
defined by the application form and as required by the building director.
Multi-family residential site plan design, for 4 unit dwellings and above, must
include an aerial view, legal description showing existing easements and be
produced by architecture/engineering software.
   B.   Building Permit Required: A building permit is required for the
erection, construction or alteration of any structure.
   C.   Variances, Conditional Uses, Etc.: All applications for variance,
conditional use, annexation, rezone and special exception submitted for review
by the planning and zoning commission shall include documentation of the
following:
      A preapplication conference with the building department staff and
invited referral agencies must have been held not more than six (6) months, nor
less than one week prior to the submittal of the application.
(2003 Code § 11-03-02; amd. Ord. 2252, 2-6-2024)
11-3-3: FEES:
The building director shall maintain a current list of fees for all building
permits and zoning applications. The fees for building permits and zoning
applications may be revised only by the city council. Current fee schedules may
be obtained from the building department. (2003 Code § 11-03-03)
11-3-4: DETERMINATION OF LEVEL OF REVIEW:
The staff of the building department shall advise the public on the preparation
of applications. The building director shall decide the appropriate review
procedure for each application filed consistent with the requirements of this
title. The decision of the building director may be appealed to the planning
and zoning commission. (2003 Code § 11-03-04)
11-3-5: LEVELS OF ZONING REVIEW:
   A.   Level Specified: Three (3) levels of zoning review are hereby
established: administrative level, commission level and city council level. All
applications submitted to the building department shall be subject to one or
more of these reviews:
      1.   Administrative Level: There is hereby established a category of uses
that are considered to be allowed uses but for which final approval may be
withheld until certain standards and/or criteria are complied with. The
building director is authorized to review the required approval standards and/
or criteria for this category of allowed uses and issue final approval or
withhold final approval. The actions of the building director on administrative
applications may be appealed to the appropriate authority as hereinafter set
forth.
      2.   Commission Level: This level of review requires action by the
planning and zoning commission. An application and fee are required for
commission level review. Commission level decisions may be appealed to the city
council, subject to the procedures set forth in section
11-3-7 of this chapter.
      3.   City Council Level: Certain zoning applications require action by
the city council. An advertised public hearing and a recommendation from the
planning and zoning commission are required for certain city council level
review. Decisions of the city council can be appealed through the judicial
system.
   B.   Resubmittal Of Application: No application for conditional use, rezone,
annexation or variance review that has been denied by the commission or city
council, shall be resubmitted in either the same or substantially the same form
in less than one year from the date of final action thereon. (2003 Code § 11-
03-05)
11-3-6: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Certain commission and city council level zoning reviews require a public
hearing. The date for such hearing shall be established by the building
director based upon published cutoff and hearing dates for commission level
reviews. The hearing shall be held no later than forty four (44) calendar days
after acceptance of such application and shall include all necessary documents
pertinent thereto. Upon the determination of the building director, when an
application is unusually complex and requires additional review, the date for
the public hearing may be fixed no later than sixty six (66) calendar days
after receipt of such application. Deferrals due to lack of commission quorum
or a request by the applicant shall extend the time during which the hearing
must be held. Council hearing dates shall be established by the city council at
a council meeting after the commission files its recommendation with the city
clerk.
   A.   Notice And Publication Of Hearing; Criteria:
      1.   At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time
and place and a summary of the proposal shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city. A notice shall also be made available to
other newspapers, radio and television stations servicing the city for use as a
public service announcement. For conditional use applications, rezone
applications and site specific appeals, additional notice shall be provided by
mail to property owners or purchasers of record within the land being
considered; within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the
land being considered; and any additional area that may be impacted by the
proposed change as determined by the building director. Notice is deemed
sufficient if mailed to the owners of record. Only one notice need be sent to
each household if the owners of record are husband and wife. Notice shall also
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises not less than one week prior
to the hearing. Failure of the city to provide actual notice to each person so
entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid; provided, that the
city substantially complies with the notice and hearing requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   The criteria used by the building director for determining if
additional areas may also be impacted by the proposed change shall be as
follows:
         a.   The application could result in significant adverse traffic,
environmental, aesthetic, noise, pollution or population density impacts
occurring outside the minimum three hundred feet (300') notice area.
         b.   The public interest would be better served by expanding the area
to be notified. (2003 Code § 11-03-06)
   B.   Alternate Forms Of Notice: When posted or mailed notice is required to
two hundred (200) or more property owners, purchasers of record or residents,
alternate forms of notice may be provided as follows: In lieu of mailed
notices, three (3) additional newspaper notices as described above and required
notice size as specified in Idaho Code sections 67-6509 and 67-6512(c); and in
lieu of posted notice on each premises, the general area may be posted with
notice. (2003 Code § 11-03-06; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Material Changes In Proposal: Following the commission hearing, if the
commission makes a material change in the proposal, further notice and hearing
shall be provided before the commission forwards the proposal with its
recommendation to the city council. For purposes of this subsection, a
"material change" shall mean any modification of the proposal which, in the
opinion of the commission, is of such importance that the public interest will
be better served by additional notice and public hearing. At any public
hearing, the commission may order the hearing to be continued by publicly
announcing the time and place of continuance and no further notice thereof
shall be required. Failure of the city to provide actual notice to each person
so entitled shall not render any proceeding hereunder invalid; provided, that
the city substantially complies with the notice and hearing requirements of
this section.
   D.   Conduct Of Hearings: The city council, the planning and zoning
commission, the hearing examiner, or any other board or commission that
conducts public hearings under this title shall conduct said hearings in
substantial conformity with the following standards. At all such hearings:
      1.   A sign in roster shall be kept at the entrance to the hearing room
for all persons who wish to testify at the hearing on a particular application
or issue. (2003 Code § 11-03-06)
      2.   The chair of the meeting shall conduct the hearing. In order to
accommodate all participants, the chair may determine the time allotted to each
speaker. (2003 Code § 11-03-06; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   A transcribable record shall be taken and maintained.
      4.   The chair shall call upon the staff to make a preliminary
presentation of facts.
      5.   Following the close of the presentation of facts by staff, the chair
shall invite the applicant (or in the case of an appeal, the appellant) to make
a presentation of evidence to the council, commission or committee. In
situations when the council, commission or committee is acting as an appeals
body and if the appellant is not an applicant for an approval or permit, then
the chair shall call upon the applicant to present evidence to the council,
commission or committee. The applicant or appellant may, in the discretion of
the chair, be allowed up to thirty (30) minutes for the presentation of
evidence unless an extension of time is granted by the council, commission or
committee.
      6.   Every document referred to by any person during testimony (including
charts, maps, photographic evidence or any other evidence) shall be offered
into the record. Every exhibit offered shall be marked and entered into the
record of the proceeding. Such exhibits shall be maintained in the building
department during the appeal period.
      7.   After the staff presentation and testimony by the applicant (or in
the case of an appeal, the appellant) the chair shall open the hearing for
public testimony and shall invite the public to address the council, commission
or committee in the order of names found on the sign in roster. If in the
opinion of the chair the number of persons testifying is so large as to unduly
delay the process of the hearing, the chair may limit public testimony to three
(3) minutes for each member of the public. The public hearing may be continued
upon motion to a date certain that shall be announced to the public there
assembled.
      8.   During appeal hearings before council or the commission, testimony
shall be limited to those issues that were set forth in the written appeal. The
council or commission may ask questions or request information regarding
aspects of the project that were not included in the written appeal if they
desire.
      9.   All persons testifying before the council, commission or committee,
except staff, shall state, for the record, their full name and address.
      10.   Members of the council, commission or committee may question any
person who testified at any time or may, upon unanimous consent of the members
present, recall a person for further testimony.
      11.   Before the close of the public testimony, the chair shall ask if
any persons attending the hearing who did not sign the roster wish to be heard
and any such person shall be given the opportunity to testify.
      12.   At the close of public testimony the chair shall solicit comments
from staff for additional facts or clarifications as a result of the testimony
given. After comments from staff, the applicant shall be given an opportunity
to address final comments to the council, commission or committee. If the
council, commission or committee is hearing an appeal by someone other than the
applicant, the appellant shall be given an opportunity to make final statements
to the council, commission or committee. The chair may determine the time
allowed for final comments subject to the right of the council, commission or
committee to grant such additional time it deems necessary.
      13.   After all testimony, the chair shall declare the public hearing
closed and shall bring the matter back before the council, commission or
committee for discussion and action. The discussion and decision may be
deferred until another date certain that shall be then announced to the public
there assembled.
   E.   Consent Agenda:
      1.   Routine, noncontested applications may be placed on a consent agenda
by the commission in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. Only
applications that meet the following criteria shall be considered for the
consent agenda:
         a.   There has not been any written or verbal opposition to the
application.
         b.   The building staff and the applicant are in agreement on the
findings and conclusions and recommended conditions of approval.
         c.   The application complies with the city comprehensive plan and
this title as proposed, or as it will be modified by conditions of approval.
      2.   Based upon a recommendation from the building staff, the chair of
the commission, at the beginning of the public hearing, shall identify all
items proposed for the consent agenda.
      3.   The chair shall propose the following questions:
         a.   Does the commission have any questions on the application
(provide agenda number and applicant's name)?
         b.   Is there anyone present who has adverse testimony related to the
application (provide agenda number, applicant's name, and location of site)?
         c.   Is the applicant or a representative of the applicant present?
         d.   Is the applicant in agreement with the staff recommendation,
findings and conclusions, and conditions of approval?
      4.   If there is any opposition from any party regarding an application,
that item shall not be placed on the consent agenda. Once the consent agenda is
established, the commission may approve all items on the consent agenda with
one motion.
   F.   Deferral Procedure:
      1.   Applications that have been placed on the planning and zoning
commission public hearing agenda shall only be deferred by the commission. A
request for deferral may be initiated by a member of the commission, the
applicant, the building staff or the public. All deferral requests shall be in
writing. Scheduled agenda items shall only be deferred by the commission within
the public hearing.
      2.   An application shall be considered as on the agenda upon the mailing
of radius notices to impacted property owners and residents. Prior to the
placement of an application on the public hearing agenda, the applicant may
submit a request for rescheduling to the building staff. The building director
shall determine the appropriate hearing date for such requests.
      3.   Requests for deferral that are submitted prior to or at the start of
the public hearing must be ruled upon by the commission after a review of the
situation. The following guidelines should be applied to such requests for
deferral:
         a.   If the applicant and the building staff are in agreement on the
deferral including the requested length of deferral and there is no public
opposition, the commission may consider the request to be routine. Such
requests should be deferred to a date specific when possible to avoid
readvertising.
         b.   Requests for deferral of contested applications must be acted
upon by the commission after consideration of the basis for the request and
input from those present to testify. The chair shall request input from the
applicant, staff and concerned public on the requested deferral. Any member of
the public who cannot or will not return for a deferral hearing shall be
provided an opportunity to testify.
      4.   The commission may deny the request for deferral, grant a deferral
to a date specific or defer the application indefinitely. In considering an
indefinite deferral, the commission should consider the following:
         a.   Have previous deferrals been requested?
         b.   Are additional studies, redesign or other development
alternatives being considered for which the time to complete cannot be
accurately estimated?
         c.   The number of public present to testify and their input on a date
specific deferral.
      5.   The applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover the cost of
readvertising, for applications that are deferred indefinitely by the
commission, unless the commission or staff initiates the request for deferral.
Such fee shall be determined by the building director to cover the actual cost
of readvertising and mailing radius notices. (2003 Code § 11-03-06)
11-3-7: APPEALS:
Any administrative or commission level decision may be appealed to the
appropriate commission, committee or council in accordance with the procedures
established herein. All such appeals must be written, accompanied by the
appropriate fee and submitted to the building director prior to the deadlines
set forth herein. If the appeal deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, the
appeal period is automatically extended to the next workday. Each appeal must
clearly state the name, address and phone number of the person or organization
appealing and the specific issues, items or conditions that are being appealed.
   A.   Administrative Decision Appeals: Any action of the building director on
a specific administrative level application or on the general interpretation of
this title may be appealed as follows:
      1.   Interpretation Of This Title: Decisions of the building director may
be appealed to the planning and zoning commission by any person or by any
official, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by such decision.
Such appeals shall be made within ten (10) days from the date of such decision.
Upon receipt of the appeal, the building director shall schedule the appeal
before the commission at the next public hearing following the cutoff date
prior to which the appeal is filed.
      2.   Other Administrative Level Applications: Actions of the building
director on administrative level applications may be appealed to the planning
and zoning commission by the applicant or any aggrieved person within ten (10)
calendar days following the decision. Upon acceptance of the appeal, the
building director shall establish a hearing date before the commission and
shall notify the appealing party, the applicant and all property owners within
three hundred feet (300') of the property. The commission, in reviewing the
building director’s decision, may sustain, deny, amend or modify the decision
by imposing additional or different conditions and limitations.
   B.   Planning And Zoning Commission Appeals:
      1.   Procedure: Any decision of the planning and zoning commission may be
appealed to the city council by the applicant, any aggrieved person or the
building director; provided, that such aggrieved person filed a written or oral
protest with the commission at or before the public hearing, or personally
appeared and voiced a protest at the hearing, except appeals based on lack of
notice. The appealing party shall file a written notice of appeal stating the
grounds for the appeal with the building director before five o’clock (5:00)
P.M. of the tenth calendar day after the decision or determination of the
commission has been made. The building director shall ascertain that the
procedural requirements have been met, notify the city clerk, and forward all
pertinent informational material to the city council for review. An appeal may
not be withdrawn without the approval of the city council. The city council may
sustain, deny, amend or modify the appeal.
      2.   Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of an appeal of a commission level
decision stays further approvals (subdivision, building permit, etc.) on the
project, provided the appeal is received at least twenty four (24) hours prior
to any public hearing regarding the project.
   C.   Hearing Examiner Appeals: The procedure for review of the hearing
examiner’s report is set forth in subsection
11-2-6C of this title.
   D.   Motions to Reconsider: An aggrieved party to any decision of City
Council under this title shall have the right to file a motion to reconsider
within fourteen (14) calendar days of the City Council’s decision. Such
aggrieved party must have appeared and filed a written or oral protest at the
public hearing on the issue. The party seeking reconsideration shall file a
written notice specifically setting forth the objections to the decision, any
factual or legal basis for the reconsideration, and the requested relief. Upon
receipt of the request for reconsideration, and verification of all procedural
requirements being met, the City Clerk shall place the matter on the next
available City Council meeting. A timely motion to reconsider shall be a
mandatory exhaustion of administrative remedies prior to the filing of any
judicial review, declaratory judgment action, or other civil proceeding
challenging the decision at issue. (2003 Code § 11-03-07; amd. Ord. 2221, 3-1-
2022)
CHAPTER 4
USE DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SECTION:
11-4A-1: Establishment Of Districts; Official Zoning Map
11-4A-2: Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries
11-4A-3: Application Of District Regulations
11-4A-4: Schedule Of District Regulations
11-4A-5: City Residential Zones
11-4A-6: Official Schedule Of Use Districts
11-4A-7: City Use District Regulations
11-4A-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
   A.   Official Zoning Map:
      1.   The city is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the
official zoning map that, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this title.
      2.   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city. If, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Idaho Code section 67-6501,
the local land use planning act, changes are made in district boundaries or
other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be
entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been
approved by the city council, with an entry on the official zoning map as
follows: "On (date), by official action of the city council, the following
(change) changes were made in the official zoning map (brief description of
nature of change);" which entry shall be signed by the zoning administrator or
mayor and attested by the city clerk.
      3.   No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or
matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set forth in
this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons
shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
      4.   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official
zoning map that may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning
map that shall be located in the office of the city clerk, shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings
and other structures in the city.
   B.   Replacement Of Official Zoning Map:
      1.   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official
zoning map that shall supersede the prior official zoning map.
      2.   The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or
omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have
the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent
amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the
signature of the zoning administrator or mayor, attested by the city clerk, and
bearing the seal of the city under the following words:
      "Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally
destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or
amendment."
(Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4A-2: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official zone map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines. No boundary of a use district can
divide a platted line.
   C.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following such city limits.
   D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
   E.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.
   G.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances
not covered by subsections A through E of this section, the city council shall
interpret the district boundaries. (Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4A-3: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land, except as hereinafter provided:
   A.   No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and
no building, structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located.
   B.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
      1.   To exceed the existing height;
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area. A ten percent (10%)
variance of this percentage may be granted by the zoning administrator when
evidence of undue hardship is presented;
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or
open spaces. Front yard setback may average the setbacks of existing houses on
each side, unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter;
      5.   On property that has not been legally platted.
   C.   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, off-street parking, or loading space similarly required for any other
building.
   D.   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the
minimum requirements established by this chapter.
   E.   All territory that may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be zoned
by the city council with appropriate recommendations by the planning and zoning
commission at the time of annexation. (Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4A-4: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Adopted: District regulations shall be set forth in the schedule of
district regulations, hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter, and in section
11-4A-6 of this chapter. Land or premises shall be used, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, only in conformity with the regulations herein set
forth for the zones or use districts in which such land or premises is located.
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered or used,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except in conformity with the
regulations herein set forth for the zone or use district in which such
building or structure is located.
   B.   Intent: The following zoning districts are hereby established. For the
interpretation of this chapter, the zoning districts have been formulated to
realize the general purpose as set forth in this chapter and to conform with
the comprehensive plan and its stated goals and objectives. In addition, the
specific purposes of each zoning district shall be as stated. No residence or
commercial building shall be erected or moved onto any lot, tract or parcel of
land in any use district or zone adopted under the provisions of this chapter
unless said lot, tract or parcel of land has been legally platted and a
building permit is issued in accordance with the Building Code.
   C.   Interpretation:
      1.   The interpretation and application of the provisions of this title
shall be by the Zoning Administrator/Building Director. An appeal of an
interpretation of such official shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, who, unless otherwise provided, is authorized to interpret this
title, and such interpretation shall be considered final. Uses are permitted
within the various zones as described in this chapter and as otherwise provided
herein.
      2.   It is recognized that all possible uses and variations of uses that
might arise cannot reasonably be listed or categorized. Mixed uses/sites, or
any use not specifically mentioned or about which there is any question, shall
be administratively classified by comparison with other uses identified in the
zones described in this Code. If the proposed use resembles identified uses in
terms of intensity and character and is consistent with the purposes of this
title and the individual zone classification, it shall be considered as a
permitted/non-permitted use within a general zone classification, subject to
the regulations for the use it most nearly resembles. If a use does not
resemble other identified allowable uses within a zone, it may be permitted as
determined by the hearing body in public hearing as an amendment to this title.
(Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4A-5: CITY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
The official schedule of zone regulations is divided into the following use
groups: Transitional Agricultural, Rural Ranchette, Low Density Residential (1
and 2), Medium Density Residential (1 and 2), and High Density Residential (1
and 2).
   A.   Transitional Agriculture (TAG): The purpose in establishing the
Transitional Agriculture Zone is to set aside land to properly guide growth of
the fringe areas of the community deemed to be important for preservation of
rural standards. Being inside the impact area, it is assumed these areas will
someday be incorporated into the City, therefore they are transitional.
   B.   Rural Ranchette (RR): The purpose of establishing the Rural Ranchette
Zone is to promote and maintain a single-family residential neighborhood that
protects animal rights as part of allowed uses. The purpose is to preserve
areas of land where small acreage including domestic farm animals may be kept
within the City limits and the impact area. The zone also includes residential
uses for handicapped and elderly persons up to eight (8) as referenced by Idaho
Code section 67-6531.
   C.   Low Density Residential 1 (LDR1): The purpose in establishing the LDR1
Zone is to promote and maintain single-family residential neighborhoods, with
conditions favorable to family living, and to encourage the development of low-
density areas of land that are best suited for residential purposes to prevent
overcrowding of the land. The zone shall also include residence for the
handicapped or elderly up to eight (8) persons as referenced by Idaho Code
section 67-6531. The maximum allowed density is six (6) units per acre.
   D.   Low Density Residential 2 (LDR2): The purpose in establishing the LDR2
Zone is to promote and maintain single-family residential neighborhoods, with
conditions favorable to family living, and to encourage the development of low-
density areas of land that are best suited for residential purposes to prevent
overcrowding of the land. An accessory dwelling unit is allowed with a
conditional use permit (CUP). The zone shall also include residence for the
handicap or elderly up to eight (8) persons as referenced by Idaho Code section
67-6531. The maximum allowed density in LDR2 is eight (8) units per acre.
   E.   Medium Density Residential 1 (MDR1): The purpose in establishing the
MDR1 Zone is to provide low to medium density land use for one- and two-family
residential development. The maximum allowed density is fourteen (14) units per
acre.
   F.   Medium Density Residential 2 (MDR2): The purpose in establishing the
MDR2 Zone is to provide low to medium density land use for one- and two-family
residential development. An accessory dwelling unit is allowed with a CUP. The
maximum allowed density is twenty eight (28) units per acre.
   G.   High Density Residential 1 (HDR1): The purpose in establishing the
Multi-Family Residence Zone is to provide for medium density land use and to
encourage more compact residential development. The maximum allowed density is
thirty (30) units per acre.
   H.   High Density Residential 2 (HDR2): The purpose in establishing the
Larger Multi-Family Residence Zone is to provide areas of land for high density
residential development, also in which small professional offices and certain
other type of semi-commercial uses may be located. The maximum allowed density
is dependent on an approvable development plan and is not measured in units per
acre. (Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4A-6: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USE DISTRICTS:
   Schedule of Residential Dimensional Standards (March 28, 2023)
Zone                 TAG RR   LDR1 LDR2 MDR1 MDR2 HDR1 HDR2
Previous Zone Titles RA  R1-R R1   New  R2   New  R3   New
Zone          TAG      RR   LDR1  LDR2      MDR1      MDR2      HDR1   HDR2
Previous Zone RA       R1-R R1    New       R2        New       R3     New
Titles
Density/units 2        6    6     8         14        28        30     30 or
per acre                                                               more
Min lot size  1/2 Acre †  7,000 5,445 ft2 6,000 ft2 5,000 ft2 21,780 32,670
(area)                      ft2                                 ft2    ft2
Min lot size  1/2 Acre †  8,000 6,445 ft2 7,000 ft2 6,000 ft2 22,780 33,670
corner (area)               ft2                                 ft2    ft2
Min lot width 75'      75'  75'   60'       60'       60'       60'    60'
Min lot depth 60'      140' 60'   60        60'       60'       60'    60'
Min lot       75'      75'  75'   60'       60'       60'       60'    60'
frontage
Min front
yard setback  30'      30'  30'   30'       30'†    30'†    20'† 20'†
primary
structure
Min rear yard
setback:      20'      20'  20'   20'       20'       20'       20'    ***
primary
structure
Min side yard
setback       10'      5'   5'    5'        5'        5'        5'     ***
primary
structure**
Primary
corner front  30'      30'  30'   30'       30'       30'       20'† †
yard setback
Primary
corner rear   20'      20'  5'    †       5'        20'       20'     
yard setback
Min side yard
setback
corner        20'      20'  20'   20'       20'       20'       20'    ***
intersecting
street
Min front
yard setback: †      30'  †   †       †       †       †    †
accessory
building(s)
Min rear yard
setback:      20'      20'  5'    5'        5'        20'       20'    ***
accessory
building(s)**
Min side yard
setback:      †      5'   5'    5'        5'        5'        5'     ***
accessory
building(s)**
Max height
primary       60'      60'  40'   40'       40'       50'       60'    60'
building
Max height
accessory     60'      60'  25'   25'       25'       30'       40'    40'
building(s)
Max lot
coverage      25%      40%�40%†40%†    40%†    50%†    45%    50%
primary
building
Max lot
coverage by   30%      30%�30%†30%†    30%†    30%†    30%    30%
accessory
building(s)
Min
greenspace    †      N/A  60%   60%       40%       40%       25%    20%
area
(landscaping)
Max lot
coverage of   †      N/A  †   †       †       †       †    ***
hard surface
 
** All side yard setbacks are measured from the furthest protruding part of the
building to the property line.
*** HDR2 setbacks and hard surface areas are determined by a calculation table
which factors in building height, property size, and view from the street
criteria. (TBD)
† See Code for requirements.
Uses LDR1 LDR2 MDR1 MDR2 HDR1 HDR2 RR  C1 C2 C3 M1 M2
                                   TAG
Uses                                                                     LDR1 MDR1  HDR1 HDR2 RR  C1 C2 C3 M1 M2
                                                                         LDR2 MDR2            TAG
Commercial:
   Bakeries                                                           N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Barbershops, beauty parlors                                        N    N     P    P    N   N  P  P  C  C
   Boarding/rooming house                                             N    N     C    C    N   P  P  C  N  N
   Branch bank                                                        N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Cemetery                                                           N    N     N    N    C   N  N  N  N  N
   Churches                                                           C    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  N  N
   Clinic (human treatment)                                           N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Commercial Self-Service Storage                                    N    N     N    N    N   N  C  C  P  P
   Convenience stores (may have gasoline sales)                       N    N     N    N    N   C  P  P  P  P
   Daycare - Up to 12 Children                                        C    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  N  N
   Daycare - 13 Children or More                                      N    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  C  C
   Delicatessens                                                      N    N     N    N    N   C  P  P  C  C
   Financial Institutions                                             N    N     N    N    N   C  P  P  C  C
   Funeral home/mortuary/crematorium                                  N    N     N    N    N   C  C  C  C  C
   Gift shop                                                          N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Government offices                                                 C    C     C    C    C   P  P  P  C  C
   Kennel                                                             N    N     N    N    C   C  C  C  C  C
   Medical and dental offices                                         N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Office building                                                    N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Parking lot                                                        C    C     C    C    C   P  P  P  P  P
   Personal service shops including, but not limited to: auto service
station, dry cleaning, food catering, non-livestock auction, small       N    N     N    N    N   N  P  P  C  C
repair shop
   Pharmacy                                                           N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Professional offices                                               N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  C  C
   Public utility building                                            C    C     C    C    C   P  P  P  P  P
   Radio and TV broadcasting                                          N    N     N    N    N   P  P  P  P  P
   Recreation and lodging facilities including, but not limited to, the
following: bowling alleys, billiard and pool rooms, dance halls, hotels, N    N     N    N    N   N  P  P  P  C
indoor amusement facilities, motels, taverns and theaters
   Retail stores, lumberyards, plant nurseries and restaurants        N    N     N    N    N   C  P  P  C  N
   Temporary building                                                 P    P     P    P    P   P  P  P  P  P
   Utilities                                                          C    C     C    C    C   P  P  P  P  P
   Veterinary clinic                                                  N    N     N    N    C   P  P  P  C  C
Residential:
   Halfway house                                                      N    N     C    C    N   P  P  C  N  N
   Home for handicapped guests                                        P    P     P    P    P   C  N  N  N  N
   Home occupation                                                    C    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  C  C
                                                                              MDR1-
   Mobile home park                                                   N    N     N    N    C   C  N  N  N  N
                                                                              MDR2-
                                                                              P
                                                                              MDR1-
   Mobile home subdivision                                            N    N     N    N    C   C  N  N  N  N
                                                                              MDR2-
                                                                              P
   Mobile homes                                                       N    ***   N    N    N   N  N  N  N  N
   Multi-family dwellings and townhouses - up to 4 units              N    C     P    P    N   C  C  C  N  N
   Multi-family dwellings and townhouses - over 4 units               N    N     P    P    N   C  C  C  C  N
   Parks                                                              C    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  N  N
   Planned unit development                                           C    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  N  N
   Playground                                                         P    P     P    P    P   C  C  C  N  N
   Private nursing home up to 8 guests                                N    N     P    P    C   P  C  C  N  N
   Private swimming pool                                              P    P     P    P    P   C  C  C  N  N
   Residence court over 8 units                                       N    N     C    P    N   C  C  C  C  C
   Rest or convalescent home                                          C    C     C    P    N   P  P  C  N  N
   Schools                                                            C    C     C    C    C   C  C  C  N  N
   Single-family dwelling                                             P    P     P    P    P   C  C  C  N  N
   Two-family dwelling or townhouse                                   N    P     P    P    N   C  C  C  N  N
Heavy industrial:
   Airport                                                            N    N     N    N    C   C  C  C  C  C
   Asphalt plant, bulk plant flammable liquid, bulk storage flammable
liquid, commercial excavating, concrete batch plant, grain and seed      N    N     N    N    N   N  N  N  C  P
elevator, rock crushing
   Assembly plant, coal, sand, gravel yard, contracting equipment,
distribution facility, fabricating plant A, food processing, industrial
laundry, manufacturing plant A, maintenance operation equipment, packing N    N     N    N    N   N  C  C  P  P
plant A, processing plant A, repair plant A, storage plant A, storage
facility, wholesale operation
   Assembly plant B, auto wrecking yard, biohazardous facility, bulk
storage/corrosive material, fabricating plant B, garbage incineration,   N    N     N    N    N   N  N  N  N  P
manufacturing plant B, packing plant B, processing plant B, repair plant
B, stockyard
Other industrial:
   Salvage yard                                                       N    N     N    N    N   N  N  N  C  C
   Sewage treatment plant                                             N    N     N    N    N   N  N  N  C  P
   Service commercial:
   Including, but not limited to, the following: bottling and
distribution, contractor shop, freight terminal, heavy building material N    N     N    N    N   N  C  P  P  P
sales, heavy machinery sales, roofing shop, salvage goods housed, sheet
metal, sign painting shop, storage warehouse (heavy duty)
 
***Only Allowed in Zones previously titled R2-T and MDR2 unless on foundation;
MH on foundation will be treated as a Single-Family Dwelling Use
 
LEGEND: “P” designates the use is permitted
       “C” designates the use is allowed upon issuance of a conditional use
        permit
       “N” designates the use is not allowed.
 
   Transitional Agriculture (TAG)          Medium Density Residential 1 (MDR1)
   Rural Ranchette (RR)            Medium Density Residential 2 (MRD2)
   Low Density Residential 1 (LDR1)      High Density Residential 1 (HDR1)
   Low Density Residential 2 (LDR2)      High Density Residential 2 (HDR2)
(Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021; amd. Ord. 2234, 3-7-2023; Ord. 2236, 4-4-2023; Ord. 2262,
10-1-2024; Ord. 2268, 6-3-2025; Ord. 2280, 10-7-2025)
11-4A-7: CITY USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Transitional Agricultural (TAG):
      1.   Purposes And Objectives: The TAG zone is established to protect
stable neighborhoods of detached single-family dwellings on larger lots. The
limited conditional uses allowed in this district shall be compatible with an
atmosphere of large, landscaped lawns, low building heights, ample setbacks and
side yards, predominantly off-street parking, low traffic volumes, and low
nuisance potentials.
      2.   Permitted Uses: All permitted, conditional, and accessory uses in
this zone are regulated by the use table in section
11-4A-6.
      3.   Lot Area: The minimum area of any lot or parcel of land in the TAG
zone is one-half (1/2) acre.
      4.   Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the TAG zone shall have a
width of no less than seventy-five feet (75').
      5.   Lot Depth: Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum of sixty
feet (60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the TAG zone shall abut
a public street for a minimum distance of seventy-five feet (75'), on a line
parallel to the centerline of the street or along the circumference of a cul-
de-sac improved to City standards. Frontage on a street end, which does not
have a cul-de-sac improved to City standards, shall not be counted in meeting
this requirement. Private drives are allowed as per review by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density: Not more than one single-family
dwelling and one accessory dwelling unit (ADU) shall be placed on a lot or
parcel of land in the TAG zone.
      9.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum yard requirements shall
apply in the TAG zone:
         a.   Front Yard: Each lot or parcel in the TAG zone shall have a
minimum front yard of at least thirty feet (30') from right-of-way.
            (1)   Exception: When the street upon which the parcel fronts has a
boulevard strip of at least seven feet (7'), the front yard setback may be
reduced to twenty feet (20') from right-of-way.
         b.   Rear Yard: The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty feet
(20').
         c.   Side Yard: Ten feet (10'). The side yard that is on the
intersecting street must have a twenty-foot (20') setback;
         d.   Accessory Building Setbacks: An accessory use is a structure that
is subordinate to and incidental to the principal building on the same lot but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. Accessory units shall
not exceed sixty feet (60') in height. Accessory units shall not encroach in
the front or side yards. Accessory units that are regulated by the adopted
Building Code shall have a minimum of twenty feet (20') rear setback. Accessory
units permitted are as follows:
            (1)   Private Garages And/Or Carports: When a garage or carport is
attached to the primary residence, it must meet all the setback requirements
for the primary structure.
            (2)   Greenhouses for private use only.
            (3)   Private swimming pools.
            (4)   Pergolas, arbors, decks, patios, storage buildings.
      10.   Setbacks And Right-of-Way Exceptions: (Reserved).
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   No lot or parcel of land in the TAG zone shall have a building or
structure, which exceeds a maximum height of sixty feet (60'), measured at the
top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the height of an accessory
structure exceed the height of any main structure on the same lot.
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In a TAG zone, all buildings, including
accessory buildings and structures (including impervious surfaces, e.g.:
driveways), shall not cover more than fifty-five percent (55%) of the area of
the lot or parcel of land.
         b.   Landscaping: At least thirty percent (30%) of the area of any lot
shall be maintained in landscaping.
         c.   Impervious Surface. On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement
shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of a front yard, fifty percent
(50%) of a rear yard, and one hundred percent (100%) of one (1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading, And Access: (Reserved).
      15.   Project Plan Approval: (Reserved).
      16.   Fencing: (Reserved).
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   The City of Blackfoot right-of-way width is dictated by City
Engineering Standards. Refer to engineering standard drawings for development
rules that apply to all residential zones.
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc., can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit (CUP). These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-
street parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have
more than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights: The following provisions shall apply to the TAG and
RR zones in the impact area upon annexation into the city:
         a.   Description Of Land And Livestock: Any landowner having livestock
upon lands located within the area of city impact may provide to the City
Planning and Zoning Commission a description of the land together with a
description of the livestock on said lands, which shall include the number of
livestock as well as the type of livestock located on said lands.
         b.   Historic Herd Size: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review the descriptions as submitted by a landowner, and together with the
landowner determine a historic herd size for the parcel of land described. The
record of historic herd size shall be kept by the City Clerk and shall be
preserved for the purpose of determining existing land use on said lands as of
the date of annexation.
         c.   Discontinued Use: In the event a landowner shall discontinue the
use and maintenance of livestock on lands described and provided to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for a period of five (5) consecutive years, when
such use shall not be reestablished, the uses of the premises thereafter shall
be in conformity with the regulations of the zone district in which the land is
situated; provided, that the use and maintenance of a lesser number of the same
general type of livestock on the described lands shall be deemed to conform to
the historic herd size as recorded with the City Clerk and will allow the
continued recognition of the historic herd size as the current existing land
use.
         d.   Expansion Or Enlargement Of Herd: The expansion or enlargement of
a livestock herd shall be allowed only by the granting of a conditional use
permit, zone change or variance, as provided by this title and depending upon
the particular circumstances and facts involved.
      20.   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU):
         a.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to allow a more economic
and efficient use of the City’s housing supply, land, and infrastructure;
provide a mix of housing that responds to changing family needs; provide a
means for homeowners, particularly seniors, single parents, and families with
grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain extra
income, security, companionship and services; protect neighborhood stability
and property values; and maintain the appearance and character of Blackfoot’s
single household neighborhoods.
         b.   Ownership: If the proposed accessory dwelling is located in a
TAG, RR, or LDR-2 zone:
            (1)   The owner of the property on which the accessory dwelling is
to be created shall occupy one or the other of the dwelling units. For the
purposes of this section:
               (A)   Owner shall mean one or more individuals who hold title
directly or indirectly to the dwelling, and for whom the dwelling is the
primary residence; a natural or adopted parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
brother, or sister of the owner of the dwelling may be considered the owner
occupying one or the other of the dwelling units.
               (B)   Owner occupancy shall mean a property owner who makes his
or her legal residence at the site, as evidenced by voter registration, vehicle
registration, or similar means, and resides at the site more than six (6)
months in any given year.
            (2)   Before obtaining a building permit, a deed restriction shall
be recorded requiring that either the primary unit or the accessory unit be
owner occupied and that the accessory dwelling shall not be sold separately.
The deed restriction shall run with the land but may be lifted at a future time
if the main dwelling and the accessory are converted back into a single
residence, or the property conforms to current zoning standards.
         c.   Location:
            (1)   An accessory dwelling unit is located on the same lot as a
single household dwelling unit, either within the same building as the single
household dwelling or in a detached building such as a guest house or attached
to a garage. It shall not be attached to a duplex or other multi-family
structure.
            (2)   An accessory dwelling unit may also be attached to or part of
a non-residential structure or land use, such as a caretaker unit, parsonage,
live-work unit, or loft apartment. Multiple apartments above or behind
commercial space in mixed-use buildings are not considered accessory dwellings.
            (3)   Accessory dwelling units are permitted with restrictions
throughout the City in the following Single Family Zones TAG, RR, and LDR-2.
New subdivisions in LDR-1 Zones may also be allowed accessory dwelling units if
requested at the time of plat development and approval. ADU’s will not be
allowed in existing LDR-1 subdivisions without an approved rezone.
         d.   Size And Height:
            (1)   Accessory units associated with a single household dwelling
shall be smaller than and clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling unit, and
no larger than one thousand square feet (1,000 ft2) in size. If the accessory
dwelling will occupy one level of the home (e.g., basement), it is not feasible
to use the remaining area on that level as part of the primary dwelling, and it
meets all other requirements of this chapter, it may be authorized by the
Director or his designee to occupy the entire level, regardless of size.
            (2)   An accessory dwelling unit associated with a non-residential
structure or land use shall not be limited in size but must be smaller than and
subordinate to the primary land use.
            (3)   The height of the accessory unit shall not exceed the height
of the main structure on site, or as permitted by the underlying zoning
district, whichever is less.
         e.   Parking And Access:
            (1)   For accessory units associated with a single household
dwelling, one (1) additional off-street parking space shall be required in
addition to the spaces required for the primary dwelling. Garages and carports
may be included in the required amount of off-street parking. Residential
driveway parking spaces shall be at least ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet
(20') deep from back of sidewalk.
            (2)   For accessory units associated with a non-residential
structure or land use, parking may be shared with the primary land use, but at
least one (1) parking space shall be dedicated for each bedroom if the dwelling
is greater than one thousand square feet (1,000 ft2) in size.
            (3)   A waiver to the parking requirements may be granted by the
Director subject to documentation that unusual circumstances of the occupancy
will result in a reduced need for parking on the premises and will not
negatively impact the neighborhood. The waiver and the circumstances allowing
for the waiver will be documented in the deed restriction required above.
            (4)   A walkway shall be provided from the accessory unit to the
street and shall be a minimum of three feet (3') wide and shall be finished
with a hard all-weather surface.
         f.   Design Compatibility:
            (1)   In order to maintain an exterior consistent with the primary
dwelling and the character of the neighborhood, or the associated non-
residential structure or land use, any additions or modifications to create an
accessory dwelling unit shall incorporate materials, colors, and design motifs
that are compatible with and complement of the primary dwelling or land use,
including siding, roofing materials, exterior colors, window trim, and roof
style. If it is not feasible for the accessory dwelling to meet these
requirements, an alternative design may be approved through a design review
process.
            (2)   For accessory dwelling units attached to a house, only one
entrance to the structure may be located on the front building elevation of the
house unless multiple entrances are already in existence.
            (3)   The accessory dwelling shall not be created in or from a
production building, vehicle, or temporary structure. Conversion of a garage is
not permitted unless the required parking can be sited legally elsewhere on the
property.
         g.   Permit Procedures For Accessory Dwelling Units:
            (1)   Any person applying for an accessory dwelling unit shall make
application to the City Building Department and obtain an approved site plan as
well as approval of their ADU building proposal.
   B.   Rural Ranchette (RR):
      1.   Purpose And Objectives: The purpose of establishing the Rural
Ranchette Zone is to promote and maintain a single-family residential
neighborhood that protects animal rights as part of allowed uses. The purpose
is to preserve areas of land where small acreage including domestic farm
animals may be kept within the City limits and the impact area. The zone also
includes residential uses for handicapped and elderly persons up to eight (8)
as referenced by Idaho Code section 67-6531.
      2.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: All permitted, conditional, and
accessory uses in this zone are regulated by the use table in section
11-4A-6.
      3.   Lot Area: For purposes of allowing farm animals, a minimum area of
one acre is required. For residential development or other residential uses,
lots sizes are required to comply with the R-1 and/or LDR-1 zoning
requirements.
      4.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width at the building line is seventy-
five feet (75').
      5.   Lot Depth: Minimum lot depth of one hundred-forty feet (140').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Minimum lot frontage of seventy-five feet (75').
      7.   Prior Created Lots: Lots which pre-existed this title will not be
denied a building permit based on nonconformance with these area and
dimensional requirements.
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density: A single dwelling unit and one
accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is allowed in the Rural Ranchette Zone.
      9.   Yard Requirements:
         a.   Minimum setback requirements for structures are measured from the
furthest projecting part of the structure:
            (1)   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Side yard: Five feet (5').
            (3)   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
         b.   Minimum setback requirements for structures on a corner lot are:
            (1)   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Side yard: Five feet (5'). The side yard on the intersecting
street must have a minimum twenty-foot (20') setback.
            (3)   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
      10.   Setbacks And Rights-Of-Way Exceptions: (Reserved).
      11.   Building Height: The height of structures is limited to sixty feet
(60'), measured at the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage: The total area that may be covered by
buildings is forty percent (40%) of the lot.
      14.   Parking, Loading And Access: (Reserved).
      15.   Project Plan Approval: (Reserved).
      16.   Fencing: Fencing must be sufficient to keep farm animals on the
subject property and built commensurate with the type of animal and size.
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   (Reserved).
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc., can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights:
         a.   The keeping of farm animals in the RR Zone must adhere to the
following limitations:
            (1)   An accumulative total of four (4) cows and horses will be
allowed per acre. This accumulative total of animals applies to year-round
hosted animals and does not apply where seasonal/rotational grazing of pasture
areas support an increased density on the property until the available feed is
fully utilized. After feed is used, the increased density of animals shall be
removed to comply with the accumulative levels listed above.
            (2)   An accumulative total of eight (8) sheep, goats and pigs will
be allowed per acre.
            (3)   An accumulative total of one hundred (100) penned rabbits and
chickens will be allowed per acre.
            (4)   Any animal not common to accepted agricultural practices in
Idaho will require a conditional use permit.
         b.   Area requirements specified are exclusive of land used for other
livestock or other uses such as buildings, lawns, gardens, etc.
         c.   Area requirements for animals not listed shall be determined by
the Zoning Administrator based upon the area requirements of the closest
related animal.
      20.   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU):
         a.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to allow a more economic
and efficient use of the City’s housing supply, land, and infrastructure;
provide a mix of housing that responds to changing family needs; provide a
means for homeowners, particularly seniors, single parents, and families with
grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain extra
income, security, companionship and services; protect neighborhood stability
and property values; and maintain the appearance and character of Blackfoot’s
single household neighborhoods.
         b.   Ownership: If the proposed accessory dwelling is located in a
TAG, RR, or LDR-2 zone:
            (1)   The owner of the property on which the accessory dwelling is
to be created shall occupy one or the other of the dwelling units. For the
purposes of this section:
               (A)   Owner shall mean one or more individuals who hold title
directly or indirectly to the dwelling, and for whom the dwelling is the
primary residence; a natural or adopted parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
brother, or sister of the owner of the dwelling may be considered the owner
occupying one or the other of the dwelling units.
               (B)   Owner occupancy shall mean a property owner who makes his
or her legal residence at the site, as evidenced by voter registration, vehicle
registration, or similar means, and resides at the site more than six (6)
months in any given year.
            (2)   Before obtaining a building permit, a deed restriction shall
be recorded requiring that either the primary unit or the accessory unit be
owner occupied and that the accessory dwelling shall not be sold separately.
The deed restriction shall run with the land but may be lifted at a future time
if the main dwelling and the accessory are converted back into a single
residence, or the property conforms to current zoning standards.
         c.   Location:
            (1)   An accessory dwelling unit is located on the same lot as a
single household dwelling unit, either within the same building as the single
household dwelling or in a detached building such as a guest house or attached
to a garage. It shall not be attached to a duplex or other multi-family
structure.
            (2)   An accessory dwelling unit may also be attached to or part of
a non-residential structure or land use, such as a caretaker unit, parsonage,
live-work unit, or loft apartment. Multiple apartments above or behind
commercial space in mixed-use buildings are not considered accessory dwellings.
            (3)   Accessory dwelling units are permitted with restrictions
throughout the City in the following Single Family Zones TAG, RR, and LDR-2.
New subdivisions in LDR-1 Zones may also be allowed accessory dwelling units if
requested at the time of plat development and approval. ADU’s will not be
allowed in existing LDR-1 subdivisions without an approved rezone.
         d.   Size And Height:
            (1)   Accessory units associated with a single household dwelling
shall be smaller than and clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling unit, and
no larger than one thousand square feet (1,000 ft2) in size. If the accessory
dwelling will occupy one level of the home (e.g., basement), it is not feasible
to use the remaining area on that level as part of the primary dwelling, and it
meets all other requirements of this chapter, it may be authorized by the
Director or his designee to occupy the entire level, regardless of size.
            (2)   An accessory dwelling unit associated with a non-residential
structure or land use shall not be limited in size but must be smaller than and
subordinate to the primary land use.
            (3)   The height of the accessory unit shall not exceed the height
of the main structure on site, or as permitted by the underlying zoning
district, whichever is less.
         e.   Parking And Access:
            (1)   For accessory units associated with a single household
dwelling, one (1) additional off-street parking space shall be required in
addition to the spaces required for the primary dwelling. Garages and carports
may be included in the required amount of off-street parking. Residential
driveway parking spaces shall be at least ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet
(20') deep from back of sidewalk.
            (2)   For accessory units associated with a non-residential
structure or land use, parking may be shared with the primary land use, but at
least one (1) parking space shall be dedicated for each bedroom if the dwelling
is greater than one thousand square feet (1,000 ft2) in size.
            (3)   A waiver to the parking requirements may be granted by the
Director subject to documentation that unusual circumstances of the occupancy
will result in a reduced need for parking on the premises and will not
negatively impact the neighborhood. The waiver and the circumstances allowing
for the waiver will be documented in the deed restriction required above.
            (4)   A walkway shall be provided from the accessory unit to the
street and shall be a minimum of three feet (3') wide and shall be finished
with a hard all-weather surface.
         f.   Design Compatibility:
            (1)   In order to maintain an exterior consistent with the primary
dwelling and the character of the neighborhood, or the associated non-
residential structure or land use, any additions or modifications to create an
accessory dwelling unit shall incorporate materials, colors, and design motifs
that are compatible with and complement of the primary dwelling or land use,
including siding, roofing materials, exterior colors, window trim, and roof
style. If it is not feasible for the accessory dwelling to meet these
requirements, an alternative design may be approved through a design review
process.
         (2)   For accessory dwelling units attached to a house, only one
entrance to the structure may be located on the front building elevation of the
house unless multiple entrances are already in existence.
         (3)   The accessory dwelling shall not be created in or from a
production building, vehicle, or temporary structure. Conversion of a garage is
not permitted unless the required parking can be sited legally elsewhere on the
property.
         g.   Permit Procedures For Accessory Dwelling Units: Any person
applying for an accessory dwelling unit shall make application to the City
Building Department and obtain an approved site plan as well as approval of
their ADU building proposal.
   C.   Low Density Residential 1 (LDR1):
      1.   Purposes And Objectives: The density allowed in the Low Density
Residential 1 (LDR1) is a maximum of six (6) units per acre. The LDR1 zone is
established to protect stable neighborhoods of detached single-family dwellings
on larger lots. The limited conditional uses allowed in this district shall be
compatible with an atmosphere of large, landscaped lawns, low building heights,
ample setbacks and side yards, predominantly off-street parking, low traffic
volumes, and low nuisance potentials.
      2.   Permitted Uses: All permitted, conditional, and accessory uses in
this zone are regulated by the use table in section 11-4A-6. An accessory
dwelling unit (ADU) may be allowed in subdivisions platted since January 1,
2021 in all residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      3.   Lot Area: The minimum area of any lot or parcel of land in the LDR1
zone is eight thousand square feet (8,000 ft2) for a corner lot and seven
thousand square feet (7,000ft2) for an inside lot.
      4.   Lot Width: Each lot or parcel of land in the LDR1 zone shall have a
width of no less than seventy-five feet (75').
      5.   Lot Depth: Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum of sixty
feet (60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the LDR1 zone shall abut
a public street for a minimum distance of seventy-five feet (75'), on a line
parallel to the centerline of the street or along the circumference of a cul-
de-sac improved to City standards. Frontage on a street end, which does not
have a cul-de-sac improved to City standards, shall not be counted in meeting
this requirement. Private drives are allowed as per review by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density: Not more than one (1) single-family
dwelling shall be placed on a lot or parcel of land in the LDR1 zone.
      9.   Yard Requirements:
         a.   Setback requirements for primary structures are:
            (1)   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Side yard: Five feet (5').
            (3)   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
         b.   Setback requirements for primary structures on a corner lot are:
            (1)   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Side yard: Five feet (5'). The side yard that is on the
intersecting street must have a twenty-foot (20') setback.
            (3)   Rear yard: Five feet (5').
               (A)   Exception: On a corner lot the side yard not on an
intersecting street may be reduced to no less than five feet (5').
      10.   Setbacks And Right-Of-Way:
         a.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed
within the triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line,
beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight
line, provided:
            (1)   Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are
trimmed from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
            (2)   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle,
not to exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
            (3)   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are
allowed within such triangle not to exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A
permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under
this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
         b.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or
any other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed
by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot
line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection C10a(1) of this
section; shrubs, hedges and flowers as provided in subsection C10a(2) of this
section; and structures as provided in subsection C10a(3) of this section.
         c.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
is allowed by the use district, from the right-of-way line of the street.
Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a street have
existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any
new structures will only need to meet the twenty-foot (20') setback. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') be required.
         d.   Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves,
shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line; except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty-foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street
that intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
         e.   Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is
subordinate to, and incidental to, the principal building on the same lot, but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An accessory use is
an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the
same lot.
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   Primary Structure: Height of primary structures is limited to
forty feet (40'), measured at the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the height of an accessory
structure exceed the height of any main structure on the same lot.
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In an LDR1 zone, the total area that may be
covered by buildings is forty percent (40%) of the lot.
         b.   Landscaping: At least sixty percent (60%) of the area of any lot
shall be maintained in landscaping.
         c.   Impervious Surface: On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement
shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of a front yard, fifty percent
(50%) of a rear yard, and one hundred percent (100%) of one (1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading, And Access: (Reserved).
      15.   Project Plan Approval: (Reserved).
      16.   Fencing: (Reserved).
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   (Reserved).
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc., can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights: The keeping of farm animals is not allowed except
domestic hen chickens (see 19a). Dogs and cats are allowed as per city code
section
6-2-6. Exotic animals such as goats, potbellied pigs, etc., may be allowed with
the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         a.   Exception: Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this
code to the contrary, the keeping of not more than six (6) domestic hen
chickens is permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling or
duplex, provided that the following requirements are observed:
            (1)   Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary
gain or profit.
            (2)   Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised
or sold for slaughter or for pecuniary gain or profit.
            (3)   The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable
fence, chicken coop, or both. The fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that they prevent the chickens from leaving the
rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set back at least five feet
(5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of
the property.
            (4)   The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do
not become a “nuisance” as that term is defined in this code.
            (5)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term “rear yard”
means a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest
foundation line of the main building and extending across the full width of the
lot. In the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side street,
the rear yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side
property line.
   D.   Low Density Residential 2 (LDR2):
      1.   Purpose And Objectives: The density allowed in the Low Density
Residential 2 (LDR2) is a maximum of eight (8) units per acre. The LDR2 zone is
established to protect stable neighborhoods of detached single-family dwellings
on medium-sized lots. The conditional uses allowed in this district shall be
compatible with single-family homes on landscaped lawns, low building heights,
predominantly off-street parking, low traffic volumes, and low nuisance
potential.
      2.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: All permitted, conditional, and
accessory uses in this zone are regulated by the use table in section
11-4A-6.
      3.   Lot Area:
         a.   The minimum area of any lot or parcel of land in the LDR2 zone is
five thousand four hundred and forty-five square feet (5,445 ft2).
         b.   An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) requires a minimum of a six
thousand five hundred square foot (6,500 ft2) lot.
      4.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the LDR2 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      5.   Lot Depth: The minimum lot depth in the LDR2 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the LDR2 zone should
abut a public street for a minimum distance of sixty feet (60'), on a line
parallel to the center line of the street or along the circumference of a cul-
de-sac improved to City standards. Frontage on a street end which does not have
a cul-de-sac improved to City standards shall not be counted in meeting this
requirement. Private drives are allowed as per review by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density:
         a.   One (1) single-family dwelling unit and one Accessory Dwelling
Unit (ADU) may be placed on a parcel or lot in the LDR2 zone.
         b.   No more than two (2) dwelling units are allowed in any one (1)
structure.
      9.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum yard requirements shall
apply in the LDR2 zone:
         a.   Front Yard: Each lot or parcel in the LDR2 zone shall have a
minimum front yard of at least thirty feet (30') from right-of-way.
            (1)   Exception: When the street upon which the parcel fronts has a
boulevard strip of at least seven feet (7'), the front yard setback may be
reduced to twenty feet (20') from right-of-way.
         b.   Rear Yard: The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty feet
(20').
            (1)   Exception: On a corner lot the side yard not on an
intersecting street may be reduced to no less than five feet (5').
         c.   Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the LDR2 zone shall have
a side yard of at least five feet (5') as measured from the furthest protruding
portion of the building.
         d.   Accessory Buildings. A minimum side yard and rear yard of five
feet (5') is required.
      10.   Setbacks And Right-Of-Way:
         a.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed
within the triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line,
beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight
line, provided:
            (1)   Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are
trimmed from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
            (2)   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle,
not to exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
            (3)   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are
allowed within such triangle not to exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A
permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under
this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
         b.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or
any other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed
by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot
line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection D10a(1) of this
section; shrubs, hedges and flowers as provided in subsection D10a(2) of this
section; and structures as provided in subsection D10a(3) of this section.
         c.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
is allowed by the use district, from the right-of-way line of the street.
Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a street have
existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any
new structures will only need to meet the twenty-foot (20') setback. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') be required.
         d.   Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves,
shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line; except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty-foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street
that intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
         e.   Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is
subordinate to, and incidental to, the principal building on the same lot, but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An accessory use is
an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the
same lot.
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   No lot or parcel of land in the LDR2 zone shall have a building
or structure, which exceeds a maximum height of forty feet (40'), measured at
the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the size or height of an
accessory structure exceed the size or height of any main structure on the same
lot.
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In an LDR2 zone, all buildings, including
accessory buildings and structures (including impervious surfaces, e.g.:
driveways), shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the area of the
lot or parcel of land.
         b.   Landscaping:
            (1)   At least sixty percent (60%) of the area of any lot shall be
maintained in landscaping.
            (2)   Impervious Surface: On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement
shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of a front yard, fifty percent
(50%) of a rear yard, and one hundred percent (100%) of one (1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading And Access: Parking is two (2) additional off-
street spaces for each additional unit and shall be located in the rear or side
yard of the primary structure.
      15.   Project Plan Approval: Accessory dwelling units shall only be
allowed upon application for and approval of a conditional use permit.
      16.   (Reserved).
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   (Reserved).
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc., can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights: The keeping of farm animals is not allowed except
domestic hen chickens (see 19a). Dogs and cats are allowed as per city code
section
6-2-6. Exotic animals such as goats, potbellied pigs, etc., may be allowed with
the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         a.   Exception: Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this
code to the contrary, the keeping of not more than six (6) domestic hen
chickens is permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling or
duplex, provided that the following requirements are observed:
            (1)   Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary
gain or profit.
            (2)   Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised
or sold for slaughter or for pecuniary gain or profit.
            (3)   The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable
fence, chicken coop, or both. The fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that they prevent the chickens from leaving the
rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set back at least five feet
(5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of
the property.
            (4)   The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do
not become a “nuisance” as that term is defined in this code.
            (5)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term “rear yard”
means a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest
foundation line of the main building and extending across the full width of the
lot. In the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side street,
the rear yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side
property line.
   E.   Medium Density Residential 1 (MDR1):
      1.   Purposes And Objectives: The density allowed in the Medium Density
Residential 1 (MDR1) is a maximum of fourteen (14) units per acre. The MDR1
zone is established to protect stable neighborhoods of detached single-family
dwellings on smaller lots and multi-family housing. Restoration or
rehabilitation of older homes in this district shall be encouraged. Conditional
uses shall be compatible with an atmosphere of low building heights, low
traffic volumes, ample off-street parking, and low nuisance potentials at a
higher density than LDR zones.
      2.   Permitted And Conditional Uses:
         a.   The following principal uses and structures indicated as “P”, and
no others, shall be permitted in the MDR1 zone. The following uses and
structures indicated as “CUP” may be permitted in the MDR1 zone only after a
conditional use permit is issued.
         b.   Permitted Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are
permitted provided they are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the
character of, the permitted principal use or structure.
      3.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area of any parcel of land in the MDR1
zone is:
         a.   Four thousand five hundred square feet (4,500 ft2) for an
individual unit.
         b.   Six thousand square feet (6,000 ft2) for a duplex or twin home.
         c.   For three (3) units or larger, apply the density requirements.
      4.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the MDR1 zone is sixty feet
(60').
         a.   Exception: A single-dwelling unit has a minimum lot width of
fifty feet (50').
      5.   Lot Depth: The minimum lot depth in the MDR1 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the MDR1 zone shall abut
a public street for a minimum distance of sixty feet (60'), on a line parallel
to the center line of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac
improved to City standards. Frontage on a street end which does not have a cul-
de-sac improved to City standards shall not be counted in meeting this
requirement. Private drives are allowed as per review by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density: Without a planned unit development
(PUD), developments shall not exceed a density of fourteen (14) units per acre.
      9.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum yard requirements shall
apply in the MDR1 zone:
         a.   Front Yard: Each lot or parcel in the MDR1 zone shall have a
minimum front yard of at least thirty feet (30') from right-of-way.
            (1)   Reduced Front Yard Setback: When the street upon which the
parcel fronts has a boulevard strip of at least seven feet (7'), the front yard
setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') from right-of-way.
            (2)   Reduced Front Yard Setback: If all parking spaces are located
behind the building, the front yard setback may be reduced to fifteen feet
(15').
         b.   Rear Yard: The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty feet
(20').
         c.   Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the MDR1 zone shall have
a side yard of at least five feet (5') or six inches (6") of setback for every
foot of building height, whichever is greater.
         d.   Reduced Side Yard Setback: A setback of ten feet (10') shall be
allowed within side yards that abut other MDR zones, HDR zones, Commercial
zones, or Mixed-Use zones, regardless of building height.
      10.   Setbacks And Right-Of-Way:
         a.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed
within the triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line,
beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight
line, provided:
            (1)   Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are
trimmed from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
            (2)   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle,
not to exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
            (3)   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are
allowed within such triangle not to exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A
permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under
this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
         b.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or
any other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed
by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot
line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection E10a(1) of this
section; shrubs, hedges and flowers as provided in subsection E10a(2) of this
section; and structures as provided in subsection E10a(3) of this section.
         c.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
is allowed by the use district, from the right-of-way line of the street.
Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a street have
existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any
new structures will only need to meet the twenty-foot (20') setback. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') be required.
         d.   Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves,
shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line; except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty-foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street
that intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
         e.   Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is
subordinate to, and incidental to, the principal building on the same lot, but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An accessory use is
an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the
same lot.
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   No lot or parcel of land in the MDR1 zone shall have a building
or structure, which exceeds a maximum height of forty feet (40') measured at
the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   Adjacent LDR Zoning: If the development is adjacent to a Low-
Density Residential Zone (LDR), the maximum building height (for buildings
adjacent to the LDR zone) shall be no greater than thirty feet (30').
         c.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the height of an accessory
structure exceed the height of any main structure on the same lot.
         d.   Gables and dormers are not included in height calculations unless
their addition raises the overall peak height.
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In an MDR1 zone, all buildings, including
accessory buildings and structures (including impervious surfaces, e.g.
driveways), shall not cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the
lot or parcel of land.
         b.   Landscaping: At least forty percent (40%) of the area of any lot
shall be maintained in landscaping.
         c.   Impervious Surface: On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement
shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of a front yard, and one hundred
percent (100%) of one (1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading and Access: Multi-family dwelling, 4 units and
above, require 2 ¼ off street parking units per unit. When the calculation of
the required number of spaces called for herein results in a fractional number,
fractions equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next
highest whole number of spaces.
      15.   Project Plan Approval: Multifamily Housing: All multifamily housing
projects are commercial uses and as such as subject to design standards. Design
standards assure large building projects address site and building design
requirements so as to minimize negative visual impacts on the community. Design
standard requirements will be reviewed at site plan approval and upon
application for a building permit.
      16.   Fencing: (Reserved).
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   Multifamily Residential Design Standards:
            (1)   Purpose And Content: The purpose of this section is to
provide guidance and parameters for the design of buildings throughout
Blackfoot (outside of Downtown) that meet the following objectives:
               (A)   Design buildings that respond to the unique context of the
site, including frontage/ground floor design, building massing and orientation,
and site environmental conditions;
               (B)   Design buildings that address the street and create a
pedestrian-friendly environment;
               (C)   Promote original and distinctive building design;
               (D)   Utilize building materials that convey a sense of quality
and permanence;
               (E)   Incorporate sustainable development practices; and
               (F)   Demonstrate respect for historic resources.
            (2)   Facade Articulation: Multifamily buildings shall include
articulation features at intervals that relate to the location/size of
individual units within the building (or no more than every thirty feet (30'))
to break up the massing of the building and add visual interest and
compatibility to the surrounding context. At least three (3) of the following
features shall be employed at intervals no greater than the unit interval or
thirty feet (30') (whichever is less).
               (A)   Use of windows and/or entries.
               (B)   Change in roofline.
               (C)   Change in building material, siding style, and/or window
fenestration pattern.
               (D)   Providing vertical building modulation of at least twelve
inches (12") in depth if tied to a change in roofline modulation or a change in
building material, siding style, or color. Balconies may be used to qualify for
this option if they are recessed or projected from the facade by at least
eighteen inches (18"). Juliet balconies or other balconies that appear to be
tacked on to the facade will not qualify for this option unless they employ
high quality materials and effectively meet the intent of the standards.
               (E)   Vertical elements such as a trellis with plants, green
wall, art element.
               (F)   Other design techniques that effectively break up the
massing at no more than thirty-foot (30') intervals.
               (G)   Landscape planting bed at least five feet (5') wide or a
raised planter bed at least two feet (2') high and three feet (3') wide in
front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or
screen at least sixty percent (60%) of the wall’s surface within three (3)
years.
               (H)   Installing a vertical trellis in front of the wall with
climbing vines or plant materials.
               (I)   Buildings shall employ techniques to recess or project
individual windows above the ground floor at least two inches (2") from the
facade or incorporate window trim at least four inches (4") in width that
features color that contrasts with the base building color.
               (J)   Departures will be considered provided they meet the
intent of the standards and the design criteria set forth.
            (3)   Utility Meters, Electrical Conduit, And Other Service Utility
Apparatus: These elements shall be located and/or designed to minimize their
visibility to the public. Project designers are strongly encouraged to
coordinate with applicable service providers early in the design process to
determine the best approach in meeting these standards. If such elements are
mounted in a location visible from the street, pedestrian pathway, common open
space, or shared auto courtyards, they shall be screened with vegetation or by
architectural features.
            (4)   Service Element Location And Design: All developments shall
provide a designated spot for service elements (refuse and disposal). Such
elements shall meet the following requirements:
               (A)   Service elements shall be located to minimize the negative
visual, noise, odor, and physical impacts to the street environment, adjacent
(on- and off-site) residents or other uses, and pedestrian areas;
               (B)   The designated spot for service elements shall be paved
with concrete; and
               (C)   Appropriate enclosure of the common trash and recycling
elements shall be required.
            (5)   Landscaping Design: Purpose:
               (A)   To provide safe, attractive, and usable open spaces that
promote pedestrian activity;
               (B)   To create usable space that is suitable for leisure and
recreational activities for residents;
               (C)   To create open space that enhances the setting and
character of residential, commercial, and mixed-use development; and
               (D)   To promote a variety of open spaces for multifamily uses.
            (6)   Surface Parking Landscaping:
               (A)   Internal parking lot landscaping is required for all lots
featuring twelve (12) or more parking spaces (including vehicular sales lots).
Uses in Industrial zones are exempt from these requirements.
            Specifically: Landscape planters shall be a minimum of eight feet
(8') in width for Class I and II trees and ten feet (10') in width for Class
III trees. The required length of the planters shall be the same as the length
of the adjacent parking space. Dimensions are measured inside curbs;
               (B)   Type C landscaping shall be utilized for planters, with at
least one (1) tree required for every planting island. No linear grouping of
parking spaces shall exceed ten (10) in a row without a planting island.
Interior landscaping shall be used to delineate and guide major traffic
movement within the parking area. Terminal planters shall be provided at the
end of parking rows to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to
aisles and driveways.
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc., can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights: The keeping of farm animals is not allowed except
domestic hen chickens (see 19a). Dogs and cats are allowed as per city code
section 6-2-6. Exotic animals such as goats, potbellied pigs, etc. may be
allowed with the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         a.   Exception: Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this
code to the contrary, the keeping of not more than six (6) domestic hen
chickens is permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling or
duplex, provided that the following requirements are observed:
            (1)   Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary
gain or profit.
            (2)   Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised
or sold for slaughter or for pecuniary gain or profit.
            (3)   The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable
fence, chicken coop, or both. The fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that they prevent the chickens from leaving the
rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set back at least five feet
(5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of
the property.
            (4)   The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do
not become a “nuisance” as that term is defined in this code.
            (5)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term “rear yard”
means a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest
foundation line of the main building and extending across the full width of the
lot. In the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side street,
the rear yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side
property line.
   F.   Medium Density Residential 2 (MDR2):
      1.   Purposes And Objectives: The density allowed in the Medium Density
Residential 2 (MDR2) is a maximum of twenty-eight (28) units per acre. The MDR2
zone is established to act as a buffer between single-family dwellings and high
density residential zones. Restoration or rehabilitation of older homes in this
district shall be encouraged. MDR2 shall have an atmosphere consistent with low
traffic volumes, ample off-street parking, and lower nuisance potentials than
higher density zoning (HDR).
      2.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: All permitted, conditional, and
accessory uses in this zone are regulated by the use table in section
11-4A-6.
      3.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area of any parcel of land in the MDR2
zone is five thousand square feet (5,000 ft2) for an individual unit.
      4.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the MDR2 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      5.   Lot Depth: The minimum lot depth in the MDR2 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the MDR2 zone shall abut
a public street for a minimum distance of sixty feet (60'), on a line parallel
to the center line of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac
approved to City standards. Frontage on a street end which does not have a cul-
de-sac improved to City standards shall not be counted in meeting this
requirement. Private drives are allowed as per review by the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density: Without a planned unit development
(PUD), development shall not exceed a density of twenty-eight (28) units per
(1) acre.
      9.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum yard requirements shall
apply in the MDR2 zone:
         a.   Front Yard: Each lot or parcel in the MDR2 zone shall have a
minimum front yard of at least thirty feet (30') from right-of-way.
            (1)   Front Yard Reduced Setback: When the street upon which the
parcel fronts has a boulevard strip of at least seven feet (7'), the front yard
setback may be reduced to twenty feet (20') from right-of-way.
            (2)   Reduced Setback For Parking: The Planning and Zoning
Commission may allow a reduction of the front yard setback to fifteen feet
(15') if all parking spaces are located behind the building.
         b.   Rear Yard: The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty feet
(20').
         c.   Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the MDR2 zone shall have
a side yard of not less than five feet (5') or six inches (6") of setback for
every foot of building height, whichever is greater.
            (1)   Side Yard Reduced Setback: A setback of ten feet (10') shall
be allowed within side yards that abut other MDR zones, HDR zones, Commercial
zones, or Mixed-Use zones, regardless of building height.
      10.   Setbacks And Right-Of-Way:
         a.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed
within the triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line,
beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight
line, provided:
            (1)   Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are
trimmed from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
            (2)   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle,
not to exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
            (3)   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are
allowed within such triangle not to exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A
permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under
this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
         b.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or
any other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed
by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot
line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection F10a(1) of this
section; shrubs, hedges and flowers as provided in subsection F10a(2) of this
section; and structures as provided in subsection F10a(3) of this section.
         c.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
is allowed by the use district, from the right-of-way line of the street.
Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a street have
existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any
new structures will only need to meet the twenty-foot (20') setback. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') be required.
         d.   Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves,
shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line; except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty-foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street
that intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
         e.   Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is
subordinate to, and incidental to, the principal building on the same lot, but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An accessory use is
an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the
same lot.
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   No lot or parcel of land in the MDR2 zone shall have a building
or structure, which exceeds a maximum height of fifty feet (50'), measured at
the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   LDR: If the development is adjacent to a Low Density Residential
Zone (LDR), the maximum building height (for buildings adjacent to the LDR
zone) shall be no greater than thirty feet (30').
         c.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the height of an accessory
structure exceed the height of any main structure on the same lot.
         d.   Gables and dormers are not included in the height calculation
unless their addition raises the overall peak height of the building.
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In an MDR2 zone, all buildings, including
accessory buildings and structures (including impervious surfaces, e.g.
driveways), shall not cover more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the
lot or parcel of land.
         b.   Landscaping: At least forty percent (40%) of the area of any lot
shall be maintained in landscaping.
         c.   Impervious Surface: On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement
shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of a front yard, fifty percent
(50%) of a rear yard, and one hundred percent (100%) of one (1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading and Access: Multi-family dwelling, 4 units and
above, require 2 ¼ off street parking units per unit. When the calculation of
the required number of spaces called for herein results in a fractional number,
fractions equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next
highest whole number of spaces.
      15.   Project Plan Approval: Multifamily Housing: All multifamily housing
projects are commercial uses and as such as subject to design standards. Design
standards assure large building projects address site and building design
requirements so as to minimize negative visual impacts on the community. Design
standard requirements will be reviewed at site plan approval and upon
application for a building permit.
      16.   Fencing: (Reserved).
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   Multifamily Residential Design Standards:
            (1)   Purpose And Content: The purpose of this section is to
provide guidance and parameters for the design of buildings throughout
Blackfoot (outside of Downtown) that meet the following objectives:
               (A)   Design buildings that respond to the unique context of the
site, including frontage/ground floor design, building massing and orientation,
and site environmental conditions;
               (B)   Design buildings that address the street and create a
pedestrian-friendly environment;
               (C)   Promote original and distinctive building design;
               (D)   Utilize building materials that convey a sense of quality
and permanence;
               (E)   Incorporate sustainable development practices; and
               (F)   Demonstrate respect for historic resources.
            (2)   Facade Articulation: Multifamily buildings shall include
articulation features at intervals that relate to the location/size of
individual units within the building (or no more than every thirty feet (30'))
to break up the massing of the building and add visual interest and
compatibility to the surrounding context. At least three (3) of the following
features shall be employed at intervals no greater than the unit interval or
thirty feet (30') (whichever is less).
               (A)   Use of windows and/or entries.
               (B)   Change in roofline.
               (C)   Change in building material, siding style, and/or window
fenestration pattern.
               (D)   Providing vertical building modulation of at least twelve
inches (12") in depth if tied to a change in roofline modulation or a change in
building material, siding style, or color. Balconies may be used to qualify for
this option if they are recessed or projected from the facade by at least
eighteen inches (18"). Juliet balconies or other balconies that appear to be
tacked on to the facade will not qualify for this option unless they employ
high quality materials and effectively meet the intent of the standards.
               (E)   Vertical elements such as a trellis with plants, green
wall, art element.
               (F)   Other design techniques that effectively break up the
massing at no more than thirty-foot (30') intervals.
               (G)   Landscape planting bed at least five feet (5') wide or a
raised planter bed at least two feet (2') high and three feet (3') wide in
front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or
screen at least sixty percent (60%) of the wall’s surface within three (3)
years.
               (H)   Installing a vertical trellis in front of the wall with
climbing vines or plant materials.
               (I)   Buildings shall employ techniques to recess or project
individual windows above the ground floor at least two inches (2") from the
facade or incorporate window trim at least four inches (4") in width that
features color that contrasts with the base building color.
               (J)   Departures will be considered provided they meet the
intent of the standards and the design criteria set forth.
            (3)   Utility Meters, Electrical Conduit, And Other Service Utility
Apparatus: These elements shall be located and/or designed to minimize their
visibility to the public. Project designers are strongly encouraged to
coordinate with applicable service providers early in the design process to
determine the best approach in meeting these standards. If such elements are
mounted in a location visible from the street, pedestrian pathway, common open
space, or shared auto courtyards, they shall be screened with vegetation or by
architectural features.
            (4)   Service Element Location And Design: All developments shall
provide a designated spot for service elements (refuse and disposal). Such
elements shall meet the following requirements:
               (A)   Service elements shall be located to minimize the negative
visual, noise, odor, and physical impacts to the street environment, adjacent
(on and off-site) residents or other uses, and pedestrian areas;
               (B)   The designated spot for service elements shall be paved
with concrete; and
               (C)   Appropriate enclosure of the common trash and recycling
elements shall be required.
            (5)   Landscaping Design: Purpose:
               (A)   To provide safe, attractive, and usable open spaces that
promote pedestrian activity;
               (B)   To create usable space that is suitable for leisure and
recreational activities for residents;
               (C)   To create open space that enhances the setting and
character of residential, commercial, and mixed-use development; and
               (D)   To promote a variety of open spaces for multifamily uses.
            (6)   Surface Parking Landscaping:
               (A)   Internal parking lot landscaping is required for all lots
featuring twelve (12) or more parking spaces (including vehicular sales lots).
Uses in Industrial zones are exempt from these requirements.
            Specifically: Landscape planters shall be a minimum of eight feet
(8') in width for Class I and II trees and ten feet (10') in width for Class
III trees. The required length of the planters shall be the same as the length
of the adjacent parking space. Dimensions are measured inside curbs;
               (B)   Type C landscaping shall be utilized for planters, with at
least one tree required for every planting island; No linear grouping of
parking spaces shall exceed ten (10) in a row without a planting island.
Interior landscaping shall be used to delineate and guide major traffic
movement within the parking area. Terminal planters shall be provided at the
end of parking rows to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to
aisles and driveways.
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc., can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights: The keeping of farm animals is not allowed except
domestic hen chickens (see 19a). Dogs and cats are allowed as per city code
section
6-2-6. Exotic animals such as goats, potbellied pigs, etc. may be allowed with
the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         a.   Exception: Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this
code to the contrary, the keeping of not more than six (6) domestic hen
chickens is permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling or
duplex, provided that the following requirements are observed:
            (1)   Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary
gain or profit.
            (2)   Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised
or sold for slaughter or for pecuniary gain or profit.
            (3)   The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable
fence, chicken coop, or both. The fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that they prevent the chickens from leaving the
rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set back at least five feet
(5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of
the property.
            (4)   The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do
not become a “nuisance” as that term is defined in this code.
            (5)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term “rear yard”
means a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest
foundation line of the main building and extending across the full width of the
lot. In the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side street,
the rear yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side
property line.
   G.   High Density Residential 1 (HDR1):
      1.   Purposes And Objectives: The HDR1 zone is established to provide
higher density residential housing areas served by collector and arterial
streets. The zone shall be characterized by dwellings for three (3) or more
families, dormitory housing, ample off-street parking, higher traffic volumes,
proximity to other traffic generators and low nuisance potential.
      2.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: All permitted, conditional, and
accessory uses in this zone are regulated by the use table in section 11-4A-6.
      3.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area on any parcel of land in the HDR1
zone is twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty square feet (21,780 ft2).
      4.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the HDR1 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      5.   Lot Depth: The minimum lot depth in the HDR1 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the HDR2 zone shall abut
a public street for a distance of sixty feet (60') on a line parallel to the
center line of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac improved
to City standards. Frontage on a street end, which does not have a cul-de-sac
improved to City standards, shall not be counted in meeting this requirement.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density:
         a.   Dwelling unit density shall not exceed thirty (30) units per
acre.
         b.   PED: The Pedestrian Emphasis District density is regulated by the
City, the adopted Building Code, and any requirements imposed as part of the
required CUP.
         c.   Infill/Redevelopment Area: (Reserved).
      9.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum yard requirements shall
apply in the HDR1 zone:
         a.   Front Yard: Each lot or parcel in the HDR1 zone shall have a
minimum front yard of at least twenty feet (20') from right-of-way.
      Exception: When the street upon which the parcel fronts has a boulevard
strip of at least seven feet (7'), the front yard setback may be reduced to
twenty feet (20') from right-of-way.
         b.   Parking Lot: If a boulevard strip is present, the front yard
setback can be reduced to ten feet (10') for a parking lot.
         c.   Rear Yard: The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty feet
(20').
         d.   Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the HDR1 zone shall have
a side yard of at least five feet (5') or six inches (6") of setback for each
one foot (1') of building height, whichever is greater.
      Exception: A setback of ten feet (10') shall be allowed within side yards
that abut other HDR zones, MDR zones, Commercial zones, or Mixed-Use zones,
regardless of building height.
         e.   Infill/Redevelopment Setbacks: Setbacks are increased for Infill/
Redevelopment projects.
         f.   Accessory Buildings: (Reserved).
      10.   Setbacks And Right-Of-Way:
         a.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed
within the triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line,
beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight
line, provided:
            (1)   Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are
trimmed from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
            (2)   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle,
not to exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
            (3)   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are
allowed within such triangle not to exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A
permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under
this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
         b.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or
any other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed
by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot
line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection G10a(1) of this
section; shrubs, hedges and flowers as provided in subsection G10a(2) of this
section; and structures as provided in subsection G10a(3) of this section.
         c.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
is allowed by the use district, from the right-of-way line of the street.
Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a street have
existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any
new structures will only need to meet the twenty-foot (20') setback. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') be required.
         d.   Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves,
shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line; except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty-foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street
that intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
         e.   Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is
subordinate to, and incidental to, the principal building on the same lot, but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An accessory use is
an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the
same lot.
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   No lot or parcel of land in the HDR1 zone shall have a building
or structure, which exceeds a maximum height of sixty feet (60'),    measured
at the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   An unroofed and unenclosed rooftop terrace, an enclosed
stairwell, or elevator providing access to the roof, shall not be included in
the measurement of total building height.
         c.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the height of an accessory
structure exceed the height of any main structure on the same lot.
         d.   Adjacent Zones: Buildings or portions of buildings within fifty
feet (50') of a residential zone other than HDR1 and HDR2 shall be limited to
thirty-five feet (35').
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In an HDR1 zone, all buildings, including
accessory buildings and structures (including impervious surfaces, e.g.
driveways), shall not cover more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of
the lot or parcel of land.
         b.   Landscaping:
            (1)   At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of any lot
shall be maintained in landscaping.
            (2)   On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement shall not cover more
than forty percent (40%) of a front yard and one hundred percent (100%) of one
(1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading and Access: Multi-family dwelling, 4 units and
above, require 2 ¼ off street parking units per unit. When the calculation of
the required number of spaces called for herein results in a fractional number,
fractions equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next
highest whole number of spaces.
      15.   Project Plan Approval: (Reserved).
      16.   Buffers And Fencing:
         a.   Old Yellowstone Highway: (Reserved).
         b.   Fencing: (Reserved).
         c.   Buffers: (Reserved).
         d.   Infill/Redevelopment Buffering: Buffering is increased for
infill/redevelopment projects.
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   Multifamily Residential Design Standards:
            (1)   Purpose And Content: The purpose of this section is to
provide guidance and parameters for the design of buildings throughout
Blackfoot (outside of Downtown) that meet the following objectives:
               (A)   Design buildings that respond to the unique context of the
site, including frontage/ground floor design, building massing and orientation,
and site environmental conditions;
               (B)   Design buildings that address the street and create a
pedestrian-friendly environment;
               (C)   Promote original and distinctive building design;
               (D)   Utilize building materials that convey a sense of quality
and permanence;
               (E)   Incorporate sustainable development practices; and
               (F)   Demonstrate respect for historic resources.
            (2)   Facade Articulation: Multifamily buildings shall include
articulation features at intervals that relate to the location/size of
individual units within the building (or no more than every thirty feet (30'))
to break up the massing of the building and add visual interest and
compatibility to the surrounding context. At least three (3) of the following
features shall be employed at intervals no greater than the unit interval or
thirty feet (30') (whichever is less).
               (A)   Use of windows and/or entries.
               (B)   Change in roofline.
               (C)   Change in building material, siding style, and/or window
fenestration pattern.
               (D)   Providing vertical building modulation of at least twelve
inches (12") in depth if tied to a change in roofline modulation or a change in
building material, siding style, or color. Balconies may be used to qualify for
this option if they are recessed or projected from the facade by at least
eighteen inches (18"). Juliet balconies or other balconies that appear to be
tacked on to the facade will not qualify for this option unless they employ
high quality materials and effectively meet the intent of the standards.
               (E)   Vertical elements such as a trellis with plants, green
wall, art element.
               (F)   Other design techniques that effectively break up the
massing at no more than thirty foot (30') intervals.
               (G)   Landscape planting bed at least five feet (5') wide or a
raised planter bed at least two feet (2') high and three feet (3') wide in
front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or
screen at least sixty percent (60%) of the wall’s surface within three (3)
years.
               (H)   Installing a vertical trellis in front of the wall with
climbing vines or plant materials.
               (I)   Buildings shall employ techniques to recess or project
individual windows above the ground floor at least two inches (2") from the
facade or incorporate window trim at least four inches (4") in width that
features color that contrasts with the base building color.
               (J)   Departures will be considered provided they meet the
intent of the standards and the design criteria set forth.
            (3)   Utility Meters, Electrical Conduit, And Other Service Utility
Apparatus: These elements shall be located and/or designed to minimize their
visibility to the public. Project designers are strongly encouraged to
coordinate with applicable service providers early in the design process to
determine the best approach in meeting these standards. If such elements are
mounted in a location visible from the street, pedestrian pathway, common open
space, or shared auto courtyards, they shall be screened with vegetation or by
architectural features.
            (4)   Service Element Location And Design: All developments shall
provide a designated spot for service elements (refuse and disposal). Such
elements shall meet the following requirements:
               (A)   Service elements shall be located to minimize the negative
visual, noise, odor, and physical impacts to the street environment, adjacent
(on and off-site) residents or other uses, and pedestrian areas;
               (B)   The designated spot for service elements shall be paved
with concrete; and
               (C)   Appropriate enclosure of the common trash and recycling
elements shall be required.
            (5)   Landscaping Design: Purpose:
               (A)   To provide safe, attractive, and usable open spaces that
promote pedestrian activity;
               (B)   To create usable space that is suitable for leisure and
recreational activities for residents;
               (C)   To create open space that enhances the setting and
character of residential, commercial, and mixed-use development; and
               (D)   To promote a variety of open spaces for multifamily uses.
            (6)   Surface Parking Landscaping:
               (A)   Internal parking lot landscaping is required for all lots
featuring twelve (12) or more parking spaces (including vehicular sales lots).
Uses in Industrial zones are exempt from these requirements.
               (B)   Landscape planters shall be a minimum of eight feet (8')
in width for Class I and II trees and ten feet (10') in width for Class III
trees. The required length of the planters shall be the same as the length of
the adjacent parking space. Dimensions are measured inside curbs.
               (C)   Type C landscaping shall be utilized for planters, with at
least one (1) tree required for every planting island. No linear grouping of
parking spaces shall exceed ten (10) in a row without a planting island.
Interior landscaping shall be used to delineate and guide major traffic
movement within the parking area. Terminal planters shall be provided at the
end of parking rows to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to
aisles and driveways.
         b.   Commercial Uses:
            (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
            (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc. can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than to (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
            (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake
shops, etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a
Neighborhood Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided
for all employees and customers.
         c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
            (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
            (2)   Definitions:
               (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
               (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
            (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
               (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
               (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind
energy system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
               (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
               (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
               (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed
sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The
level, however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
               (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
               (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building
permit applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
               (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
               (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
               (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system
shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer
owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
               (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
               (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so
that in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on
adjoining property.
      19.   Animal Rights: The keeping of farm animals is not allowed except
domestic hen chickens (see 19a). Dogs and cats are allowed as per city code
section
6-2-6. Exotic animals such as goats, potbellied pigs, etc. may be allowed with
the issuance of a conditional use permit.
         a.   Exception: Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this
code to the contrary, the keeping of not more than six (6) domestic hen
chickens is permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling or
duplex, provided that the following requirements are observed:
            (1)   Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary
gain or profit.
            (2)   Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised
or sold for slaughter or for pecuniary gain or profit.
            (3)   The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable
fence, chicken coop, or both. The fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that they prevent the chickens from leaving the
rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set back at least five feet
(5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of
the property.
            (4)   The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do
not become a “nuisance” as that term is defined in this code.
            (5)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term “rear yard”
means a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest
foundation line of the main building and extending across the full width of the
lot. In the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side street,
the rear yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side
property line.
   H.   High Density Residential 2 (HDR2):
      1.   Purposes And Objectives: The HDR2 zone is established to provide
higher density residential housing areas served by collector and arterial
streets. The zone shall be characterized by dwellings for three (3) or more
families, dormitory housing, ample off-street parking, higher traffic volumes,
proximity to other traffic generators and low nuisance potential.
      2.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: All permitted, conditional, and
accessory uses in this zone are regulated by the use table in section
11-4A-6.
      3.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area on any parcel of land in the HDR1
zone is thirty-two thousand six-hundred seventy square feet (32,670 ft2) or
thirty-three thousand six-hundred seventy square feet (33,670ft2) for a corner
lot.
      4.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width in the HDR1 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      5.   Lot Depth: The minimum lot depth in the HDR1 zone is sixty feet
(60').
      6.   Lot Frontage: Each lot or parcel of land in the HDR2 zone shall abut
a public street for a distance of at least sixty feet (60') on a line parallel
to the center line of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac
improved to City standards. Frontage on a street end, which does not have a
cul-de-sac improved to City standards, shall not be counted in meeting this
requirement.
      7.   Prior Created Lots: (Reserved).
      8.   Lot Configuration And Density:
         a.   Dwelling unit density is thirty or more units (30+) per acre.
         b.   PED: The Pedestrian Emphasis District density is regulated by the
City, the adopted Building Code, and any requirements imposed as part of the
required CUP.
         c.   Infill/Redevelopment Area: The Pedestrian Emphasis District (PED)
area lies within the Infill/Redevelopment Overlay.
      9.   Yard Requirements: The following minimum yard requirements shall
apply in the HDR1 zone:
         a.   Front Yard: Each lot or parcel in the HDR2 zone shall have a
minimum front yard of at least seven feet (7') from right-of-way.
         b.   Parking Lot: If a boulevard strip is present, the front yard
setback can be reduced to ten feet (10') for a parking lot.
         c.   Rear Yard: The minimum depth of a rear yard shall be twenty feet
(20').
         d.   Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the HDR2 zone shall have
a side yard of at least six feet (6') or six inches (6") of setback for every
foot (1') of building height, whichever is greater.
      Exception: A setback of ten feet (10') shall be allowed within side yards
that abut other HDR zones, MDR zones, Commercial zones, or Mixed-Use zones,
regardless of building height.
         e.   Infill/Redevelopment Setbacks: Setbacks are increased for infill/
redevelopment projects.
         f.   Accessory Buildings: (Reserved).
      10.   Setbacks And Right-Of-Way:
         a.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed
within the triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line,
beginning at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight
line, provided:
            (1)   Trees are allowed within such triangle if all branches are
trimmed from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
            (2)   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle,
not to exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
            (3)   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures are
allowed within such triangle not to exceed three feet (3') above curb level. A
permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under
this subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
         b.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or
any other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed
by measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot
line from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a
straight line; except for trees as provided in subsection H10a(1) of this
section; shrubs, hedges and flowers as provided in subsection H10a(2) of this
section; and structures as provided in subsection H10a(3) of this section.
         c.   Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected closer than
is allowed by the use district, from the right-of-way line of the street.
Exception: When more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots along a street have
existing buildings with a front setback of not more than twenty feet (20'), any
new structures will only need to meet the twenty foot (20') setback. In no case
shall a front yard of more than thirty feet (30') be required.
         d.   Side Yard: No building or part of a building, including eaves,
shall be erected closer than five feet (5') to any side property line; except
corner lots shall maintain a twenty-foot (20') side yard adjacent to the street
that intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
         e.   Accessory Uses: An accessory use is a building that is
subordinate to, and incidental to, the principal building on the same lot, but
does not include any building containing a dwelling unit. An accessory use is
an activity or structure incidental or secondary to the principal use on the
same lot.
         f.   Underground Parking Structures: Underground parking structures
may be projected into any required setback if the structure is covered by
landscaping or grass and does not raise the grade of the yard by more than two
feet (2').
      11.   Building Height:
         a.   No lot or parcel of land in the HDR2 zone shall have a building
or structure, which exceeds a maximum height of sixty feet (60'), measured at
the top of building’s tallest horizontal wall.
         b.   An unroofed and unenclosed rooftop terrace, an enclosed
stairwell, or elevator providing access to the roof, shall not be included in
the measurement of total building height.
         c.   Accessory Structure: In no case shall the height of an accessory
structure exceed the height of any main structure on the same lot.
         d.   Adjacent Zones: Buildings or portions of buildings within fifty
feet (50') of a residential zone other than HDR1 and HDR2 shall be limited to
thirty-five feet (35').
      12.   Distance Between Buildings: (Reserved).
      13.   Permissible Lot Coverage:
         a.   Building Coverage: In an HDR2 zone, all buildings, including
accessory buildings and structures (including impervious surfaces, e.g.
driveways), shall not cover more than eighty percent (80%) of the area of the
lot or parcel of land.
         b.   Landscaping:
            (1)   At least twenty percent (20%) of the area of any lot shall be
maintained in landscaping.
            (2)   On any lot, concrete or asphaltic cement shall not cover more
than forty percent (40%) of a front yard and one hundred percent (100%) of one
(1) side yard.
      14.   Parking, Loading and Access: Multi-family dwelling, 4 units and
above, require 2 ¼ off street parking units per unit. When the calculation of
the required number of spaces called for herein results in a fractional number,
fractions equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next
highest whole number of spaces.
      15.   Project Plan Approval: (Reserved).
      16.   Buffers And Fencing:
         a.   Old Yellowstone Highway.
         b.   Fencing.
         c.   Buffers.
         d.   Infill/Redevelopment Buffering: Buffering is increased for
infill/redevelopment projects.
      17.   Signs: For signs, see city sign code.
      18.   Other Requirements:
         a.   Multifamily Residential Design Standards:
            (1)   Purpose And Content: The purpose of this section is to
provide guidance and parameters for the design of buildings throughout
Blackfoot (outside of Downtown) that meet the following objectives:
               (A)   Design buildings that respond to the unique context of the
site, including frontage/ground floor design, building massing and orientation,
and site environmental conditions;
               (B)   Design buildings that address the street and create a
pedestrian-friendly environment;
               (C)   Promote original and distinctive building design;
               (D)   Utilize building materials that convey a sense of quality
and permanence;
               (E)   Incorporate sustainable development practices; and
               (F)   Demonstrate respect for historic resources.
            (2)   Facade Articulation: Multifamily buildings shall include
articulation features at intervals that relate to the location/size of
individual units within the building (or no more than every thirty feet (30))
to break up the massing of the building and add visual interest and
compatibility to the surrounding context. At least three (3) of the following
features shall be employed at intervals no greater than the unit interval or
thirty feet (30') (whichever is less).
               (A)   Use of windows and/or entries.
               (B)   Change in roofline.
               (C)   Change in building material, siding style, and/or window
fenestration pattern.
               (D)   Providing vertical building modulation of at least twelve
inches (12") in depth if tied to a change in roofline modulation or a change in
building material, siding style, or color. Balconies may be used to qualify for
this option if they are recessed or projected from the facade by at least
eighteen inches (18"). Juliet balconies or other balconies that appear to be
tacked on to the facade will not qualify for this option unless they employ
high quality materials and effectively meet the intent of the standards.
            (E)   Vertical elements such as a trellis with plants, green wall,
art element.
            (F)   Other design techniques that effectively break up the massing
at no more than thirty-foot (30') intervals.
            (G)   Landscape planting bed at least five feet (5') wide or a
raised planter bed at least two feet (2') high and three feet (3') wide in
front of the wall with planting materials that are sufficient to obscure or
screen at least sixty percent (60%) of the wall’s surface within three (3)
years.
            (H)   Installing a vertical trellis in front of the wall with
climbing vines or plant materials.
            (I)   Buildings shall employ techniques to recess or project
individual windows above the ground floor at least two inches (2") from the
facade or incorporate window trim at least four inches (4") in width that
features color that contrasts with the base building color.
            (J)   Departures will be considered provided they meet the intent
of the standards and the design criteria set forth.
         (3)   Utility Meters, Electrical Conduit, And Other Service Utility
Apparatus: These elements shall be located and/or designed to minimize their
visibility to the public. Project designers are strongly encouraged to
coordinate with applicable service providers early in the design process to
determine the best approach in meeting these standards. If such elements are
mounted in a location visible from the street, pedestrian pathway, common open
space, or shared auto courtyards, they shall be screened with vegetation or by
architectural features.
         (4)   Service Element Location And Design: All developments shall
provide a designated spot for service elements (refuse and disposal). Such
elements shall meet the following requirements:
            (A)   Service elements shall be located to minimize the negative
visual, noise, odor, and physical impacts to the street environment, adjacent
(on- and off-site) residents or other uses, and pedestrian areas;
            (B)   The designated spot for service elements shall be paved with
concrete; and
            (C)   Appropriate enclosure of the common trash and recycling
elements shall be required.
         (5)   Landscaping Design: Purpose:
            (A)   To provide safe, attractive, and usable open spaces that
promote pedestrian activity;
            (B)   To create usable space that is suitable for leisure and
recreational activities for residents;
            (C)   To create open space that enhances the setting and character
of residential, commercial, and mixed-use development; and
            (D)   To promote a variety of open spaces for multifamily uses.
         (6)   Surface Parking Landscaping:
            (A)   Internal parking lot landscaping is required for all lots
featuring twelve (12) or more parking spaces (including vehicular sales lots).
Uses in Industrial zones are exempt from these requirements. Specifically:
Landscape planters shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width for Class I
and II trees and ten feet (10') in width for Class III trees. The required
length of the planters shall be the same as the length of the adjacent parking
space. Dimensions are measured inside curbs;
            (B)   Type C landscaping shall be utilized for planters, with at
least one (1) tree required for every planting island. No linear grouping of
parking spaces shall exceed ten (10) in a row without a planting island.
Interior landscaping shall be used to delineate and guide major traffic
movement within the parking area. Terminal planters shall be provided at the
end of parking rows to protect parked vehicles and confine moving traffic to
aisles and driveways.
      b.   Commercial Uses:
         (1)   Schools and churches are authorized in all residential zones.
Off-street parking must be provided for all participants and employees.
Designated drop-off zones, free from traffic interference, must be provided for
those who arrive in other than personal conveyance.
         (2)   Small service type businesses, such as accounting, tax
preparation, dog groomers, hair salons, childcare services, etc. can be
authorized in most residential zones with the issuance of a conditional use
permit. These businesses cannot have more than two (2) employees. Off-street
parking must be provided for all employees. Such businesses cannot have more
than two (2) customers on the premises at any one time.
         (3)   Small commercial enterprises such as corner markets, bake shops,
etc. can be authorized in residential zones by applying for a Neighborhood
Business District designation. Off-street parking must be provided for all
employees and customers.
      c.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
         (1)   Purpose And Intent: To balance the need for clean, renewable
energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community, the city finds these regulations are necessary to
ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed and
safely sited and installed. This section establishes the regulations and
criteria which allow compatible accessory uses to be located within the various
land use districts. Unless otherwise provided, all accessory uses are subject
to the same regulations as the sponsoring primary use.
         (2)   Definitions:
            (A)   RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind turbine, tower and associated control or conversion
electronics, which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of
utility power. A system is considered a residential wind energy system only if
it supplies electrical power solely for on-site use, except that when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company.
            (B)   TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion
system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the
ground.
         (3)   Regulations: Residential wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning classifications where structures of any sort are
allowed, subject to certain requirements as set forth below:
            (A)   Tower Height: For property sizes less than one acre, the
tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60'). For property sizes of one
acre or more, there is no limitation on tower height, except as imposed by FAA
regulations.
            (B)   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the residential wind energy
system shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
            (C)   Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including
guywire anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property
boundaries of the installation site; provided, that it also complies with any
applicable fire setback requirements.
            (D)   Automatic Over Speed Controls: All wind energy conversion
systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic
over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the residential wind energy system.
            (E)   Sound: Residential wind energy systems shall not exceed sixty
(60) dBA, as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling. The level,
however, may be exceeded during short term events, such as utility outages and/
or severe windstorms.
            (F)   Approved Wind Turbines: Residential wind turbines must be
approved under an emerging technology program, such as the California Energy
Commission, IEC or any other small wind certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
Noncertified residential wind turbines must submit a description of the safety
features of the turbine prepared by a registered mechanical engineer.
            (G)   Compliance With International Building Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind systems shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
International Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted. This analysis may be supplied by the manufacturer. Wet
stamps shall not be required.
            (H)   Compliance With FAA Regulations: Residential wind energy
systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
            (I)   Compliance With National Electric Code: Building permit
applications for residential wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code. This information may be supplied by the manufacturer.
            (J)   Utility Notification: No residential wind energy system shall
be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer owned
generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
            (K)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a tower shall be
forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
            (L)   Placement On Lot: The tower must be placed in the lot so that
in the event the tower falls in any direction, it cannot encroach on adjoining
property.
   19.   Animal Rights: The keeping of farm animals is not allowed except
domestic hen chickens (see 19a). Dogs and cats are allowed as per city code
section
6-2-6. Exotic animals such as goats, potbellied pigs, etc. may be allowed with
the issuance of a conditional use permit.
      a.   Exception: Notwithstanding any restrictions contained in this code
to the contrary, the keeping of not more than six (6) domestic hen chickens is
permitted within the rear yard of any single-family dwelling or duplex,
provided that the following requirements are observed:
         (1)   Eggs produced by such hens shall not be sold for pecuniary gain
or profit.
         (2)   Such hens shall not be slaughtered on the premises or raised or
sold for slaughter or for pecuniary gain or profit.
         (3)   The hens must be contained in the rear yard by suitable fence,
chicken coop, or both. The fence and/or chicken coop must be constructed and
maintained in such a manner that they prevent the chickens from leaving the
rear yard. The fence and/or chicken coop must be set back at least five feet
(5') from the property line on all sides. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
fence may be placed on the property line adjacent to an alleyway at the rear of
the property.
         (4)   The chickens must be maintained in such a manner that they do
not become a “nuisance” as that term is defined in this code.
         (5)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term “rear yard” means
a residential yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest foundation
line of the main building and extending across the full width of the lot. In
the case of a corner lot where the building fronts on a side street, the rear
yard may be established from the rear of the house to the side property line.
(Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021; amd. Ord. 2224, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2236, 4-4-2023; Ord. 2242,
7-5-2023; Ord. 2248, 11-7-2023)
ARTICLE B. COMMERCIAL ZONES
SECTION:
11-4B-1: Commercial And Industrial Zoning Districts
11-4B-2: Regulation Of Use Districts
11-4B-3: Supplementary Use Regulations
11-4B-4: Special Supplementary Commercial And Industrial Use Regulations
11-4B-5: Additional Off-Street Parking And Loading Requirements
11-4B-6: Home Occupations
11-4B-1: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Neighborhood Commercial:
      1.   Neighborhood Commercial C1: The purpose in establishing the
Neighborhood Commercial Zone is to provide a district in which business,
professional and government offices can be established, also in which cultural
facilities and certain other uses of a semicommercial nature can meet the needs
of the neighborhood. (2003 Code § 11-04-09)
      2.   Neighborhood Commercial C1-R: The purpose in establishing the
Neighborhood Commercial Zone is to provide a district in which business,
professional and government offices can be established, also in which cultural
facilities and certain other uses of a semicommercial nature can meet the needs
of the neighborhood. Allowed in the district will be residential apartments,
except in the story abutting street level. Original residential structures
within these zones used for commercial purposes would be allowed to return to
residential use if the structure has not been materially modified from its
exterior residential design, without the requirement of obtaining a conditional
use permit to return to its original use.
   B.   Community Commercial:
      1.   Community Commercial C2: The purpose in establishing the Community
Commercial Zone is to provide a district in which the primary use of land is
for business purposes and promotes the development of retail shopping stores
and service establishments. (2003 Code § 11-04-09)
      2.   Community Commercial C2-R: The purpose in establishing the Community
Commercial Zone is to provide a district in which the primary use of land is
for business purposes and promotes the development of retail shopping stores
and service establishments. Allowed in the district will be residential
apartments, except in the story abutting street level. Original residential
structures within these zones used for commercial purposes would be allowed to
return to residential use if the structure has not been materially modified
from its exterior residential design, without the requirement of obtaining a
conditional use permit to return to its original use.
   C.   Service Commercial C3: The purpose in establishing the Service
Commercial Zone is to provide areas of land where activities of a service
nature are more intensive in character than other Commercial Zones, in which
business could provide service to both the community and industry.
   D.   Light Industrial M1: The purpose in establishing the Light Industrial
Zone is to provide for and encourage industries such that the appearance of
buildings and treatment of land will not be detrimental or obtrusive to
surrounding commercial or residential uses.
   E.   Heavy Industrial M2: The purpose in establishing the Heavy Industrial
Zone is to provide for suitable areas in which heavy industrial uses may locate
and be substantially free from residential or retail commercial activities.
(2003 Code § 11-04-09)
   F.   Downtown Business District (DBD): The purpose in establishing the
Downtown Business District is to provide a district in which the primary use of
land is for business purposes and promotes the development of retail shopping
stores and service establishments. Encouraged in the district will be
residential apartments, except in the story abutting street level.
   G.   Project Redevelopment Option (PRO) Zone:
      1.   Purpose; Applicability:
         a.   Intent: This subsection G creates a regulatory framework to
govern the enactment of regulations to further the intention of the
Comprehensive Plan, particularly, but not exclusively, in older, densely
developed areas of the City.
         b.   Purpose: The purpose of the Project Redevelopment Option ("PRO")
Zone is to create a regulatory tool that permits initiative and flexibility in
creating well-planned, architecturally-designed development that meets the
needs of the community. More particularly, the intent of the City Council in
enacting this subsection G is to:
            (1)   Encourage creative and efficient utilization of land.
            (2)   Encourage assemblage of property to create harmonious and
efficient development patterns and projects.
            (3)   Provide land use and design standards tailored to specific
geographic areas so that new development outcomes are more predictable and
compatible with surrounding land uses.
            (4)   Coordinate property development and design, including large-
scale facilities, with development, both existing and as envisioned by the City
of Blackfoot Comprehensive Plan, on adjoining and nearby property.
            (5)   Minimize the effect of additional traffic.
            (6)   Improve parking and air quality.
            (7)   Encourage new development that fosters a sense of community.
            (8)   Better manage the location, timing, and sequencing of new
development.
            (9)   Provide an opportunity to involve the public.
      2.   Zone Establishment:
         a.   The provisions of this subsection G shall apply to every PRO Zone
created under the authority of this chapter.
         b.   To establish a PRO Zone, an applicant shall submit a petition
(application). The application shall then be considered for approval as
provided in this title.
      3.   Optional Schematic Development Plan:
         a.   Schematic Plan Submittal: An applicant may, before submitting a
proposed PRO application as required by this subsection G, submit an
application showing a proposed schematic development plan for the subject
property. A schematic development plan shall be considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council as provided in this section.
         b.   What To Include In A Schematic Development Plan: A schematic
development plan application shall include the following:
            (1)   A review fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
               (A)   Fifty percent (50%) of the schematic development plan
application fee may be applied to the application fee for a PRO Zone if the
City Council recommends that an applicant apply as provided in subsection G3b
(4) of this section.
            (2)   A public hearing notice fee as required by the City codes,
and administrative policies of the City of Blackfoot.
            (3)   A statement detailing efforts by the applicant to assemble
property to achieve logical boundaries for the proposed development.
            (4)   A schematic development plan which shows how a property could
be developed under proposed PRO Zone regulations. A schematic development plan
shall be drawn to scale and must show a realistic layout reflecting how the
property reasonably could be developed considering the development standards of
a proposed PRO Zone, and existing and envisioned conditions on the subject
property and adjoining property. A schematic development plan should show at
least the following; whatever is shown shall be construed as the intent of the
plan:
               (A)   Location of proposed uses, including dwelling unit density
and occupancy.
               (B)   Height, location, bulk and preliminary elevations of
buildings.
               (C)   Location, arrangement, and configuration of open space,
landscaping, and building setbacks.
               (D)   Location, access points, and design of off- street parking
areas.
               (E)   Number, size, and location of signs.
               (F)   Street layout, and traffic and pedestrian circulation
patterns, including proposed access to the property.
               (G)   Relationship of the property to adjoining and nearby
properties and uses.
            (5)   A schematic development plan is not intended to permit actual
development of property pursuant to such a plan but shall be prepared merely to
represent how the property could be developed. Submittal and review of an
application for a schematic development plan shall not create any vested rights
to development.
               (A)   Neighborhood Meeting: A neighborhood meeting shall be held
at least two (2) weeks prior to presenting a schematic development plan at a
meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
               (B)   Process Leading To The Public Hearing: Pursuant to the
notice and hearing requirements of the State and this Code, the schematic
development plan shall be first submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for a recommendation and thereafter to the City Council for consideration.
After a public hearing, the Council may vote to recommend that an applicant:
                  (i)   Apply to a PRO Zone that would allow development:
                     (a)   As shown on the schematic development plan; or
                  (ii)   As amended to address issues identified by the City
Council to accomplish the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; or
                  (iii)   Not submit a PRO Zone application.
      4.   PRO Zone Application Requirements:
         a.   Requirements: The following materials shall be included with
every application for the establishment of a PRO Zone:
            (1)   Proposed zone name and location.
            (2)   A statement showing how the proposed PRO Zone relates to the
Comprehensive Plan and furthers the intent of the plan.
            (3)   A statement detailing efforts by the applicant to assemble
property to achieve logical boundaries for the proposed development.
            (4)   Proposed zone text, including:
               (A)   Permitted, conditional, and accessory uses (individually
listed and defined).
               (B)   Proposed development standards, including:
                  (i)   Land use standards are establishing land use types,
occupancy, location, density, buffering and any other element envisioned by
applicable sections of the General Plan.
                  (ii)   Lot standards are establishing requirements for
minimum lot area, depth, coverage, and dimensions.
                  (iii)   Building setback standards for the front, side, and
rear yards.
                  (iv)   Design standards addressing building height, building
orientation, common and private open space, natural resource protection,
architectural design, and any other provisions proposed to be included in the
PRO Zone.
                  (v)   Landscaping and buffering standards.
                  (vi)   Parking.
                  (vii)   A statement that the PRO Zone will conform to all
applicable chapters of this Code, except as may be specifically amended by the
adopted PRO Zone text.
                  (viii)   Evidence of justification for requested changes to
such standards. Deviation from parking and street standards outlined in this
Code is intended to be rare and shall be approved by three (3) members of the
City Council.
            (5)   A preliminary project plan as provided in this title and
including the following additional information:
               (A)   Relationship of the property to surrounding properties and
uses.
               (B)   Number, size, and location of all proposed signs.
            (6)   A review fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) plus a fee
of:
               (A)   Thirty dollars ($30.00) for each dwelling unit proposed in
a residential project; or
               (B)   Ten dollars ($10.00) for each one hundred (100) square
feet of gross floor area in a non-residential project.
            (7)   A public hearing notice fee as required.
      5.   Review Of PRO Zone Application - Approval:
         a.   Neighborhood: A neighborhood meeting shall be held at least two
(2) weeks prior to presenting a PRO Zone application at a meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
         b.   Considering An Application: When considering an application for a
proposed PRO Zone, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the
City Council may adopt, modifications to PRO regulations and standards proposed
by an applicant who, in the opinion of the approving authority, is needed to
meet the intent and requirements of this subsection G.
         c.   Approval: A proposed PRO Zone application and associated
preliminary project plan shall be approved only if, in the opinion of the
approving authority, development proposed on the property will:
            (1)   Further applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and
any applicable master plan, particularly provisions which establish density
limitations.
            (2)   Conform to applicable chapters of this title and except as
may be specifically amended by the adopted PRO Zone text.
            (3)   Preserve and enhance the subject property and neighborhood by
achieving integrated planning and design.
            (4)   Be compatible with development on adjoining and nearby
property, both existing and as envisioned by the City of Blackfoot
Comprehensive Plan.
            (5)   Minimize the effect of traffic congestion and improve parking
and air quality, including providing opportunities for alternative modes of
transportation such as walking, bicycling, or transit.
         d.   Development Agreement: When deemed necessary or desirable by the
City, application and approval of a PRO Zone and any development within a PRO
Zone may require the submission and support of a development agreement.
      6.   Zone Designation:
         a.   Adopted PRO Zone: Upon approval, each adopted PRO Zone shall be
listed in subsection G10 of this section and shall be independent of any other
PRO Zone.
         b.   Text Amendment: A text amendment to this title which establishes
regulations for a particular PRO Zone shall be adopted as a separate chapter of
this title and shall be identified sequentially. Each such chapter shall have a
unique name combined with the designation "PRO" followed by a code categorizing
the PRO by project type as (B) Business, (A) Apartment or other multi-family,
or (R) Residential - One family, then followed by a sequential number without
regard to project category, corresponding to the chapter number for the zone,
the first of which shall be "1".
      7.   Permits Required: After approval of a PRO Zone and an associated
preliminary project plan, and before the issuance of any building permits, a
final project plan shall be submitted as required by this Code. Applications
for subdivision approval and any other needed permits shall be submitted as
needed to implement an approved preliminary project plan.
      8.   Project Plan Variations And Amendments: After a PRO Zone is adopted
and a preliminary project plan for the subject property has been approved, no
material variations shall be made to the preliminary project plan and the
development standards adopted in the applicable PRO Zone unless the zoning text
or map, as the case may be, is amended by the City Council to permit such
variation. Such amendments to an approved preliminary project plan shall be
obtained only by following the procedures required for first approval set forth
in this subsection G.
      9.   Reversion Of Zoning: Substantial action shall be taken to obtain
needed additional approvals and begin construction authorized by such approvals
within one year after the support of a PRO Zone. If a final project plan has
not been approved within one year after a PRO Zone has been applied to a
specific property, action shall be initiated to rezone the property to the zone
previously existing on the property or such other zone as may be deemed
appropriate by the City Council.
      10.   PRO Zones Adopted: The following Project Redevelopment Option Zones
are anticipated to be adopted (example): Blackfoot Southgate Project
Redevelopment Option Zone (Southgate PRO Zone).
      11.   Reserved:
      12.   Uses Must Be In Conformity: Land or premises shall be used, unless
otherwise provided in this subsection G, in conformity with regulations herein
set forth for the zoning district in which said land or premises is located.
      13.   Building In Conformity: No building or structure shall be erected
or used unless in conformity within the regulations herein set forth for the
zoning district in which said building or structure is located.
      14.   Architectural Design Standards: Reserved.
      15.   Commercial Lighting Standards: Reserved. (Ord. 2082, 8-6-2008, eff.
8-6-2008; amd. Ord. 2180, 5-7-2019; Ord. 2181, 5-7-2019; Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4B-2: REGULATION OF USE DISTRICTS:
District regulations shall be as set forth in section
11-4A-6, "Official Schedule Of Use Districts", of this chapter. (Ord. 2113, 2-
5-2013, eff. 2-5-2013; amd. Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021)
11-4B-3: SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   C1 District And Downtown Business District Regulations:
      1.   No front yard or side yard shall be required, except when a building
or group of buildings abuts upon a Residential District. A yard of not less
than ten feet (10') in width or a sight obstructing fence shall be provided on
the side of the lot abutting the Residential District.
      2.   There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen
feet (15'), or a sight obstructing fence when abutting upon a Residential Zone.
The rear yard may be used for off- street parking and loading. If there exists
an alleyway behind said property, no rear yard is required.
      3.   There is no minimum lot width or minimum area requirements.
      4.   Residential usage in commercial areas shall follow the area
requirements as set forth in the HDR1 Residential Zone regulations. Residential
usage in the Downtown Business District shall have no minimum or maximum area
requirements.
      5.   Height limit is not more than sixty feet (60').
      6.   Off-street parking is delineated in section
11-4B-5 of this chapter.
      7.   Signs are controlled by title 10, chapter 6 of this Code. No
animated signs that are deemed to have a deteriorating influence upon
surrounding properties may be used.
   B.   C2 District Regulations: All regulations that apply in the C1 Zone also
apply in the C2 Zone.
   C.   C3 District Regulations: All regulations that apply in the C1 Zone
(except height regulations) also apply in the C3 Zone.
   D.   M1 District Regulations: All regulations that apply in the C3 Zone also
apply in the M1 Zone.
   E.   M2 District Regulations: All regulations that apply in the C3 Zone also
apply in the M2 Zone.
(2003 Code § 11-04-12) (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2181, 5-7-2019; Ord. 2208, 7-6-
2021; Ord. 2280, 10-7-2025)
11-4B-4: SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTARY COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE REGULATIONS:
The special supplementary use regulations that apply to Commercial and
Industrial Use Districts are:
   A.   Visibility At Intersections: No structures shall be allowed within the
triangle formed by measuring thirty feet (30') along each lot line, beginning
at their intersection, and closing such triangle with a straight line,
provided:
      1.   Trees are allowed within each triangle if all branches are trimmed
from the curb level to at least seven feet (7') above the curb level.
      2.   Shrubs, hedges and flowers are allowed within such triangle, not to
exceed three feet (3') above the curb level.
      3.   Fences, walls and all other sight obscuring structures not to exceed
three feet (3') above curb level are allowed within such triangle. A permit
must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator for all structures under this
subsection. A fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council per permit shall be charged.
   B.   Visibility At Alleys And Driveways: No fences, walls, hedges or any
other sight obstructing objects shall be allowed within the triangle formed by
measuring fifteen feet (15') along the alley or driveway and along the lot line
from the intersection of said lines, and closing such triangle with a straight
line; except for trees as provided in subsection A1 of this section; shrubs,
hedges and flowers as provided in subsection A2 of this section; and structures
as provided in subsection A3 of this section.
   C.   Accessory Uses: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of the premises that does not alter the essential characteristic of the use
considered as a whole and as related to other uses permitted in the same
district.
   D.   Structures To Have Access: Every building hereafter erected or moved
shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or with access to an appropriate
private street, and all structures shall be located on lots as to provide safe
and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street
parking.
   E.   Boat Docks And Boat Landing Facilities: These facilities shall be
permitted along the shores of the Snake River Jensen Grove Lake, and other
bodies of water located within the City, and the impact area when approved by
the city council. Plans and specifications shall be required for review to
ensure the safety of the public and the users of the facilities.
   F.   Yard Space For One Building Only: No required yard or other open space
around an existing building, or that is hereafter provided around any building
for the purpose of complying with provisions of this chapter, shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, nor shall
any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as
providing the yard or open space whereon a building is to be created or
established.
   G.   Sale Or Lease Of Required Yard: No space needed to meet the width,
yard, coverage, parking or other requirements of this chapter for a lot or
building may be sold or leased apart from such lot or building, unless other
space so complying is provided.
   H.   Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Space Required: No parcel or land that has
less than the minimum width and area requirements for the zone in which it is
located may be cut off from a larger part of land for the purpose (whether
immediate or future) of building or development as a lot.
   I.   Off-Street Parking Requirements: Off-street parking must be usable
space within a public or private parking area or building, that is not less
than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'),
exclusive of access drives, aisles and ramps, for the storage of one passenger
automobile or commercial vehicle. This space may not be on any public street
and must comply with the federal Americans with disabilities act (ADA). Each
use district zone has an off-street parking requirement. Additional off-street
parking may be required. See the additional off-street parking and loading
requirements in section
11-4B-5 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-04-13) (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2208, 7-
6-2021)
11-4B-5: ADDITIONAL OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Expansions: When the use of any building, structure or premises is
expanded through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity or other units of measurement that would have required additional off-
street parking or loading facilities if such use were originally planned when
initial approval was sought or granted, additional parking and loading
facilities shall be required consistent with the current regulations now in
effect for the expanded use.
   B.   New Uses: Whenever the existing use of a building or structure is
changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use.
   C.   Access For Commercial, Industrial Uses: Access to parking spaces as
required herein for commercial and industrial uses shall be not less than
twelve feet (12') wide and not more than forty feet (40') wide at the curb
line.
   D.   Existing Buildings Not Considered Nonconforming: No lawfully existing
building shall be deemed to be a nonconforming building solely because of the
lack of any such required spaces; provided, that space being used for off-
street parking or loading in connection with any such building at the time of
the effective date hereof shall not be further reduced in area or capacity.
   E.   Fractional Numbers: When the calculation of the required number of
spaces called for herein results in a fractional number, fractions equal to or
greater than one-half (1/2) shall be adjusted to the next higher whole number
of spaces.
   F.   Uses Not Specified: Parking space requirements for a use not
specifically mentioned shall be the same as for a use specified that has
similar traffic generating characteristics.
   G.   Mixed Uses: Except as required for dwellings and motels, off-street
parking facilities for several buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed
uses, may be provided collectively; provided, that the total number of spaces
so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements
for each of the buildings or uses.
   H.   Surfacing: Every open off-street parking area having more than four (4)
parking spaces shall be hard surfaced, including access driveways.
   I.   Lighting And Screening: Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking
areas shall be directed away from residential properties, and such parking
areas shall be effectively screened on any side adjoining property in a
residential zone by a wall, fence or hedge to a height of six feet (6'), except
for the front yard setback area of the adjoining residential property, in which
case the maximum height shall be three feet (3').
   J.   Location For Dwellings: Required parking spaces for dwellings shall be
upon the same premises as the dwelling.
   K.   Minimum Number Of Parking Spaces: The minimum number of parking spaces
as hereinafter set forth shall be provided for all uses allowed and conditional
uses permitted in any zone; provided, that a greater number of spaces may be
required in any case where a conditional use permit is involved:
      1.   For each guest bedroom in a hotel, motel, club, lodging house,
fraternity or sorority house: One parking space; plus one parking space for
each three (3) beds in a dormitory.
      2.   For each four (4) beds in a convalescent, nursing or rest home,
sanatorium or home for the care of children or the aged: One parking space;
plus one parking space for each doctor assigned full time to the staff; plus
two (2) parking spaces for each three (3) other employees.
      3.   For a hospital: One parking space for each one thousand (1,000)
square feet of net floor area; plus one parking space for each four (4) regular
employees.
      4.   For a church, auditorium, theater, sports arena or mortuary: One
parking space for each five (5) seats in the principal assembly room or area.
(2003 Code § 11-04-14)
      5.   For floor space used by the public or by members in a social hall,
dance hall, nightclub, pool hall, restaurant or other similar enterprise or
establishment: One parking space for every five (5) people. (Building occupancy
to be identified by the adopted building code.) (2003 Code § 11-04-14)
      6.   For a bowling alley: Four (4) parking spaces for each lane.
      7.   Business offices, not otherwise specified: One parking space for
each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of net floor space.
      8.   Medical or dental office or clinic: One parking space for each two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of net floor area.
      9.   Retail stores, banks and shops other than as specified below: One
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of net floor area in
excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet. For drive-in banks: Three (3)
additional parking spaces for each teller window.
      10.   Retail sales establishments handling only durable goods or bulky
merchandise such as machinery, furniture or vehicles, personal service and
repair shops, wholesale stores: One parking space for each six hundred (600)
square feet of net floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet.
      11.   For manufacturing establishments: One parking space for each
employee, based on the greatest number of employees at any one time.
      12.   For every building hereafter erected containing more than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet in area and that is designed to be occupied by
any use requiring regular receipt or dispatch of merchandise by truck, there
shall be provided and maintained, with adequate design to provide safe and
efficient means of access and maneuvering, one loading space not less than
thirty feet (30') in length and ten feet (10') in width, exclusive of access
platforms and maneuvering areas.
      13.   Any use of an existing building in the central business district,
defined as "that part of the city centrally located where traditionally most of
its commercial activities have been concentrated, such as financial service,
retail, government, entertainment and offices with the traditional street
pattern", does not have to meet the parking requirements for said existing
buildings if a variance is obtained from the planning and zoning commission. A
regular variance hearing as outlined in Idaho Code section 67-6509 is not
required and the petitioner is not required to attend the planning and zoning
commission meeting. The zoning administrator will present the request to the
commission for a vote.
   L.   Parking, Storage Or Use Of Major Recreational Equipment: For the
purpose of these regulations, "major recreational equipment" is defined as
including boats and trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches
(designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent
trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting such
recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when
parked or stored on a residential lot, or any location not approved for such
use.
   M.   Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: See title 10, chapter 3 of
this code.
   N.   Frontage And Access: For the purpose of ensuring orderly development
and to provide adequate access for firefighting equipment and other services to
all buildings, no residence or commercial building shall be erected or moved
onto any lot, tract or parcel of land in any use district or zone adopted under
the provisions of this chapter unless said lot, tract or parcel of land has
thirty feet (30') of frontage on a public right of way and has reasonably
efficient access thereto to vehicular traffic and has been legally platted; and
provided further that a building permit may be issued for construction of a
residence on a private easement where, in the opinion of the planning and
zoning commission, the following conditions have reasonably been met:
      1.   Minimum easement width of twenty feet (20').
      2.   Maximum easement length of four hundred feet (400').
      3.   Minimum turnaround radius of sixty two feet (62'), or equivalent "T"
style turnaround.
      4.   Maximum grade of ten percent (10%).
      5.   The easement must serve land that otherwise would have no access to
a public road.
   O.   For pre-existing buildings in the downtown business district: The
Planning and Zoning Commission may consider a variance to the parking space
requirements for existing buildings in the downtown which are located in areas
that may be impractical to require such number of spaces.
(2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021; Ord. 2259, 9-3-2024)
11-4B-6: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   General: Home occupations shall be permitted in all zones, with the
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. The home occupation must be clear and
obvious that it is subordinate to the main use or dwelling unit for residential
purposes. Home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the primary
structure on the premises.
   B.   Conditions: The following conditions shall apply to home occupations:
      1.   The home occupation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the floor area of the primary structure.
      2.   Other than those related by blood, marriage or adoption, no more
than one person may be employed in the home occupation.
      3.   Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than fifty percent
(50%) of the area permitted to be used as a home occupation.
      4.   There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on said
premises.
      5.   The use may not materially change the character of the dwelling or
adversely affect the uses permitted in a residential zone.
      6.   Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and
scheduled so that not more than one patron vehicle is on the premises at the
same time.
      7.   Two (2) additional parking spaces shall be provided on the premises,
except only one need be provided if the home occupation does not have an
employee.
   C.   Permits Required: To be approved for a home occupation, applicants must
apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a Conditional Use Permit.
   D.   Application Fee: All applicants for a conditional use permit must pay
an application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city
council at the time they apply for the permit.
(2003 Code § 11-04-16) (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2208, 7-6-2021; Ord. 2251, 2-6-
2023)
CHAPTER 5
MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Purpose
11-5-2: Provisions Governing Parks; Conflicts
11-5-3: Mobile Home Parks
11-5-3-1: Location In Mobile Home Park Required
11-5-3-2: Parking And Storage Of Unoccupied Mobile Homes
11-5-3-3: Approval Of Plans And Documents Necessary
11-5-3-4: Preliminary Plan And Documents
11-5-3-5: Final Site Plan
11-5-3-6: Stage Construction Permitted
11-5-3-7: Guarantee Of Performance
11-5-3-8: Development Of Parks And Play Areas
11-5-4: Travel Trailer Parks
11-5-4-1: Approval Of Plans And Documents Necessary
11-5-4-2: Preliminary Plan And Documents
11-5-4-3: Final Site Plan
11-5-4-4: Stage Construction Permitted
11-5-4-5: Guarantee Of Performance
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
The regulations of this chapter establish minimum standards and requirements
for the construction or expansion of mobile home and/or travel trailer parks
for the city. These regulations are intended to provide a stable, healthful
environment for those residents choosing to reside in such parks, while
protecting adjacent land uses. (2003 Code § 11-05-01)
11-5-2: PROVISIONS GOVERNING PARKS; CONFLICTS:
Mobile home and/or travel trailer parks that are desired or that are required
shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Whenever
there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances
of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Subjects not covered
by this chapter shall be governed by the respective provisions found in other
land use ordinances of the city. (2003 Code § 11-05-02)
11-5-3: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
The development of a mobile home park shall conform to the standards and
requirements of this section. (2003 Code § 11-05-03)
11-5-3-1: LOCATION IN MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIRED:
   It shall be unlawful to maintain a mobile home or travel trailer for
residential purposes outside a mobile home park or in a mobile home subdivision
previously titled R2-T or MDR2 zone. Such prohibition shall apply regardless of
whether the parking site shall be on private or public premises, streets,
alleys or highways. Mobile homes used for residential quarters for watchmen or
caretakers and located on the premises of an industrial establishment in any
industrial zone may be permitted by a conditional use permit.
(2003 Code § 11-05-04; amd. Ord. 2280, 10-7-2025)
11-5-3-2: PARKING AND STORAGE OF UNOCCUPIED MOBILE HOMES:
   Parking of unoccupied mobile homes is prohibited on public premises,
streets, alleys or highways, at all times, except for emergency purposes.
(2003 Code § 11-05-04)
11-5-3-3: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS NECESSARY:
Any person wishing to construct a mobile home park shall obtain from the zoning
administrator information pertaining to the city's plan of land use, streets,
public facilities, zoning and subdivision ordinances, and other requirements
affecting the land within the development. Before any permit can be issued for
any construction connected with a mobile home park, the preliminary plans,
required documents pertaining to the development and the final plan shall have
been approved as hereinafter set forth. (2003 Code § 11-05-04)
11-5-3-4: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND DOCUMENTS:
The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
   A.   Plan Requirements: One (1) digital copy and, for commercial
developments only, one (1) hard copy of the preliminary plan must be submitted
to the zoning administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the
planning and zoning commission at which the plan will be considered. Plats
shall comply with Idaho Code 50-1304 and any amendments thereto, or as
recommended by the zoning administrator, and shall show the following
information:
      1.   The topography represented by contours shown at no greater intervals
than two feet (2') when required by the zoning administrator.
      2.   The proposed street and mobile home park layout.
      3.   Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds and open spaces.
      4.   Size and character of recreation buildings and other structures
associated with land and facilities to be used by the mobile home occupants.
      5.   Layout of a typical trailer space.
      6.   Tabulations showing the following:
         a.   Area of land within the mobile home park.
         b.   Number of mobile homes permitted.
         c.   Number of mobile home spaces provided for in the mobile home
park.
         d.   Percent of area to be devoted to parks and playgrounds.
         e.   Number of off street parking spaces.
      7.   Proposed location of off street parking spaces.
      8.   Generalized landscape planting plan.
      9.   Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water
and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs and other
improvements.
      10.   Draft of proposed documents including the following:
         a.   Management policies, covenants and restrictions.
         b.   Maintenance agreement.
      11.   Typical street cross sections.
      12.   Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require.
   B.   Standards And Requirements: The development of a mobile home park shall
conform to the standards and requirements listed below:
      1.   The area shall be in one ownership and shall remain in one ownership
and shall not be subdivided.
      2.   The final development plan must be prepared by an engineer or
architect licensed to practice in the state.
      3.   The initial site size for a mobile home park shall provide space for
a minimum of five (5) mobile homes and such additional area as may be necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter.
      4.   The mobile homes may be clustered; provided, that the gross density
of mobile home units within the development does not exceed seven (7) units per
acre.
      5.   The land area not contained in individual lots, roads or automobile
parking spaces shall be set aside and developed as parks, playground and
service areas for the common use and enjoyment of the occupants of the mobile
home park within two (2) years from the date of approval of the mobile home
park.
      6.   No less than five hundred (500) square feet per mobile home in the
mobile home park shall be set aside for parks and playground. The land covered
by vehicular roadways, sidewalks, off street parking and landscaped area
surrounding mobile home spaces that are pertinent to each mobile home, and the
area devoted to service facilities, shall not qualify as part of the area
required for parks and playgrounds. Designated open space shall be located as
near the central part of the development as good design shall permit.
      7.   No mobile home or add on shall be closer than ten feet (10') to a
property or lot line. A rear yard of twenty five feet (25') will be required,
except that a minimum rear yard of fifteen feet (15') will be accepted if one
of the required side yards is a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). All mobile
homes and additions shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from all
interior, private mobile home park roadways.
      8.   All off street parking spaces and driveways shall be hard surfaced
within one year from the date of approval of the mobile home park.
      9.   A strip of land at least twenty feet (20') wide surrounding the
mobile home park shall be left unoccupied by mobile homes and shall be planted
and maintained in lawn, shrubs and trees designed to afford privacy to the
development.
      10.   All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of the confines of
a mobile home must be housed in a closed structure compatible in design and
construction to the mobile home and to any service buildings within the mobile
home park. All patios, garages, carports and other additions must also be
compatible in design and construction with the mobile home and with the service
buildings as approved by the zoning administrator.
      11.   Roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated
traffic as follows:
         a.   For one-way and two-way with parking, fifty feet (50') in width.
         b.   For entrance street, a minimum of sixty feet (60') in width or
forty eight feet (48') curb to curb. (2003 Code § 11-05-05)
         c.   All streets shall be bordered by curb, gutter and sidewalk, and
shall be hard surfaced, or constructed as specified by the planning and zoning
commission. (2003 Code § 11-05-05; amd. 2012 Code)
      12.   There shall be no more than two (2) entrances from the mobile home
park into any one street, which entrances shall be no closer than one hundred
feet (100') to each other, nor closer than seventy feet (70') to the corner of
an intersection. All mobile home parks shall have at least two (2) entrances
and more may be required depending on the size of the development.
      13.   Access shall be provided to each mobile home space by means of an
accessway reserved for maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall be kept
free from trees and other immovable obstructions. Paving the accessway shall
not be required. Use of planks, steel mats or other means during placement of a
mobile home shall be allowed so long as the same are removed immediately after
placement of the mobile home.
      14.   Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking
space per mobile home space within the mobile home park. In no case shall the
parking space be located greater than one hundred feet (100') away from the
mobile home space it is designed to serve.
      15.   In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the
other laws of the city, all mobile home parks shall also conform to the
requirements of the state health department. In the event of any conflict
between said regulations and this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall
govern.
      16.   Mobile home parks may include a launderette for the convenience of
the occupants of the park, but not for the general public.
      17.   All mobile homes shall be located at least thirty feet (30') back
from any public street and the resulting yard must be landscaped, except for
driveways.
      18.   An aggregate area of at least one hundred (100) square feet for
each mobile home space contained within the mobile home park shall be provided
for the storage of the renters' boats, trailers, campers and other items that
cannot be stored in the mobile homes. Said storage space shall be enclosed with
a sight obscuring fence of no less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet
(8') in height.
      19.   The site of any mobile home park shall be graded and/or filled and
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or waste water of any
kind. A mobile home park shall not be permitted where there is inadequate
drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained for patios, mobile
home stands, buildings, sidewalks, streets and other improvements.
      20.   Signs as may be required by the zoning administrator shall be
placed in all mobile home parks indicating the direction of travel and the
areas where no automobile parking will be permitted. (2003 Code § 11-05-05)
      21.   All streets, water, sanitary sewer and drain systems shall meet
city standards and shall meet the approval of the public works department.
(2003 Code § 11-05-05; amd. 2012 Code)
      22.   Any mobile home park that has been legally established and that was
in use at the time of the effective date hereof shall be deemed to be
nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use may be continued notwithstanding the
fact that it may not comply with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that
such nonconforming use does not constitute a hazard to health or a nuisance.
Such nonconforming use shall not be extended, changed or enlarged, except in
compliance with this chapter. If any mobile home or mobile home park was
illegally established at the effective date hereof, the enactment of this
chapter shall not be deemed to render such use legal unless such use is
expressly authorized by the terms of this chapter.
      23.   Only mobile homes shall be allowed to occupy a mobile home space in
a mobile home park.
      24.   Operation of a mobile home park shall not be hazardous or
detrimental to existing neighborhood uses.
      25.   Destruction, loss or damage of natural, scenic or historical
features of major importance to the city will not be allowed.
   C.   Documents: Documents shall also be submitted with the preliminary plan
consisting of the following:
      1.   A declaration of management policies, covenants and restrictions
setting forth the responsibilities and duties of the renters or occupants and
owner within the mobile home park.
      2.   An agreement between the mobile home developers and the city stating
among other things:
         a.   The developer will construct the project in accordance with the
approved plans.
         b.   In the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners,
successors or assigns to maintain the common areas, landscaping and other
improvements in good condition, the city may perform the necessary work and for
the purposes may enter in or upon the land and do said work and charge the cost
thereof, including reasonable attorney fees, against the owners or their
successors or assigns.
   D.   Review And Approvals:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission shall review the plan and
proposed documents to determine compliance with all portions of the city land
use plan and this title. In considering said plan, the planning and zoning
commission, among other things, shall make sure that such developments shall
constitute a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability
and that it will not adversely affect amenities in the surrounding area. The
planning and zoning commission may require changes to be made in the plan or
documents. They may also require additional yards or buffers or other
improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or
parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval that are
necessary to ensure that the development will mix harmoniously with adjoining
or nearby uses, and to ensure that the stated quality of the maintenance will
be carried out.
      2.   An application for approval of a mobile home park shall be granted
or denied only after a public hearing by the planning and zoning commission.
Notice of the hearing shall be given to a newspaper of general circulation at
least fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing.
      3.   If approved by the planning and zoning commission, the application
with the commission's recommendations shall be submitted to the city council
for its approval. An application denied by the planning and zoning commission
may be appealed to the city council. Said appeal must be made in writing within
ten (10) days after the denial is made by the planning and zoning commission.
Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of one year. (2003
Code § 11-05-05; amd. Ord. 2270, 6-3-2025)
11-5-3-5: FINAL SITE PLAN:
   A.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan and documents by the city
council, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a final site
plan of either the entire mobile home park or the first stage of such
development that is to be constructed, and final copies of the required
documents. Such plan shall be drawn to scale and provide, in detail, the
information required under section
11-5-3-4 of this chapter, the preliminary plans and documents. This shall
include detailed and complete plans of the alignment, location and grades of
all streets and utilities.
   B.   Copies of the final approved documents shall also be filed in the
office of the zoning administrator and until the guarantee of performance
required below in this chapter has been properly posted. (2003 Code § 11-05-06)
11-5-3-6: STAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:
Development may be carried out in progressive stages in which event each stage
shall be so planned that the requirements and intent of this chapter shall be
fully complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for the
initial stage shall provide for less than five (5) mobile home spaces and such
additional as may be necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. (2003
Code § 11-05-07)
11-5-3-7: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Ability To Perform:
      1.   Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of the
mobile home park, the developer must submit evidence satisfactory to the
council that the developer has the financial means and the ability to complete
the stage of construction for which he has applied for a building permit.
      2.   Such evidence shall consist of the contractor's bid or the
engineer's or architect's estimate of the amount required to complete the
development, together with the resources of the developer committed to such
expenditure, or the proof of the loan commitment sufficient to construct and
complete such development.
   B.   Possession And Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of the mobile home
park shall be allowed until the improvements as planned for each stage shall be
fully constructed. However, if the developer desires to have any occupancy of a
portion of the partially developed staged construction, then the developer
shall post bond as security for the completion of all improvements, including,
but not limited to, landscaping, road improvements, pedestrianways, curb,
gutters, road surfacing, water and sewer lines, and common facilities as shown
on the final site plan. Upon the posting of bond satisfactory in form and
amount to the city council for the completion of such improvement, occupancy
may be granted upon a partially constructed mobile home park.
   C.   Estimates: All estimates of completion and costs shall be submitted to
the city engineer for his approval.
   D.   Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bonds or other assurance of
completion of improvements in a development of mobile home parks shall be for a
minimum of two (2) years from the date of approval of the development by the
city council. An extension of time may be granted by the city council upon
application of the developer, provided such an application is submitted at
least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the bond, and provided the
issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
   E.   Default: In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to
satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time limitation,
the city council may declare the bond or other assurances forfeited and the
city may install or cause to be installed, the required improvements using the
proceeds from the bonds or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
   F.   Release Of Security: The developer shall be responsible for the quality
of all materials and workmanship. All street, utility and park work shall be
continuously inspected by the city, and the city engineer shall make a final
inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the city council.
If the improvements do not meet the standards and the plans, the engineer shall
so report and the developer shall be obliged to correct the improvements and
complete the installation to meet all such plans to be approved by the city
engineer. Upon the city engineer's approval of the installation or
improvements, the bond or other assurance shall be released and exonerated.
   G.   Continuing Obligation:
      1.   Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain
the mobile home park or any portion thereof in accordance with the approved
management policies, covenants, conditions, restrictions and agreements shall
be deemed a public nuisance endangering the health, safety and general welfare
of the public and a detriment to the surrounding area.
      2.   All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to,
utilities, drainage, streets and snow removal shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
   H.   Removal, Abatement: In addition to any other remedy provided by law for
the abatement or removal of such public nuisance, the city may remove or abate
the nuisance and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees,
to the owner. (2003 Code § 11-05-08)
11-5-3-8: DEVELOPMENT OF PARKS AND PLAY AREAS:
The parks and play areas shall be protected against building development by
conveying to the city an open space easement over such open areas, restricting
the area against any future building or use, except as is consistent with that
of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational
satisfaction of the residents. Buildings or uses for noncommercial,
recreational or cultural purposes, compatible with the open space objectives,
may be permitted only with the express approval of the city council, following
approval of building, site and operational plans by the planning and zoning
commission. The granting of such open space easement shall not absolve the
developer from the responsibility of developing and maintaining the parks and
play areas. (2003 Code § 11-05-09)
11-5-4: TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS:
11-5-4-1: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND DOCUMENTS NECESSARY:
Any person wishing to construct a travel trailer park shall obtain from the
zoning administrator information pertaining to the city plan of land use,
streets, public facilities and other requirements affecting the land within the
development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction connected with
a travel trailer park, the preliminary plans, required documents pertaining to
the development and the final plan shall have been approved as hereinafter set
forth. (2003 Code § 11-05-10)
11-5-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND DOCUMENTS:
The preliminary plan and documents shall be prepared and submitted as follows:
   A.   Plan Requirements: One (1) digital copy and, for commercial
developments only, one (1) hard copy of the preliminary plan must be submitted
to the zoning administrator at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the
planning and zoning commission at which the plan will be considered. Plats
shall comply with Idaho Code 50-1304 and any amendments thereto, or as
recommended by the zoning administrator, and shall show the following
information:
      1.   Proposed road and trailer space layout.
      2.   Proposed reservation for parks, playgrounds and other open space.
      3.   Proposed location for service facilities.
      4.   A generalized landscape plan.
      5.   Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water
and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs and other
improvements.
      6.   Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require.
   B.   Standards And Requirements:
      1.   Each travel trailer park shall be held in one ownership and shall
contain at least two (2) acres of land.
      2.   All travel trailer parks shall abut upon a collector or arterial
street, as set forth in the major street plan of the city.
      3.   All travel trailers shall be set back at least thirty feet (30')
from any public street, and fifteen feet (15') from an interior private
roadway.
      4.   The roadway system shall provide convenient circulation through the
travel trailer park and provide access to each travel trailer space. No travel
trailer space will be permitted direct access to a public street, road or
highway, other than by means of the travel trailer park roadway system. All
entrances and exits from the travel trailer park shall be forward motion only.
No exit or entrance from a travel trailer park shall be through a residential
zone and no entrance or exit shall be located closer than seventy feet (70') to
the intersection of two (2) streets.
      5.   All one-way and two-way roadways shall have curb to curb width of at
least thirty seven feet (37') and all roadways shall be hard surfaced.
      6.   All areas within the park that are not hard surfaced shall be
landscaped and maintained with lawns, trees and shrubs designed to provide
privacy and noise containment and shall be equipped with adequate sprinkling or
watering devices as approved by the zoning administrator. A landscape screen at
least eight feet (8') in width shall be provided adjacent to the exterior
boundaries of the park.
      7.   Each travel trailer space shall be at least twenty feet (20') in
width and at least forty feet (40') in length.
      8.   No travel trailer space shall be rented for a period of more than
thirty (30) days and no travel trailer that exceeds eight feet (8') in width
shall be placed in a travel trailer park.
      9.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all travel trailer spaces shall
be served by an approved water and sewage disposal system. In addition, each
travel trailer park shall have a sewage dump for self-contained travel units.
      10.   In addition to meeting the above requirements, all travel trailer
parks shall conform to the requirements of the state and city health
regulations relating to travel trailer parks.
      11.   The site of any travel trailer park shall be graded and/or filled
and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or waste water of any
kind. A travel trailer park shall not be permitted where there is inadequate
drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided and maintained for all patios,
travel trailer stands, buildings, streets and other improvements.
      12.   Signs as may be required by the zoning administrator shall be
placed in all travel trailer parks indicating the direction of travel and the
area where no automobile parking will be permitted on roadways.
      13.   No permit to construct or enlarge a travel trailer park shall be
issued until the plans for the proposed construction or enlargement have been
approved by the zoning administrator and the city engineer.
      14.   Both dependent and independent travel trailers shall be allowed to
occupy travel trailer spaces in a travel trailer park.
      15.   All improvements, including utilities, streets, paved areas and
landscaping, must be completed within two (2) years of the date the plan is
approved by the city council.
   C.   Review And Approvals:
      1.   The planning commission shall review the plan to determine its
compliance with any portion of the city land use plan and this title. In
considering approval of the development, the planning and zoning commission
shall, among other things, make sure that such development will mesh
harmoniously with the surrounding area; that it will not produce a volume of
traffic beyond the capacity of the surrounding street system. Requirements for
utilities, off street parking, traffic circulation and other public
requirements will be adequately met and the standards and intent of this
section shall be adequately complied with.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission may require changes to be made in
the plan. They may also require additional yards or buffers or other
improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or
parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval where it
is determined by the planning and zoning commission that such changes are
necessary to ensure that the development will mesh harmoniously with adjoining
or nearby uses.
      3.   An application for approval of a travel trailer park shall be
granted or denied only after a public hearing by the planning and zoning
commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general
circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing.
      4.   After consideration of the planning and zoning commission, the
application, with the planning and zoning commission's recommendations, shall
be submitted to the city council for its approval. An application denied by the
planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. Said appeal
must be made in writing within ten (10) days after the denial is made by the
planning and zoning commission. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid
for a period of one year. (2003 Code § 11-05-11; amd. Ord. 2270, 6-3-2025)
11-5-4-3: FINAL SITE PLAN:
   A.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the city council, the
developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a final site plan
of either the entire travel trailer park or the first stage of such development
that is to be constructed. Such plan shall be drawn to scale and provide in
detail the information required under this chapter.
   B.   Copies of the final approved documents shall also be filed in the
office of the zoning administrator. No building permit shall be issued for said
travel trailer park until final plans have been approved by the planning and
zoning commission and the city council, and the required documents filed in the
office of the zoning administrator, and until the guarantee of performance
required stated in section
11-5-4-5 of this chapter has been properly posted. (2003 Code § 11-05-12)
11-5-4-4: STAGE CONSTRUCTION PERMITTED:
Development may be carried out in progressive stages, in which event, each
stage shall be so planned that the requirements and intent of this chapter
shall be fully complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for
the initial stage shall cover less than one acre. (2003 Code § 11-05-13)
11-5-4-5: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Ability To Perform: Prior to issuing a building permit for the
construction of a travel trailer park, the developer must submit evidence
satisfactory to the city council that the developer has the means and the
ability to complete the stage of construction for which he has applied for a
building permit. Such evidence shall consist of the contractor's bid or the
engineer's or architect's estimate of the amount required to complete the
development, together with the resources of the developer committed to such
expenditure, or the proof of the loan commitment sufficient to construct and
complete such development.
   B.   Possession And Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of the travel
trailer park shall be allowed until the improvements as planned shall be fully
constructed; provided, however, that if the developer desires to have any
occupancy of a portion of the partially developed staged construction, the
developer shall post bond as security for the completion of all improvements.
Included in these improvements, but not limited to, landscaping, road
improvements, pedestrianways, curbs, gutters, road surfacing, water, sanitary
and storm drain lines and common facilities as shown in the final site plan.
Upon the posting of bond, satisfactory in form and amount, to the city council
for the completion of such improvements, occupancy may be granted upon a
partially constructed and developed travel trailer park.
   C.   Estimates: All cost estimates for completing the development shall be
submitted to the city engineer for his approval.
   D.   Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bonds or other assurance of
completion of improvements and development of travel trailer parks shall be for
a minimum of two (2) years from the date of the approval of the development by
the city council. An extension of time may be granted by the city council upon
application of the developer, provided such application is submitted at least
sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the bond and provided the issuer of
the bond is willing to extend the time of assurance.
   E.   Default: In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to
satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time limitation,
the city council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the city
may install, or cause to be installed, the required improvements using the
proceeds from the bonds or other assurance to defray the expense thereof.
   F.   Release Of Security: The developer shall be responsible for the quality
of all materials and workmanship. All street and utility work shall be
inspected by the city and upon the completion of installation of all such
improvements, the city engineer shall make a final inspection of the
improvements and shall submit a report to the city council. If the improvements
do not meet the standards and the plans, the engineer shall so report and the
developer shall be obliged to correct the improvements and complete the
installation to meet all such plans and the approval of the city engineer. Upon
the city engineer's approval of the installation of improvements, the bond or
other assurance shall be released and exonerated.
   G.   Continuing Obligation:
      1.   Any failure on the part of the developer or his assigns to maintain
the travel trailer park in accordance with the approved management policies,
covenants, conditions and restrictions and agreements shall be deemed a public
nuisance endangering the health, safety and general welfare of the public and a
detriment to the surrounding area.
      2.   All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to,
utilities, drainage, streets and snow removal, shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
   H.   Abatement, Removal: In addition to any other remedy provided by law for
the abatement or removal of such public nuisance, the city may remove or abate
the nuisance and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney fees,
to the owner. (2003 Code § 11-05-14)
CHAPTER 6
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
ARTICLE A. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
11-6A-1: Zoning Title Amendments; Reclassification Of Land
11-6A-2: Amendment Of Comprehensive Plan
11-6A-3: Annexation
11-6A-4: Conditional Use Permits
11-6A-5: Planned Unit Developments
11-6A-6: Other Conditional Use Approvals
11-6A-7: General Exceptions
11-6A-8: Special Exceptions
11-6A-9: Sign Variances
11-6A-10: Variances To Zoning Title
11-6A-11: Appeals Of Administrative Decisions
11-6A-1: ZONING TITLE AMENDMENTS; RECLASSIFICATION OF LAND:
   A.   Power To Amend: This title may be amended whenever the city council
deems that amendment is required for the public convenience or necessity, or
for the general welfare. Any amendment to this title shall be enacted pursuant
to this section. The amendment of this title or the reclassification of zoning
districts may be initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning
commission, or by one or more property owners or holders of valid options to
purchase property. The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to any
measure to change district boundaries, reclassify districts, to change district
regulations, to add, repeal or amend district regulations and to add, repeal or
amend any other provisions of this section or the whole of this title.
   B.   Application, Fee Required: Every person seeking the reclassification of
any land as regulated by this title shall file an application and fee with the
zoning administrator/building director in accordance with section
11-3-2 of this title.
   C.   Public Hearing:
      1.   The planning and zoning commission shall advertise, provide notice
and conduct a public hearing in accordance with section
11-3-6 of this title for each application to amend this title, or to reclassify
a zoning district.
      2.   Any recommendation of the planning and zoning commission relating to
change, modification and reclassification of zoning districts and land use
classifications and the regulations and standards thereof shall be in writing.
The recommendation shall include findings of fact supporting the purposes and
objectives of zoning and otherwise securing public health, safety and general
welfare. The recommendation shall specifically find that such changes,
modifications and reclassifications of zoning districts and land use
classifications and the regulations and the standards thereof:
         a.   Comply with and conform to the comprehensive plan; and
         b.   Provide and maintain existing future capabilities of public
utilities; and
         c.   Maintain and preserve compatibility of surrounding zoning and
development. (2003 Code § 11-06-01)
11-6A-2: AMENDMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   A.   Power To Amend: The planning and zoning commission may recommend
amendments to the plan to the city council not more frequently than every six
(6) months to correct errors in the original plan or to recognize substantial
changes in the actual conditions in the area.
   B.   Public Hearing Required: The planning and zoning commission, prior to
recommending the adoption, amendment or repeal of the plan to the city council,
shall conduct at least one public hearing in accordance with section
11-3-6 of this title.
   C.   Application Required: Every person seeking an amendment of the
comprehensive plan shall file an application with the zoning administrator/
building director in accordance with section
11-3-2 of this title. (2003 Code § 11-06-02)
11-6A-3: ANNEXATION:
Legislative intent. It is the intent of the legislature to honor the right of
private landowners to have a voice in their own governance, to minimize
conflict between citizens and the City of Blackfoot, to provide a mechanism for
the orderly development of the city, including the efficient and economically
viable provision of tax-supported and fee-supported city services, to enable
the orderly development of private lands that benefit from cost-effective
availability of the city services in urbanizing areas, and to equitably
allocate the costs of public services in managing development on the urban
fringe.
The corporate boundary of the city may be expanded whenever the city council
deems it to be for the public convenience or necessity, or for the general
welfare. A request for the annexation of subject land into the city may be
initiated by the city council, the planning and zoning commission, or by one or
more landowners. When the annexation request is initiated by the landowner, the
planning and zoning commission may expand or modify the annexation request. All
annexations shall be done be meeting the requirements for the consent of
landowners, and subject lands that are enclaves, or contiguous to the corporate
boundary of the city according to state statue 50-222.
   A.   Application Required: Every person seeking annexation into the city
shall file, with the zoning administrator/building director, an application as
prescribed in sections
11-3-2 and
11-3-3 of this title.
   B.   Public Hearing Required: The planning and zoning commission shall hold
at least one public hearing for each annexation request as prescribed in
section
11-3-6 of this title.
   C.   Recommendation From Commission: The planning and zoning commission
shall file its recommendation on each annexation application with the city
clerk in accordance with subsection D of this section. The commission's
recommendation on annexation applications shall be in accordance with the
following policies:
      1.   The annexation shall incorporate the Blackfoot sewer planning area.
      2.   Honor negotiated area of impact agreements.
      3.   Attempt to balance costs of services with anticipated revenues.
      4.   Promote other goals of population balance, contiguous development
and prevention of costs due to leapfrog development.
   D.   Action By Commission: At every hearing before the planning and zoning
commission, the commission shall hear all persons interested in the subject
matter then pending before it. Not later than ten (10) days after the
conclusion of the proceedings, the planning and zoning commission shall file
with the city clerk a written report of the hearings before and by the
commission at each hearing, and its recommendations to the city council.
(2003 Code § 11-06-03; amd. Ord. 2281, 11-4-2025)
11-6A-4: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Justification: Conditional uses by definition possess characteristics
such as to require review and appraisal by the planning and zoning commission
to determine whether or not the use would cause any damage, hazard, nuisance or
other detriment to persons or property in the vicinity.
   B.   Be Listed As A Conditional Use: Constitute a conditional use as
established in the land use tables of this chapter.
   C.   Application, Fee Required: Every person seeking conditional use
approval shall file an application and fee with the zoning administrator/
building director in accordance with sections
11-3-2 and
11-3-3 of this title. A narrative statement shall discuss the general
compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent properties and the
neighborhood, the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan,
and the effects of the following on the adjoining property: noise, glare,
traffic generated, vibration, odor, fumes, drainage, building height, massing,
and solid waste.
   D.   Notice Of Hearing; Publication: The planning and zoning commission
shall hold a public hearing and give notice of hearing for every application
for a conditional use as required by section
11-3-6 of this title.
   E.   Commission Action: Following the hearing, the planning and zoning
commission shall approve, deny or modify the application for a conditional use
permit, imposing any conditions needed to establish the findings of subsection
K of this section.
   F.   Effective Date Of Approval: Approval of any conditional use permit by
the planning and zoning commission shall become final after a lapse of ten (10)
calendar days from the date following the decision; provided, however, that
such effective date shall be stayed by the filing of an appeal as provided in
subsection
11-3-7B of this title.
   G.   Resubmittal Of Denied Application: No application for conditional use
permit that has been denied by the planning and zoning commission or the city
council, shall be resubmitted in either the same or substantially the same form
in less than one year from the date of final action thereon.
   H.   Term Of Permits: The term of a permit shall continue indefinitely
unless the approved conditional use changes to a new use or the operation of
the approved conditional use increases by more than twenty-five percent (25%)
or the operation of the approved conditional use changes sufficiently to
violate the criteria and findings set forth in subsection N herein. If the
approved conditional use requires modification of a structure, the holder of
the permit must, within six (6) months:
      1.   Acquire construction permits and commence placement of permanent
footings and structures on or in the ground. The definition of structures in
this context shall include sewer lines, water lines, streets or building
foundations; or
      2.   Commence the use permitted by the permits in accordance with the
conditions of approval; or
      3.   For conceptual conditional use permits, submit an application for
detailed conditional use permit; or
      4.   For projects that require platting, the plat must be recorded within
this period. The planning and zoning commission may also fix the time or period
within which the permit shall be completed, perfected or bonded. If the
conditions of approval shall not be completed or bonded within such period,
said permit shall lapse.
   I.   Extensions:
      1.   If the use or operation of a conditional use permit changes or the
approved operation increases, the planning and zoning commission may, upon
written request by the holder, grant a one (1) year time extension to a
conditional use permit and allow time for modification and/or submission of an
application for a new conditional use permit. Upon receipt of written request
for extension, the zoning administrator/building director shall determine if a
hearing on the request is required, based on the following considerations:
         a.   Whether there have been significant amendments to the
comprehensive plan or this title that will apply to the subject conditional use
permit; or
         b.   If significant land use changes have occurred in the project
vicinity that would adversely impact the project or be adversely impacted by
the project; or
         c.   Whether hazardous situations have developed or have been
discovered in the project area; or
         d.   If community facilities and services required for the project
remain adequate.
      2.   If any of the foregoing considerations are found to exist with
regard to the project for which an extension is sought, a hearing shall be
required. If a hearing is required, notice shall be provided as described in
section
11-3-6 of this title and a new application and fee must be submitted in
compliance with current plans and ordinances and in accordance with the
application procedures of this section.
   J.   Modification And Revocation: Upon application by the holder of a
conditional use permit, the planning and zoning commission may modify the
conditions and limitations of the permit in accordance with the limitations and
requirements of subsection M of this section. The planning and zoning
commission may delegate to the zoning administrator/building director authority
to consider minor modifications to conditional use permits. The zoning
administrator/building director may refer any modification request to the
planning and zoning commission if in his/her judgment, the change is
significant or could best be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission.
The commission may revoke or modify a conditional use permit, upon notice and
hearing, for breach or violation of any condition or limitation of said permit.
   K.   Staff Level Modifications: Staff level modifications of conditional use
approvals shall include, but are not limited to, the following considerations:
      1.   A reduction in density that does not exceed twenty five percent
(25%) of the total units.
      2.   A relocation of dwelling units or building pads for some practical
reason, such as road alignment, topography, access or solar access or stability
in hillside areas.
      3.   A change in the phasing plan.
      4.   A modification to the recreation area or open space design, but not
elimination or significant reduction.
      5.   An increase or decrease in proposed setback as long as ordinance
requirements are met.
      6.   A change in building elevations as reviewed and approved by the
staff.
   L.   Conditional Use Modification; Considerations, Conditions:
      1.   Prior to approving any conditional use modification, the zoning
administrator/building director shall determine that the following are true:
         a.   The requested modification was not the subject of an appeal
during the public hearing process; or
         b.   The requested modification will not adversely impact adjacent
properties.
      2.   All staff level conditional use modification approvals shall be in
writing and shall be signed by the zoning administrator/building director, or
deputy director. A letter stating the nature of the modification and findings
of fact on which the approval was based shall be provided by mail to the
applicant. A notice, stating the nature of the modification, shall be provided
by mail to the property owners, purchasers of record and residents within a
three hundred foot (300') radius of the external boundaries of the subject
property. A copy of that notice and documentation of its mailing shall be noted
and entered into the project files.
   M.   Modifications Requiring Commission Approval: Commission level approval
of conditional use modifications shall be required for the changes described
below:
      1.   Any increase in population density.
      2.   Density increases exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the total
density approved by the conditional use.
      3.   Any change that will impact the neighborhood, such as a change in
traffic generation or flow, impacts to rivers or streams, or increases in soil
erosion.
      4.   The requested change was the subject of an appeal during the public
hearing.
      5.   The requested change would affect some other condition such as a
condition regarding greenbelt, streets, schools, floodplain, etc.
      6.   A request for greater than twenty percent (20%) increase in building
square footage.
      7.   A request to change the nature of the approved use.
      8.   A request to change or delete a condition of approval.
   N.   Criteria And Findings: The planning and zoning commission, following
the procedures outlined below, may approve a conditional use permit when the
evidence presented at the hearing is such as to establish:
      1.   Location: The location of the proposed use is compatible to other
uses in the general neighborhood and will not place an undue burden on existing
transportation and service facilities in the vicinity; and
      2.   Size Of Property: The site is large enough to accommodate the
proposed use and all yards, open spaces, pathways, walls and fences, parking,
loading, landscaping and such other features as are required by this title; and
      3.   Compatibility: The proposed use, if it complies with all conditions
imposed, will not adversely affect other property of the vicinity; and
      4.   Nuisance: Not create a nuisance or safety hazard for neighboring
properties in terms of excessive noise or vibration, improperly directed glare
or heat, electrical interface, odors, dust or air pollutants, solid waste
generation and storage, hazardous materials or waste, excessive traffic
generation, or interference with pedestrian traffic and that the proposed use
will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare; and
      5.   Compliance Plan: The proposed use is in compliance with and supports
the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan; and
      6.   Public Facilities And Services: The request can demonstrate adequate
public facilities, including roads, schools, street access, drainage, drainage
structures, potable water, sanitary sewer, refuse disposal, and police and fire
protection, exist or will exist to serve the requested use at the time such
facilities are needed. If existing facilities are not adequate, the developer
shall show that such facilities shall be upgraded sufficiently to serve the
proposed use; and
      7.   Traffic: Not generate traffic in excess of the capacity of public
streets or access points serving the proposed use and will assure adequate
visibility at traffic access points; and
      8.   Natural Environment: The request has minimized, to the degree
possible, adverse affects on the natural environment; and
      9.   Buffers: Be effectively buffered to screen adjoining properties from
adverse impacts of noise, building size and resulting shadow, traffic, and
parking; and
      10.   Slope And Soil: Be compatible with the slope of the site and the
capacity of the soils and will not be in an area of natural hazard unless
suitably designed to protect lives and property; and
      11.   Historic Features: Not result in the destruction, loss or damage of
a historic feature of significance to the community of Blackfoot.
   O.   Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: In granting a conditional use
permit, the approving body may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards.
Such conditions to be attached to the permit may include but not be limited to:
      1.   Minimizing adverse impact on other developments.
      2.   Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
      3.   Controlling the duration of development.
      4.   Assuring the development is properly maintained.
      5.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
      6.   Requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities of
services.
      7.   Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required
in this chapter.
   P.   Formal Notice: Formal notice will be sent to applicant after approval
of a conditional use permit.
      1.   Notice will state the conditions of the permit.
   Q.   Time Limit: If conditions are violated or not met, there will be a
ninety (90) day period to cure the non-compliant issue. Failure to comply with
the terms may result in revocation of the conditional use permit.
(2003 Code § 11-06-04; amd. Ord. 2192, 5-5-2020)
11-6A-5: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Justification:
      1.   A planned development is a parcel of land that is planned and
developed as a unit under single ownership or control, containing one or more
uses, buildings and common open space or recreational facilities.
      2.   The planned development process provides an opportunity for land
development that preserves natural features, allows efficient provision of
services, and provides common open spaces or other amenities not found in
traditional lot by lot development. The process also provides for the
consistent application of conditions of approval for the various phases of a
planned development. Every planned development requires a conditional use
application, and shall be subject to all conditional use procedures.
   B.   Use Exceptions:
      1.   In the case of planned developments greater than five (5) acres in
size in residential, commercial or industrial districts, the planning and
zoning commission may authorize specified uses not permitted by the use
regulations of the district in which the development is located. The purpose of
this provision is to avoid single use projects that generate high levels of
traffic and to promote other uses that are functionally integrated with and
provide services to the primary use;
      2.   Approval shall be based on the following findings:
         a.   The uses permitted by such exception are strongly related to the
primary use and are intended and designed to provide services or facilities
useful and convenient to the primary use.
         b.   The uses permitted by such exception are integrated into the
larger project through the following features:
            (1)   The use exception site shall be located in proximity to and
therefore within reasonable walking distance of all portions of the primary
use.
            (2)   One or more of the main vehicular accesses to the primary
site shall also serve as the main access for the use exception site.
            (3)   Pedestrian and/or bicycle pathway connections shall be
provided from the primary use.
            (4)   Buildings on the use exception site shall be oriented to
facilitate access from the primary use.
            (5)   Architecture and building bulk shall reflect or complement
the primary use.
            (6)   Landscaping concepts from the primary use shall be continued
onto the use of the exception site.
            (7)   Signage shall be low profile and consistent with any sign
package submitted for the primary use;
      3.   The uses permitted by the exception are neighborhood or community
serving in nature and in scale and do not constitute a regional serving use;
      4.   The uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so
located as to be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood;
      5.   No more than twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the planned
development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by the exception; and
      6.   The development is phased so that the construction of the excepted
use or uses will be justified by the construction of all or a proportionate
phase of the permitted use.
   C.   Development Standards: The planning and zoning commission may approve
planned unit developments in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Changes May Be Approved: Changes from the development standards of
the underlying zone may be approved.
      2.   Planned Development Size: The minimum size for a planned development
shall be as follows:
         a.   Planned residential development: No minimum.
         b.   Planned commercial development: One acre.
         c.   Planned industrial development: Five (5) acres.
         d.   Planned office development: Two (2) acres.
      3.   Residential Density: The number of dwelling units allowed in a
planned development shall be calculated by dividing the gross area, less the
area set aside for nonresidential uses (that is, office, commercial or
industrial), by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required by the zone in
which the site is located.
      4.   Private Open Space: All residential planned developments on less
than one acre shall provide each dwelling unit with a minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of usable private open space. The planning and zoning
commission should evaluate each project on its own merits and allow variations
to the open space standard where it can be shown that the provided space meets
the intent and purpose of this title.
      5.   Required Setbacks:
         a.   Attached structures may be permitted in planned developments. The
minimum separation between detached buildings shall be ten feet (10') unless
greater separation is required by fire or building codes.
         b.   Along the periphery of planned developments, yards shall be
provided as required by the regulations of the district in which the
development is located, unless the planning and zoning commission provides an
exception as provided for in this subsection. Where development already exists
at the periphery, the yards shall, where practical, be matched. For example,
side yards should be provided adjacent to side yards, rear yards adjacent to
rear yards and front yards opposite front yards.
      6.   Service Drives; Private Streets: Service drive design and
construction shall comply with the requirements of this title. Private street
design and construction shall comply with the requirements of the subdivision
ordinance.
      7.   Residential Infill Planned Developments: Lots within the city that
are located within areas already largely developed (at least 80 percent of the
land within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject lot) and to
which municipal fire, police, sewer, water and school services are already
available may qualify for infill development. In reviewing infill planned
development, the planning and zoning commission may allow exceptions to
subsections C1 through C6 of this section as follows:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission may allow up to a twenty
percent (20%) increase in the density allowed in the zoning district as an
infill incentive.
         b.   The applicant shall submit documentation that the site qualifies
as an infill site with the conditional use application. Verification of infill
may be in the form of recent aerial photographs. In addition, the developer
shall provide documentation regarding the availability of the following
services: 1) water; 2) sewer; 3) fire coverage; and 4) public schools.
      8.   Residential Uses: A variety of housing types or residential uses may
be included in planned developments, including attached units (duplexes,
townhomes), detached units (patio homes), single-family units and multiple-
family units (triplexes, 4-plexes, 6-plexes, etc.) regardless of the zoning
classification of the district; provided, that the overall density of the zone
is maintained. This applies only to planned residential developments.
   D.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Stages Of Submittal: A conditional use application for a planned
development may be submitted in one or two (2) stages:
         a.   As a detailed conditional use application; or
         b.   Any planning and zoning commission level conditional use
application may be submitted and processed as a concept plan. The applicant
must specify on the application form that concept approval is being requested.
A concept approval is a statement by the city that a general development plan,
including the general arrangement of uses, density, location of major streets,
open spaces, utilities, etc., is acceptable. A concept review allows the
applicant to obtain approval of a general development plan without incurring
the expense of preparing detailed building plans until after the concept
approval. It provides the developer and the city with guidelines for the design
of each phase of a project. Supporting information will be required for concept
applications as specified by the zoning administrator/building director.
      2.   Phases Require Approval: Each phase of a concept approval requires
detailed conditional use approval through a new application, fee and public
hearing. Submittal requirements for detailed conditional use applications are
the same as for standard conditional use applications that are processed and
reviewed in one step.
      3.   Public Hearing: The concept and detailed conditional use
applications are both subject to the public hearing requirements of section
11-3-6 of this title and the conditional use requirements of this section and
section
11-6A-4 of this article.
      4.   Concurrent Review Of Other Applications May Be Required: In cases
where subdivision platting is being proposed or would be required, concurrent
review of the conditional use and subdivision plat is required when the zoning
administrator/building director determines that regulations of the subdivision
ordinance, including, but not limited to, private streets, apply to the design
of the proposed development.
   E.   Staff Review Procedure; Extended Period: The zoning administrator/
building director may extend the review/processing period for large planned
development applications to a maximum of sixty six (66) days from the cutoff
date prior to which the application was submitted. This extended review period
is to allow for adequate staff research and analysis, agency review and
comment, coordination with other city departments, and coordination with the
applicant. Planned development applications for which additional review time is
required shall be subject to the following procedures:
      1.   A summary of the development proposal shall be presented to the city
council as an information item during a scheduled precouncil meeting prior to
the submittal of the staff report to the planning and zoning commission.
      2.   Recommended conditions of approval submitted to the planning and
zoning commission and made available to the public shall not be altered by
staff or any other party prior to the public hearing. The planning and zoning
commission may alter or modify conditions of approval.
      3.   When the Planning and Zoning Commission has completed its action on
a proposed planned unit development (PUD), the planning and zoning
administrator will forward the PUD to the Mayor, recommending that it be
submitted to the city council for approval or denial. The city clerk shall
place the request for the PUD on the next available city council agenda.
   F.   Developer Benefits: Planned developments are intended to provide
certain benefits to the public and to the developer. The installation of public
improvements (streets, water, sewer, streetlights, etc.) ensure a public
benefit. To provide the developer with an incentive to utilize the planned
development process, the following allowances may be incorporated into a
planned development proposal:
      1.   A variety of housing types may be included in the project, including
attached units, detached units, single-family units and multiple-family units.
      2.   The minimum lot size of the zoning district may be reduced within
the density limits of the district.
      3.   Planned developments may use private streets and service drives that
are designed and constructed to the standards of the zoning and subdivision
ordinances.
      4.   Setbacks for buildings within the interior of the project may be
less than required in the zoning district.
      5.   The conditions of approval applied to a large planned development
concept plan shall be applied consistently to each subsequent phase, unless
otherwise agreed to by both the applicant and the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
      6.   Uses that are not allowed within the zoning district may be allowed
as part of the planned development, subject to the twenty percent (20%)
exception requirements of subsection B of this section.
      7.   Buildings may be clustered to preserve river areas and other
environmentally sensitive areas as open space. (2003 Code § 11-06-05) (amd.
Ord. 2202, 3-2-2021)
11-6A-6: OTHER CONDITIONAL USE APPROVALS:
There are certain conditional uses that require consideration of additional
approval criteria unique to the specific application. In reviewing such
applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission must consider the standards of
approval set forth for each conditional use described below in addition to the
general criteria and findings set forth for conditional use permits in
subsection
11-6A-4M of this article. An application and fee are required for each request
in accordance with sections
11-3-2 and
11-3-3 of this title. (Ord. 2164, 12-5-2017)
   A.   Agriculture: The tilling of soil, aquaculture, raising crops,
livestock, farming, dairying and animal husbandry, including all uses
customarily accessory and incidental thereto; but excluding hogs,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer works, boneyards and commercial feedlots. The
following standards shall apply to agricultural uses:
      1.   Stables may board horses commercially.
      2.   Lot size requirements for maintaining animals shall be a minimum of
one acre of pasture area, excluding all structures, except for barns and
stables, with an overall animal density not to exceed:
         a.   Two (2) horses per acre; or
         b.   Two (2) cows per acre; or (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
         c.   Four (4) sheep per acre; or (2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. 2012
Code)
         d.   An equivalent animal density as approved by the Zoning
Administrator/Building Director.
      3.   Buildings and corrals (not perimeter fencing) housing such animals
shall not be less than thirty feet (30') from all property lines and at least
fifty feet (50') from all residential structures, and must meet all
requirements of the appropriate health authority.
      4.   Provide a viable method for frequent (twice monthly) disposal of
manure that will prevent obnoxious odors and the accumulation of flies from
intruding onto adjacent properties. (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
   B.   Childcare And Adult Daycare Requirements:
      1.   Classifications:
         a.   Family childcare (1 through 6 children, exclusive of own children
and legal wards):
            (1)   Permitted all residential and commercial zones with an
approved conditional use permit.
            (2)   Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must
be met.
         b.   Group childcare (7 through 12 children, exclusive of own children
and legal wards):
            (1)   Permitted in all residential and commercial Zoneswith an
approved conditional use permit.
            (2)   Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must
be met.
         c.   Childcare center (13 or more children):
            (1)   Permitted in MDR1, MDR2, HDR1, HDR2, TAG, and Commercial and
Manufacturing Zones with an approved conditional use permit.
            (2)   Building, Health and Safety, and Fire Code requirements must
be met.
      2.   Building Requirements: Childcare facilities in an inhabited home
must comply with applicable Building Codes and Fire Codes. Childcare facilities
in an inhabited home must obtain a conditional use permit. A group childcare
facility for seven (7) to twelve (12) children with no more than five (5)
children under two and one-half (21/2) years of age and which provides care for
less than twenty four (24) hours at a time, must meet the requirements of
education occupancies (E) pursuant to the International Building and Fire Codes
as adopted by the City.
      3.   Exits:
         a.   The required exits must be located to provide an unobstructed
path outside the building to a public way or area of refuge. Exit doors must be
able to be opened from the inside without the use of a key and without any
special knowledge or effort.
         b.   There must be at least two (2) exits (travel distance between not
to exceed 75 feet) located a distance apart, not less than one-half (1/2) the
diagonal dimension of the building or portion used for childcare.
            (1)   Exception: In buildings with automatic fire sprinkler
systems, the distance may be increased to one hundred ten feet (110').
         c.   Required exits shall not be less than thirty two inches (32") of
clear exit width and not less than six feet, eight inches (6'8") in height.
            (1)   Exception: Sliding patio doors will be accepted as a required
second exit in "family and group childcare facilities" only.
         d.   Two (2) exits are required from basements and upper floors. The
occupancy load is determined by the ratio of one occupant per thirty five (35)
square feet of floor space. Egress windows or a second exit door are required
from sleeping rooms within a childcare facility. An egress window may not be
more than forty four inches (44") off the finished floor to the top of
windowsill and must have a minimum of 5.7 square inches of operational opening.
Window wells must have a minimum of nine (9) square feet of clear opening and
not more than forty four inches (44") in depth.
      4.   Accessibility: All new childcare facilities will comply with the
adopted version of ANSI A117.1 as referenced in the building codes (ADA
Specification Manual).
      5.   Existing Building Modifications: Existing buildings that are
changing use to accommodate a childcare facility are subject to the same
requirements as new construction.
      6.   Parking: Sufficient and safe parking and unloading zones must be
available to accommodate the proposed childcare facility.
      7.   The occupant load of a building, as best determined by the Building
Department and Fire Department requirements, will include all persons using the
facility.
   8.   General Childcare Requirements:
      a.   Provide a minimum on site outdoor play area of one hundred (100)
square feet per child. This area requirement may be waived or modified if
appropriate open space with connecting public sidewalks or paths are located
near the facility and that open space can be used by the children as a play
area; or the program of the facility is such that the size of a group of
children using the play area at any one time conforms to the one hundred (100)
square feet per child criteria. This criteria may also be met by safely
transporting students to an approved outdoor play area.
      b.   Provide a minimum of thirty five (35) square feet of indoor gross
play area per child.
      c.   Secure and maintain a childcare license from the State (for
childcare givers with seven (7) or more children). Background checks are
required for providers caring for four (4) or more children.
      d.   Comply with the regulations where applicable by law or jurisdiction
of the City Building and Fire Department, and the County health inspector.
      e.   Provide as a minimum, one off street parking space per employee.
      f.   Provide for an on-site child pick up area if located on a collector
or arterial street, designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto the roadway
(backing into an alley is permissible).
      g.   The lot size shall be adequate for parking, child pick up area, play
area, screening and setbacks.
      h.   An application fee set by the City Council and amended from time to
time by resolution, shall be paid with the submittal of an application.
   9.   Standards: The Zoning Administrator/building official may also require
the following standards to protect adjacent properties from adverse impacts or
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the children:
      a.   Fencing or landscape screening of the facility to protect adjacent
properties from activities of the facility, or to protect the children from
adverse activities such as traffic on arterial or collector streets, at
intersections or to screen adjacent properties; or
      b.   Additional setbacks to play areas from property line to protect
adjacent properties or to protect children from busy streets, irrigation
ditches, animal pastures and other similar conflicts; or
      c.   Any other conditions deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator/
building official to protect the health, safety and welfare of the children, or
to protect adjacent property owners from adverse impacts. (Ord. 2164, 12-5-
2017)
   10.   Adult Daycare Standards: Adult daycare has different use
characteristics from other allowed uses and therefor requires additional
standards to be determined by the Zoning Administrator/building official:
         a.   There shall be adequate access for physically handicapped patrons
of the facility.
         b.   If located on an arterial or collector street, provide for an on
site patron pick up area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto street
(backing into alley is permissible).
         c.   The use shall meet the occupancy requirements of the city
building and fire departments.
         d.   All applicable licenses must be obtained from the city or the
state.
         e.   An application fee set by the city council and amended from time
to time by resolution, shall be paid with the submittal of an application.
   C.   Drive-Up Windows: No drive-up window establishment shall be permitted
unless the planning and zoning commission finds that the design and operation
of the establishment is substantially in compliance with the following
requirements and conditions that shall be in addition to those required in
section
11-6A-4 of this article:
      1.   The location of the establishment shall not cause an increase of
commercial traffic in nearby residential neighborhoods, increase general
traffic congestion where serious congestion problems already exist, or cause
other significant adverse impacts on public or private property in the vicinity
of the site. The advice of the appropriate transportation authority shall be
solicited for the purpose of evaluating existing and projected levels of
service and the effects of projected turning movements on highway safety; and
      2.   The internal circulation on the site provides for pedestrians to
walk from parking lots to the lobby entrances without traversing the waiting
lanes for the drive-up window; and
      3.   The waiting lanes be of sufficient length to provide for anticipated
average monthly peak volumes; and
      4.   The design, signage or operational characteristics of the
establishment prevent or discourage vehicles from waiting for service on public
sidewalks or streets; and
      5.   Drive-in waiting lanes be designed so that curbs, gates or other
devices do not prevent a vehicle from leaving a waiting lane; and
      6.   All lights and other illuminated materials shall be designed,
positioned, shielded, directed and located to prevent glare from falling on
adjoining properties. Screening of lights may be required as a secondary
measure of mitigation. Illumination levels shall not exceed two (2) foot-
candles as measured one foot (1') above the ground at property lines shared
with residentially zoned or used parcels; and
      7.   The drive-up window service does not constitute the entire
establishment. This finding may be waived upon showing that the public interest
would be better served if the drive-up window service does constitute the
entire establishment; and
      8.   The design, operation and sign characteristics of the project will
attempt to minimize air pollution and wasteful consumption of fuel. Required
mitigation measures include, but are not limited to:
         a.   Prohibiting all parking spaces that are in addition to the
minimum number of parking spaces required by this title; and
         b.   Retention of existing desirable trees for reasons of species,
location, health, age or other reason as determined and recommended by the city
engineer; and
         c.   Maximum placement of landscaped areas and trees; and
      9.   Landscaping shall screen drive-up aisles from the public right of
way and shall be used to minimize the visual impact of vehicular lights, reader
board signs and directional signs; and
      10.   Drive-through lanes shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from
adjacent residentially zoned or used property. This buffer shall include both
coniferous trees and sound abatement walls; and
      11.   Any drive-up window establishment that is within three hundred feet
(300') of a residential use or zone, as measured along the shortest distance
between the nearest residential property line and any part of the drive-up
portion of the land use, shall not be permitted to utilize outdoor order
speakers; use of a handheld phone or an order window shall be required; and
      12.   In accordance with section
11-6A-4 of this article, the planning and zoning commission has the authority
to limit the hours of operation, and may impose such restrictions on drive-up
window establishments.
   D.   Adult Bookstore, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Performance
Business Or Adult Entertainment Establishment:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city, to
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of employees and patrons of
adult businesses and adult establishments, and to protect children from being
inadvertently exposed to adult material.
      2.   Conditions: In order to approve a conditional use permit for such
uses, the planning and zoning commission must determine that the following
conditions are met:
         a.   Such business shall not be located within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of a school, preschool, daycare facility, public park,
playground or other institution, either public or private, where children under
the age of eighteen (18) frequent or are taught, instructed or trained.
Distance shall be measured in a straight line from the property line of the
school or park to the property line of the proposed adult bookstore, adult
motion picture theater, or adult performance business; and
         b.   Such business shall not be located within five hundred feet
(500') of a church. Distance shall be measured as in subsection D2a of this
section; and
         c.   Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any other adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult
performance business. Distance shall be measured as in subsection D2a of this
section; and
         d.   Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of any store, bar, tavern or business that sells, vends, serves,
dispenses or distributes any alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited
to, beer, wine and liquor; and
         e.   Such business shall not be located on a lot or parcel that is
adjacent or contiguous to residential zones, even if separated by an alley.
This condition may be waived; provided, that sixty six and two-thirds percent
(662/3%) of the residentially zoned property owners and residents within five
hundred feet (500') of the proposed use sign a petition approving such a
business; and
         f.   Distance standards shall apply regardless of the political
jurisdiction in which schools, parks or churches, or other adult businesses,
are located; and
         g.   The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted
with the conditional use application for review by the planning and zoning
commission. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not
be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of
the building; and
         h.   Lobby and entrance areas should be designed so as to minimize
obstruction of sidewalks during operating hours and shall be oriented and
consistent with other commercial activities in the area; and
         i.   All building openings, entries, windows and the like shall be
located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the
interior from any public or semipublic area; and
         j.   No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such
businesses that can be discerned by the public outside the building; and
         k.   The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit
materials must be disposed of in a manner that prevents minors from having
access to the material; and
         l.   The planning and zoning commission may impose such other
conditions and limitations as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose
of this subsection and to preserve and protect the general public health,
safety and welfare.
      3.   Applicability Of Standards: For purposes of this subsection, the
above conditions and standards shall be applicable in the following
circumstances:
         a.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new
business.
         b.   The conversion of an existing business to any of the adult
businesses regulated herein.
         c.   The addition or expansion of any business to include any of the
adult businesses regulated herein.
         d.   The relocation of any such business.
      4.   School Defined: For purposes of this subsection, a "school" shall be
considered as an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private,
that offers instruction in those courses of study required by the state or that
is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This
definition includes a kindergarten, elementary, junior high or senior high
school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the
state department of education, but does not include a vocational or
professional institution or institution of higher education such as a community
or junior college, college or university.
      5.   Construction: These provisions shall not be construed as permitting
any use or act that is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
   E.   Lot Area Reduction In MDR1 District (Combined Residential): Within the
MDR1 district, the lot area for each dwelling unit contained in a building or
buildings on a "lot of record", as defined in section
11-1-3 of this title, may be reduced to not less than two thousand (2,000)
square feet if authorized by a conditional use permit and the following
conditions and restrictions are met and complied with:
      1.   All other applicable zoning and use regulations have been met; and
      2.   The applicant must conclusively prove that the lot cannot feasibly
be developed without reduction in lot area; and
      3.   The improvements upon the lot would not be out of character with the
adjoining and surrounding improvements; and
      4.   Sufficient open space and amenities have been provided to create a
desirable living unit. (2003 Code § 11-06-06)
   F.   Exceptions To Parking Requirements: Parking space requirements for a
particular use as established by this title, may be reduced upon application
for conditional use approval in accordance with this title. Joint or mixed use
of off street parking facilities may be approved by a conditional use permit
submitted in accordance with this title. (2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. 2012 Code)
   G.   Conversion Of Nonconforming Use: The conversion of a nonconforming use
to any use other than an allowed use is prohibited, except upon application and
issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of
section
11-6A-4 of this article; provided, however, that in addition to the
requirements of section
11-6A-4 of this article, such conditional use permit will not be granted unless
the planning and zoning commission makes all of the following findings of fact:
(2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. Ord. 2085, 5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-2009)
      1.   The proposed conversion is compatible with the comprehensive plan,
the purposes of this title and with surrounding land uses; and
      2.   Such proposed conversion will not place an undue burden on existing
transportation and service facilities in the vicinity of the application; and
      3.   Such proposed conversion will be in compliance with all requirements
and provisions of this code; and
      4.   The continuation of a nonconforming use without the benefit of such
conversion would likely result in a deterioration of the neighborhood. (2003
Code § 11-06-06)
   H.   Restoration Of Nonconforming Use: Any nonconforming building or mobile
home destroyed by fire or other calamity to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or
more of the appraised value, where such destruction was not intentionally
caused by the owner or an agent of the owner of such property, may rebuild or
restore such building or mobile home to its former use. Such rebuilding or
restoration shall be substantially the same as the former building. (Ord. 2085,
5-5-2009, eff. 5-5-2009)
   I.   Expansion Of Conditional Uses And Legal Nonconforming Uses:
      1.   Findings Required: Expansions to conditional uses or legal
nonconforming uses that exceed twenty percent (20%) of the existing facility
(based on square footage or other dimensional measure) require conditional use
approval by the planning and zoning commission. Approval of such requests shall
be based upon the following findings:
         a.   The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion
will not alter the zoning classification of the nonconforming use; and
         b.   The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion
conforms to all existing requirements of this code; and
         c.   The proposed conversion, restoration, enlargement or expansion
will not place an undue burden on existing transportation and service
facilities in the vicinity; and
         d.   The proposed enlargement or expansion is not inimical to the best
interest of the surrounding neighborhood.
      2.   Illegal Expansion; Loss Of Status: Any illegal expansion of a
nonconforming use will result in the loss of the legal nonconforming use status
of that project.
   J.   General Height Exceptions: Conditional use approval from the planning
and zoning commission is required to exceed the height limits set forth in this
title. The planning and zoning commission's decision on height exceptions shall
be based upon the criteria set forth in section 11-6A-4M of this article.
   K.   Public Services; Height Exception: Public service poles, towers or
similar installations of a height of seventy feet (70') or greater must be
approved by conditional use permit. The planning and zoning commission must
make the findings required by section 11-6A-4M of this article and the
following additional findings. The pole or tower locations and heights:
      1.   Do not interfere with airport height restrictions; and
      2.   Minimize disturbance to views from established residential areas;
and
      3.   Minimize disturbance to or interference with view of city, state, or
federally registered historic structures; and
      4.   Do not obstruct clear vision triangles or otherwise threaten
motorist or pedestrian safety; and
      5.   Minimize conflict with existing uses; and
      6.   Are within route corridors already established for use by rail,
automobile traffic arterials or electrical transmission; and
      7.   Are within route corridors that provide for a satisfactory level of
energy efficient transmission of the product (electrical energy or other
signals); or
      8.   Are the best available alternative placements and heights, even
though they do not comply perfectly with all the above findings.
   L.   Professional, Administrative And Business Offices In M1 And M2
Districts: Professional, administrative and business offices are conditional
uses in the M1 and M2 districts and are subject to the following criteria as
well as those in section 11-6A-4M of this article:
      1.   Amenities (that may include, but are not limited to, visual
screening, orientation and placement of buildings, parking and access areas)
are provided for the future office to buffer the impact of any conflicting land
uses; and
      2.   The lot or parcel occupied by such offices abuts a public right of
way that separates such lot or parcel from residential or office zones or uses;
or
      3.   Where the use of the subject property for such offices will not
encroach upon or conflict with existing industrial development or that which
may be reasonably expected to develop.
   M.   Composting Facility: Any composting facility shall submit a site and
operational plan with their application for a conditional use permit. That plan
shall demonstrate compliance with the following requirements:
      1.   Composting piles or windrows shall be constructed that are no larger
than can be managed in a nuisance free manner by the proposed equipment and
composting technology;
      2.   Additional area shall be provided at no less than fifteen percent
(15%) of size of the active composting pile or windrow area for staging, curing
and storage;
      3.   A minimum fifty foot (50') setback shall be maintained from the
property boundary or public right of way to any active processing area of the
facility, including any area used for storage, active composting and curing;
      4.   A minimum two hundred foot (200') buffer zone between the active
composting pile or windrow and any existing adjacent residentially zoned or
occupied property shall be maintained;
      5.   Compliance with all applicable state or federal laws, regulations or
standards pertaining to water quality, air quality and solid waste management
shall be required;
      6.   No composting facility shall be allowed in a floodplain;
      7.   Surface slope of one to five percent (5%) grade shall be required
for any composting facility;
      8.   Adequate fencing, barriers or screening shall be required for all
composting facilities;
      9.   Public access shall be limited to those times when an attendant is
on duty and during limited operating hours;
      10.   Adequate space shall be provided between the piles or windrows to
allow access to vehicles, including firefighting equipment;
      11.   Noncompostable residues shall be disposed or processed at a
permitted solid waste disposal facility in accordance with local, state and
federal laws, regulations and standards;
      12.   All organic materials received at the composting facility shall be
removed from any containers unless the containers are of a biodegradable type
in which case the container shall be opened before composting;
      13.   A permanent sign must be posted and maintained at the composting
facility showing the nature of the project, facility name, address and
telephone number of operator, operating hours, materials that may be received
by the facility, and the phrase, "No Dumping Of Garbage, Trash Or Rubbish
Allowed".
(2003 Code § 11-06-06; amd. Ord. 2265, 3-4-2025; Ord. 2280, 10-7-2025)
11-6A-7: GENERAL EXCEPTIONS:
The planning and zoning commission may grant the following general exceptions
to the requirements of this title, subject to the procedures, provisions and
findings of section
11-6A-4 of this article:
   A.   When a lot or parcel has one-half (1/2) or less of its area in a
district more restrictive than the district that includes the remainder, the
planning and zoning commission may permit the regulation of the less
restrictive district to be applied to the entire lot or parcel. More than one
property owner may combine lots or parcels as a planned development and receive
consideration under this subsection.
   B.   Where a lot located in an R1 or R2 district has a lot line that abuts
property zoned for multiple-family, commercial or industrial uses, the planning
and zoning commission may permit, by conditional use permit pursuant to
subsection 11-6A-4M of this article, up to seventy five feet (75') of adjoining
portion of such lot to be used for any use permitted in the multiple-family R3
district. (2003 Code § 11-06-07)
11-6A-8: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The planning and zoning commission shall review all requests for special
exceptions and make recommendations to the city council.
   A.   Justification: Finding that there are certain uses that because of
their normal nature or design are not commonly permitted in a given district,
but that with special consideration by the applicant to the standards of the
area, impact, design and existing uses, the said use may benefit the immediate
community, the city council may approve, with conditions as outlined below, any
use as requested by an applicant as a conditional use under the special
exceptions provision.
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of this section to promote infilling of built
areas of the community with minimal community impact. In all districts, it is
intended to allow uses of equal or lessor impact than those permitted uses in
the district.
   C.   Procedure For Filing: Any person may apply for a special exception
under this section upon submittal of an application on a form prescribed by the
planning and zoning commission and accompanied by a filing fee as specified
herein. All answers to questions as prescribed in the form shall be used to
validate the application by the zoning administrator/building director. The
zoning administrator/building director shall reject any application that does
not fully contain the following:
      1.   Complete detailed description of the proposed use, including, but
not limited to, the following: hours of operation, number of employees,
expected number of daily customers, anticipated number of needed parking
spaces, noise to be generated, signs and other impacts, where applicable; and
      2.   All applications shall be accompanied by appropriate architectural
and site development plans to scale that shall show building location,
landscaping, prominent existing trees, ground treatment, fences, off street
parking and circulation, location and size of adjacent streets, north arrow and
property lines, drawings of the major exterior elevations showing exterior
building treatment, existing grade and proposed new grades; and
      3.   All applications shall contain a detailed statement explaining how
and why the proposed use is appropriate to the site and neighborhood and why
such use will not adversely impact the site and neighborhood; and
      4.   All applications shall contain a written statement, justified with
submitted drawings, that the applicant does not require or request a variance
in bulk, setback or sign regulations from those required in the existing zoning
district of the proposed location.
   D.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   At every special exception hearing before the planning and zoning
commission, the commission shall hear all persons interested in the subject
matter then pending before it. Not later than ten (10) days after the
conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall file with the city clerk a
written report of the proceedings before and by the planning and zoning
commission at each hearing and its recommendations to the city council. Any
recommendation of the commission relating to a special exception shall be in
writing and must include in its recommendation all of the following findings of
fact, based upon the evidence presented, and supporting the purposes and
objectives of said special exception:
         a.   This zoning title does not anticipate that such a use could be a
desirable use in the zone under special circumstances; and
         b.   The use will produce an equal or reduced impact upon the site or
neighborhood than would an allowed use; and
         c.   The location of the proposed use is compatible to other land uses
in the general neighborhood area and does not place an undue burden on existing
transportation and service facilities in the vicinity; and
         d.   The site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use
and all yards, open spaces, walls and fences, parking, loading, landscaping and
such other features as are required by this title; and
         e.   The site is appropriate for such proposed use and that proper
zoning for the proposed use is not available in the general neighborhood; and
         f.   Natural features and existing trees are appropriately preserved
and integrated with the project and that the finished grading, storm drainage
and landscaping are consistent with the established or contemplated character
of the neighborhood; and
         g.   Access to the property and internal vehicular circulation thereon
are safe and convenient for pedestrians, cyclists, automobiles and service
vehicles and are designed such as to have minimal impact upon the surrounding
neighborhood and traffic operations; and
         h.   The approval, denial or modification of the special exception
does not provide precedent for any other parcel in the city.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission must list, as part of its report
to the city council, those "special circumstances" that are not anticipated by
this title.
      3.   The planning and zoning commission may make recommendations as to
specific conditions for approval that would allow establishment of the proposed
use in a compatible manner with the neighborhood. Such conditions shall be
imposed in accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-6A-4N of this
article. (2003 Code § 11-06-08)
11-6A-9: SIGN VARIANCES:
A sign variance is a request to vary from the standard for background area,
height, illumination, number of signs, location, projection and clearance, or
any other standard prescribed in the sign code, if applicable, except that sign
variances may not be applied to signs that are prohibited. In accordance with
the public hearing requirements of this title, the planning and zoning
commission shall have the authority to deny, approve, or approve with
modifications, a sign variance. All of the following findings of fact shall be
considered and clearly established by the planning and zoning commission when
granting a sign variance in whole or in part:
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless it can be shown that there are
special circumstances applicable to the property involving the size, shape,
topography, location or surroundings that do not apply generally to other
properties in the same zoning district that are not the result of voluntary
actions of the applicant; and
   B.   The granting of such sign variance will not constitute a grant of
special privilege that is inconsistent with the limitations upon other property
in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated; and
   C.   Nonconforming signs in the vicinity surrounding the subject site may
not be used to set the standard for or be compared with applications for new
signs, and shall not be used as justification for a hardship or special
circumstance; and
   D.   The sign variance is the minimum necessary to alleviate the identified
hardship or exceptional circumstance; and
   E.   The approval, denial or modification of any sign variance shall not
provide precedent for any other sign variance in the city; and
   F.   The granting of the sign variance will not be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to the properties or improvements in the
vicinity. (2003 Code § 11-06-10)
11-6A-10: VARIANCES TO ZONING TITLE:
   A.   Variance Defined: A "variance" is a modification of the requirements of
this title as to lot size, lot coverage, lot width, street frontage, setback
requirements, parking requirements, loading requirements, or other provisions
of this title affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of
the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not be
considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant
upon a showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site, or
unique circumstances relating to the intended use, and that the variance is not
in conflict with the public interest.
   B.   Application Required: Every person desiring a variance from the
provisions of this title shall submit an application upon a form prescribed by
the zoning administrator/building director, and pay a fee in accordance with
the current fee schedule.
   C.   Public Hearing; Notice: Prior to granting a variance, notice and an
opportunity to be heard shall be provided to property owners, purchasers of
record and residents within the land being considered and adjoining the parcel
under consideration. All requests for variance shall be heard and decided by
the planning and zoning commission in a public hearing scheduled and advertised
in accordance with section
11-3-6 of this title, except that mailed notice be provided to the applicant
and to each property owner, purchaser of record or resident within the land
being considered and adjoining the parcel under consideration (including those
properties across a street, alley, canal or other right of way) advising them
of the time and place of the hearing.
   D.   Action By Commission: The planning and zoning commission must approve,
approve conditionally, deny or modify the variance request. In acting upon such
variance, the planning and zoning commission shall review the findings of staff
and shall grant a variance upon finding that the following are true:
      1.   The granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the spirit
and intent of the comprehensive general plan for the city, and will not effect
a change in zoning;
      2.   There is either a hardship associated with the property itself or an
exceptional circumstance relating to the intended use of the property that is
not generally applicable to property or permitted uses in the district;
      3.   The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or
improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of such property
or improvement.
   E.   Conditions Of Granting Variance: The planning and zoning commission may
grant a variance as part of a conditional use application without requiring a
separate application and hearing, as long as the notice requirements of
subsection C of this section are met and the findings in subsection D of this
section are made.
   F.   Effective Date Of Approval: Approval of any variance by the planning
and zoning commission shall become final after a lapse of ten (10) calendar
days from the date of the decision to allow for the filing of appeals in
accordance with subsection
11-3-7B of this title.
   G.   Waiver Of Appeal Period: The applicant may request a waiver of the ten
(10) day appeal period for an approved variance. Such request must be filed in
writing and shall be accompanied by the signatures of all adjacent property
owners indicating they do not object to the waiver request. The zoning
administrator/building director shall review all pertinent information and
issue a decision on the request within two (2) working days from the date upon
which the request was filed. The zoning administrator/building director cannot
waive the appeal period for any application to which a written or verbal
protest was submitted.
   H.   Resubmittal Of Application Upon Denial: No application for a variance
that has been denied by the planning and zoning commission (or by the city
council on appeal) shall be resubmitted in either the same or substantially the
same form in less than one year from the date of final action.
   I.   Term Of Variance: The term of a variance approval shall not exceed
eighteen (18) months. Within this period, the holder of a variance must
initiate construction of the project.
   J.   Extension Of Variance Approval: The holder of a valid variance approval
may submit a written request for a one year extension of the variance approval
for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. A maximum of three (3)
such extensions may be granted. (2003 Code § 11-06-11)
   K.   Appeal Of Variance Decisions: The decision of the planning and zoning
commission on variance requests may be appealed to the city council in
accordance with subsection
11-3-7B of this title. A letter explaining the basis of the appeal and a fee as
established in the current fee schedule must be submitted to the building
director within the ten (10) day appeal period. (2003 Code § 11-06-11; amd.
2012 Code)
11-6A-11: APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
   A.   General Authority: The planning and zoning commission shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator/
building director in the interpretation or enforcement of this title. In
exercising the above powers, the planning and zoning commission may, in
conformity with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as it considers warranted by the evidence before it and to that end shall have
all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   B.   Initiation Of Application: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
zoning administrator/building director may file an appeal. Such appeal shall be
made within ten (10) calendar days from such decision. If the tenth day falls
on a weekend or holiday, the appeal may be filed on the next workday by five
o'clock (5:00) P.M.
   C.   Application And Fee: Every person wanting to appeal an administrative
decision shall file a notice of appeal stating the grounds for the appeal and
fee with the zoning administrator/building director in accordance with current
fee schedule.
   D.   Action By Zoning Administrator/Building Director: The zoning
administrator/building director shall review all appeal applications for
compliance with the requirements of this section. Upon acceptance of
application for appeal, the zoning administrator/building director shall
transmit to the planning and zoning commission the record of the subject
hearing. The filing of an appeal stays further action (subdivision, conditional
use, etc.), on the request that has been appealed, unless the zoning
administrator/building director determines that a stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the planning and
zoning commission upon application or notice to the zoning administrator/
building director, and upon notice to the chairperson of the commission or by a
court of record.
   E.   Hearings; Publication And Notice: The planning and zoning commission
shall hear the appeal at the public hearing following the cutoff date prior to
which the appeal was submitted. Notice for the public hearing shall be as set
forth in section
11-3-6 of this title.
   F.   Action By Commission: The planning and zoning commission shall
thereafter, upon due cause being shown, confirm wholly or partly, modify or
reverse the decision from which appeal is made, and, not later than ten (10)
days after the conclusion of such hearing, shall file with the city clerk a
written report stating the action taken at such hearing. (2003 Code § 11-06-12)
ARTICLE B. CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
11-6B-1: General Authority
11-6B-2: Action By City Council
11-6B-3: Resubmittal Of Application Upon Denial
11-6B-4: City Council Action; Amendment And Reclassification
11-6B-5: Annexation
11-6B-6: Comprehensive Plan Amendment
11-6B-7: Special Exceptions
11-6B-8: Development Agreements
11-6B-1: GENERAL AUTHORITY:
The city council shall approve, deny or modify any application to amend this
title, to change the boundary of a zoning district, to amend the comprehensive
plan, to annex property into the corporate limits, or to establish a use as a
special exception or special use to this title. Prior to taking action on any
such application, the city council shall receive a written recommendation from
the planning and zoning commission. The city council shall allow public comment
at the council meeting and may hold a formal public hearing, but the city
council shall not be required to advertise for a public hearing. (2003 Code §
11-08-01)
11-6B-2: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
At its next regular meeting after the planning and zoning commission has filed
its recommendations with the city clerk, the city council shall set the date,
time and place of hearing the recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission. Following the hearing, the city council may either approve,
disapprove or modify the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission.
The city council is enjoined from granting less restrictive regulations,
standards or land use classifications than those applied for and as publicized
prior to the public hearing held by the planning and zoning commission. (2003
Code § 11-08-02)
11-6B-3: RESUBMITTAL OF APPLICATION UPON DENIAL:
No application that has been denied by the city council or withdrawn by the
applicant shall be resubmitted in either the same or substantially the same
form or with reference to substantially the same premises or the same purpose
in less than one year from the date of final action thereon. (2003 Code § 11-
08-03)
11-6B-4: CITY COUNCIL ACTION; AMENDMENT AND RECLASSIFICATION:
The city council is prohibited from amending, supplementing, changing,
modifying or repealing any provisions of this title or the comprehensive plan
until the substance thereof has first been referred to and reported upon by the
planning and zoning commission.
   A.   Amendment And Reclassification: The power to amend this title may be
amended whenever the city council deems that amendment is required for the
public convenience or necessity, or for the general welfare. Any amendment
shall be enacted pursuant to this section, and for purposes of this section,
includes any measure to change district boundaries, establish or disestablish
districts, to change district regulations, to add, repeal or amend district
regulations, and to add, repeal or amend any other provisions of this section,
or the whole of this title.
   B.   Ordinance Required: In the event the city council shall have approved
or modified the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the city
council shall cause to be prepared the appropriate ordinance of amendment.
However, no ordinance amending the "Blackfoot city zoning ordinance" shall
become effective until a public hearing has been held for which fifteen (15)
days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city. (2003 Code § 11-08-04)
11-6B-5: ANNEXATION:
Requests for annexation of property into the city must be heard by the city
council after receiving recommendation by the planning and zoning commission,
and must meet one or more of the requirements as outlined in Idaho Code, as
amended. (2003 Code § 11-08-05)
11-6B-6: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT:
The city council, prior to adoption, amendment or repeal of the comprehensive
plan, shall conduct at least one public hearing using the same notice and
hearing procedures as the planning and zoning commission. The city council
shall not hold a public hearing, give notice of a proposed hearing, nor take
action upon the plan, amendments or repeal until recommendations have been
received from the planning and zoning commission. Following the hearing of the
city council, if the council makes a material change in the plan, further
notice and hearing shall be provided before the city council adopts the plan.
For purposes of this section, a "material change" shall mean any modification
of a proposed comprehensive plan amendment which, in the opinion of the city
council, is of such importance that the public interest will be better served
by additional notice and public hearing. (2003 Code § 11-08-06)
11-6B-7: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Findings: At the hearing before the city council, the city council
shall hear all persons interested in the special exception then pending before
it. The city council shall review the findings and recommendations of the
planning and zoning commission. The city council may approve, disapprove or
modify the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, but in so
doing must make the following findings:
      1.   The decision to grant or deny the application is based upon the
findings of subsection 11-6A-8D of this chapter.
      2.   The approval, denial or modification of the special exception does
not provide precedent for any other parcel in the city.
      3.   In the event the application is denied, the actions, if any, that
the applicant could take to obtain a special exception permit.
   B.   Council May Impose Restrictive Regulations: The city council, in
amending or modifying the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission,
may impose more restrictive regulations or standards.
   C.   Modification, Extension And Revocation: Upon request of the holder of a
special exception, the city council may modify or extend the term, conditions
and limitations of said permit in accordance with the limitations and
requirements of subsection 11-6A-8D of this chapter. The city council may
revoke or modify, upon notice and hearing, a special exception for the breach
or violation of any condition or limitation of said permit.
   D.   Transferability: Special exceptions shall be nontransferable through
assignment, sale or other means of conveyance without written acknowledgment by
the assignee, purchaser or conveyer in writing of agreement to be bound by
conditions that were set forth in the approval of the application pursuant to
this section. Special exceptions shall not be considered as establishing
binding precedent upon the city.
   E.   Term: A special exception shall become void if not utilized within
eighteen (18) months of issuance, or if the authorized use is abandoned for
more than a period of six (6) months. (2003 Code § 11-08-07)
11-6B-8: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Authority: Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6511A, development
agreements hereby are authorized.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of a development agreement is to provide a vehicle
for development in areas and for uses where, in the opinion of the city council
or the planning and zoning commission, approval of a requested rezone by itself
does not satisfy the requirements set forth in this title for rezone approval;
but, that use of a development agreement will assure compliance with the
required rezone findings and conclusions. Development agreements can be used
after a determination has been made that the proposed rezone by itself is not
appropriate, unless the use of a development agreement could allow development
to proceed under stricter restrictions than those imposed generally in the
proposed zoning district. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
relieving the property that is subject to development agreement restrictions
from further compliance with all other permit and code requirements applicable
because of the zoning designation of the property. Restrictions imposed upon
property as a result of a development agreement are in addition to all other
zoning ordinance requirements.
   C.   Request Or Requirement For Agreement: After an application for rezone
has been received in the planning department, a request to enter into a
development agreement for that parcel may be submitted by the rezone applicant;
or, a development agreement may be required by city council at council's rezone
hearing, or may be required by city council upon recommendation from the
planning and zoning commission following the commission's rezone hearing.
   D.   Form Of Development Agreement Application: All applications for
development agreements shall be in a form as required by the zoning
administrator/building director.
   E.   Process: Upon receipt of an application for development agreement, the
planning director shall work with the applicant to prepare a development
agreement. The development agreement should address the concerns for the
development that have been proposed by the applicant. Such concerns addressed
may include, but shall not be limited to, density, bulk, site design,
mitigation of impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, appearance, provision of
utilities or public facilities, and restrictions on use.
   F.   Approval Of Development Agreement: Development agreements may be
approved at the sole discretion of the city council. The city council may,
prior to approval, remand the matter to the planning and zoning commission for
consideration and recommendation. In such case, the planning and zoning
commission may recommend approval or denial and may recommend the addition of
conditions, terms, duties or obligations to the development agreement.
   G.   Agreement To Run With Land: The development agreement, or any
modification thereto, and all conditions, terms, duties or obligations included
therein shall run with the land and shall be considered continuing obligations
of the owner, co-owners and each other person acquiring an interest in the
property. An owner, co-owner, each subsequent owner or other person acquiring
an interest in the property that is restricted by a development agreement or
modification adopted pursuant to this section, shall comply with the terms,
conditions, obligations and duties contained in the development agreement or
modification.
   H.   Modification Of Development Agreement: Development agreements may only
be modified after public hearing by the city council. Major modifications as
determined by the zoning administrator/building director require a hearing and
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission prior to the city
council hearing.
   I.   Termination Of Development Agreements:
      1.   Development agreements may be amended or terminated by the city
council, after public hearing, for failure to comply with the commitments
expressed in the development agreement.
      2.   Upon termination of the development agreement, the city council
shall revert the property to the prior zone or in the case of an initial zone
at annexation, to a zone deemed appropriate by the city council. All uses of
the property that are not consistent with the subsequently designated zone
following termination of the development agreement shall cease. The owner of
the property shall apply for a conditional use for the property if the use is
conditionally allowed within the subsequently designated zone.
   J.   Enforcement Of Development Agreements: Development agreements may be
enforced by the city through any means deemed to be appropriate, including, but
not limited to, specific enforcement, injunctive relief, damages or criminal
penalty for violation of this section. The enforcement options available to the
city shall not be considered exclusive. (2003 Code § 11-08-08)
CHAPTER 7
WIRELESS TOWERS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Findings
11-7-2: Purposes
11-7-3: Definitions
11-7-4: General Regulations
11-7-5: Siting And Facility Priorities
11-7-6: Collocation Required
11-7-7: Applications
11-7-8: Height Standards
11-7-9: Setback Standards
11-7-10: Environmental Standards
11-7-11: Lighting And Signage Standards
11-7-12: Parking
11-7-13: Access
11-7-14: Facade Attached And Utility Pole Attached Standards
11-7-15: Special Use WCF Permit
11-7-16: Special Use WCF Permit Procedures
11-7-17: Special Use WCF Standards
11-7-18: Tower Design Standards For Special Use WCF
11-7-19: Compliance With Federal Regulations
11-7-20: Antenna Support Structure Safety
11-7-21: Maintenance
11-7-22: Modifications
11-7-23: Abandonment Or Discontinuation Of Use
11-7-24: Conflicts
11-7-1: FINDINGS:
The communications act of 1934, as amended by the telecommunications act of
1996 ("the act"), grants the federal communications commission (FCC) exclusive
jurisdiction over the regulation of the environmental effects of radio
frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications facilities and the regulation
of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum. The regulation of
towers and telecommunications facilities will not have the effect of
prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications services in
violation of the act. (2003 Code § 11-07-01)
11-7-2: PURPOSES:
   A.   The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement,
construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities in
order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while at the
same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive
wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city.
   B.   Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are:
      1.   To regulate the location of wireless telecommunications facilities
in the city;
      2.   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impact of towers and other telecommunications facilities;
      3.   To minimize adverse visual impact of wireless telecommunications
facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
      4.   To promote and encourage shared use/collocation of towers and
antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single use wireless telecommunications facilities;
      5.   To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that
will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of tower structures to
support antenna and telecommunications facilities;
      6.   To avoid potential damage to property caused by wireless
telecommunications facilities by ensuring such structures are soundly and
carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no
longer used or are determined to be structurally unsound; and
      7.   To ensure that wireless telecommunications facilities are compatible
with surrounding land uses to the greatest extent reasonably possible. (2003
Code § 11-07-02)
11-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ACOUSTICAL ENGINEER: A professional engineer with demonstrated education,
accreditation and experience to perform and certify noise measurements.
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves,
including equipment attached to a tower or building for the purpose of
providing personal wireless services. Antennas include the following types:
   Ancillary Antenna: An antenna that is less than twelve inches (12") in its
largest dimension and that is not directly used to provide personal wireless
communication services, e.g., a global positioning satellite antenna (GPS).
   Directional (Panel) Antenna: Receives and transmits signals in a directional
pattern typically encompassing an arc of one hundred twenty degrees (120°).
   Omnidirectional (Whip) Antenna: Receives and transmits signals in a three
hundred sixty degree (360°) pattern, and that is up to fifteen feet (15') in
height and up to four inches (4") in diameter.
   Parabolic (Dish) Antenna: A bowl shaped device that receives and transmits
signals in a specific directional pattern.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any building or structure, other than a tower that
can be used for location of telecommunications facilities.
APPLICANT: Any person who applies for a tower development permit.
APPLICATION: The process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the city
submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify or erect a tower upon
such parcel of land. Application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant
to the city concerning such a request.
BUILDING: Any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of person,
animals, chattels or property of any kind that is permanently affixed to the
land and that has one or more floors and a roof.
CARRIER: A company that provides wireless services.
COLLOCATION: The use of a single support system on the ground by more than one
carrier (vertical collocation) and/or several support systems on an existing
building or structure by more than one carrier.
EIA: The Electronic Industries Association.
EQUIPMENT ENCLOSURE: A small enclosed structure, shelter, cabinet, box or vault
at the base of the support system within which are housed batteries and
electrical equipment.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
FACADE ATTACHED ANTENNA: Any antenna directly attached or affixed to the
elevation of a building, tank, tower, or other structure.
FREESTANDING TOWER: A tower not physically attached to a building or structure.
The tower is attached to the ground by a foundation.
FULLY AUTOMATED WCF: A WCF with no on site personnel required for its daily
operation.
GUYWIRE: Diagonal cables utilized to tie towers to the ground or other
surfaces.
LATTICE TOWER: A support structure that consists of a network of crossed metal
braces, forming a tower that is usually triangular of square in cross section.
LICENSED CARRIER: A company authorized by the FCC.
NONAUTOMATED WCF: A WCF with on site personnel.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A building or structure not constructed for
residential purposes.
OWNER: Any person with fee title or a long term (exceeding 10 years) leasehold
to any parcel of land within the city who desires to develop, or construct,
build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not
for profit.
PHOTOSIMULATION: Computer generated photographs, renderings combining existing
subject adjacent property conditions and improvements with proposed
improvements.
PLANNING COVERAGE MAP: A map, maps, or plan on which are marked the service
areas of other WCF sites operated by the applicant. The planning coverage map
shall be considered exempt from disclosure pursuant to Idaho Code section 9-
340, or as subsequently amended.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Includes all public streets and utility easements owned by
or dedicated to the city of Blackfoot, or other public entity.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: A building utilized exclusively for short or long term
residential purposes.
SERVICE AREA: Contained areas within which a wireless communication facility is
able to transmit clear signals, generally circular in form.
STEALTH DESIGN: Any wireless telecommunications facility that is designed to
enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to,
architecturally screened roof mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower,
such as light poles, power poles and trees. The term stealth does not
necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower
designs.
UTILITY POLE: A telephone, electric, or cable television pole located in a
street right of way.
TOWER: A self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from
grade supports telecommunications facilities. The term tower shall not include
amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
WATERWAY: A channel, natural or manmade, through which water runs.
WHIP ANTENNA: See definition of Antenna.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Any facility that transmits and/or
receives electromagnetic signals, including antennas, microwave dishes,
parabolic antennas, directional antennas and other types of equipment for the
transmission or reception of such signals, towers or similar structures
supporting the equipment, equipment buildings, shelters, cabinets, parking
area, and other accessory development. However, telecommunications facilities
shall not include any satellite earth station antenna two meters (2 m) in
diameter or less that is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial; or
any satellite earth station antenna one meter (1 m) or less in diameter,
regardless of zoning category. (2003 Code § 11-07-03)
11-7-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Application Required: No person shall build, erect, use or modify a
wireless telecommunications facility (hereinafter WCF) upon any parcel of land
within any zoning district unless: 1) a complete application to do so has been
filed with the building inspection department; and 2) approval in the form of a
WCF permit has been received from the appropriate body, subject to the
provisions set out in this chapter. All WCFs are prohibited from interference
with city and public safety communication systems and/or area television or
radio broadcasts. Applications must be accompanied by the appropriate fee as
set by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Anchor Restrictions: Guywires may only be used to anchor an antenna,
antenna array, or support structure to an existing building to which the
antenna, antenna array, or support structure is attached.
   C.   Residential Zones: In residential zoning districts, freestanding WCFs,
including towers, are prohibited except on public school property used for
school purposes. Freestanding WCFs also are prohibited within two hundred feet
(200') of any residentially zoned parcel, regardless of the underlying zoning
district on which the WCF might be located. WCFs attached to utility poles or
facade attached to nonresidential buildings are allowed by administrative staff
permit, subject to application procedures set out in this chapter and a twenty
one (21) day notice and comment period requirement, and subject to the
standards set out in this chapter, including those set out in section
11-7-18 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing regarding WCFs placed on
public school property, the tower height in any event may not exceed the
distance from the center of the tower at ground level to the edge of the school
property.
   D.   Nonresidential Zones: In nonresidential zones, tower WCFs are permitted
by means of an approved special WCF permit. Other WCFs are permitted subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Special Use Districts: Applications submitted for a WCF permit within a
special use district, such as a nationally recognized historic district or
site, must be accompanied by a certificate of appropriateness from the
appropriate review board or commission of the city.
   F.   Exceptions:
      1.   The city council may approve a lease agreement or right of way use
permit that allows a tower to be placed on city owned property in any zoning
district within the city limits, without special WCF permit procedures being
required, after a public hearing on the matter, if the city council deems it to
be in the best interests of the city.
      2.   The planning and zoning commission may approve an application for a
tower in a residential zone with a special WCF permit upon a satisfactory
showing that applicant's coverage requirements necessitate location within that
zone, and that the WCF can meet or exceed standards set out in this chapter.
"Satisfactory showing" shall include certification from a qualified engineer as
to the coverage requirements and insufficiency of other zoning districts to
provide the same, and that a tower facility, rather than another WCF support
system, is necessary. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs for
professional services to provide information deemed necessary by the planning
and zoning commission in order to reach its decision. Appeal from the decision
may be made to the city council, provided the request is submitted, in writing,
to the city clerk within ten (10) days following the issuance of the decision.
(2003 Code § 11-07-04)
11-7-5: SITING AND FACILITY PRIORITIES:
Based on potential aesthetic impact and subject to other restrictions set out
in this chapter, the order of preference for approval of facility type is as
follows: roof attached, facade attached, utility pole attached and freestanding
tower. WCFs shall be located in the following priority order:
   A.   Collocation on an existing tower, structure or building. The applicant
shall have the burden of proving that there are no feasible existing structures
upon which to collocate as described below.
   B.   On city owned property.
   C.   In areas where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings and other
structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
   D.   On other nonresidential buildings or vacant nonresidentially zoned
land.
   E.   In residential districts (nontower facilities only) subject to
restrictions in this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-07-05)
11-7-6: COLLOCATION REQUIRED:
   A.   No new tower shall be permitted unless the tower is designed and built
to be able to support another carrier's WCF comparable in weight, size, and
surface area to the telecommunications facilities installed on said tower by
the applicant. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant provides
evidence of the failure of applicant's good faith effort to install or
collocate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on city owned towers or
usable antenna support structures or on towers located on property leased from
the city located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower
site, including good faith efforts to negotiate lease rights, to no avail and
evidence of the following:
      1.   Lack of existing towers or structures located within the geographic
area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements;
      2.   Insufficiency of design of existing tower or structures to meet
applicant's engineering requirements as shown in the master development plan;
      3.   Insufficiency of existing towers or structures to support the
proposed antenna and related equipment;
      4.   That the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna; and/or
      5.   The fees, costs of contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for share are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are
presumed to be unreasonable.
   B.   Collocation requests shall require only an administrative review and
staff approval under the terms of the application procedures set out below.
(2003 Code § 11-07-06)
11-7-7: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Submittal: Applications shall be submitted to the building inspector
department for review.
      1.   Nonresidential Districts: For permits requested in nonresidential
districts for WCFs collocating on an existing structure, for WCFs attached to
utility poles, or for WCFs whose installation on utility poles requires
replacement of existing poles with poles no taller than seventy five feet
(75'), the department is hereby authorized to issue an administrative permit
upon its review and approval of an application submitted as set forth herein.
      2.   Residential Districts: For permits requested in residential
districts for facade attached WCFs or other permitted WCFs, in addition to the
application and supporting documentation required herein, the applicant shall
provide the department with mailing labels for owners of real property within a
three hundred foot (300') radius of the proposed WCF location. The department
shall mail notices to said property owners informing them of the application,
the proposed permit issuance date, and their right to submit written comments
or protests regarding the application; provided, that said comments are
submitted within twenty one (21) days of the date of said notice. For protests
to be considered, there must be an allegation of facts, which, if accurate,
show that the WCF will not or cannot substantially comply with the standards
set out in this chapter, including the special WCF permit standards.
         a.   If no written protests are received before the proposed issuance
date, the department may issue the permit, subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
         b.   In the event the department approves a permit, if timely written
protests have been received, the owners who submitted written protests shall be
given written notice of the approval and their opportunity to appeal in writing
to the department, within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. If an appeal
is filed, the department shall notify the applicant of the appeal, set a date
before the planning and zoning commission for its consideration and notify the
applicant, any party having submitted comments, and the property owners
described above, of the date, time and place of the hearing. The department
shall prepare a staff report and forward the written comments and protests and
all information it gathers to the planning and zoning commission, along with
the original application for consideration of the commission. The planning and
zoning commission shall conduct the hearing, analyze information, and issue
written findings and a decision regarding issuance of the permit. The planning
and zoning commission may apply conditions that it deems necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city in the event it
decides to issue or uphold the issuance of the permit. Any aggrieved party who
appeared in person or in writing before the department or the planning and
zoning commission may file a written appeal with the city clerk within ten (10)
days of the decision for hearing before the city council at the next available
regular city council meeting. The city council shall review the record of the
hearing below and the written appeal and may accept, reject or modify the
decision. The city council may apply conditions that it deems necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city in the event
it decides to issue or uphold the issuance of the permit.
   B.   Information Required: Applications must contain the following
information:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, any
coapplicants, and any authorized agents for the applicant and/or coapplicants.
Written authorization bearing original signatures of the applicant and/or
coapplicants shall be provided for any agent representing the applicant/
coapplicants in this process. The applicant or coapplicant must be a licensed
carrier and provide proof thereof with the application. The application must
contain original signatures of the applicant and all coapplicants.
      2.   A complete legal description of the subject property.
      3.   A site plan drawn to a scale of no less than one inch equals twenty
feet (1" = 20') specifying the following; provided, that the city may waive any
or all of the following for WCFs attached to existing structures:
         a.   Location, type, and height of the proposed WCF, including setback
measurements.
         b.   On site structures, land uses and zoning.
         c.   Circulation information including adjacent roadways, ingress and
egress from the roadways, parking, pedestrian circulation and access.
         d.   Fences, signs, exterior lighting and storm drainage.
         e.   Property lines with dimensions, adjacent land uses, structures
and zoning.
         f.   Information demonstrating compliance with the standards of this
chapter.
         g.   Existing watercourses, utility lines, easements, deed
restrictions, and any built or natural features restricting the use of the
subject property.
         h.   North arrow, scale and legend.
      4.   A landscaping plan (unless the WCF is to be attached to an existing
building and all equipment is located within or on the building) drawn to the
same scale as the site plan, clearly depicting all existing landscaping/
vegetation and whether it will be removed or retained; all proposed landscaping
complete with size, location and species of vegetation; specific depiction and
notation of any features necessary to comply with the screening standards of
this chapter.
      5.   Elevation drawing or before and after photographs/drawings
simulating and specifying the location and height of the antennas, support
structures, equipment enclosures and other accessory uses, fences and signs.
      6.   Elevations of proposed aboveground equipment enclosures.
      7.   A planning coverage map and/or maps on which are marked the service
area of the facility for which application is being made and all applicant's
WCF sites operating within the city limits and in the area of city impact as
defined in Idaho Code. The map shall be drawn to a scale of no less than one
inch equals five hundred feet (1" = 500').
      8.   Photosimulations of the proposed WCF from affected residential
properties and public rights of way.
      9.   All information set out in the collocation requirement section of
this chapter related to efforts at collocating facilities and all documentation
necessary to show good faith efforts to comply with the siting and facility
priority section of this chapter.
      10.   A description of the support structure or building upon which the
WCF is proposed to be located, and the technical reasons for the design and
configuration of the WCF.
      11.   A signed statement by the applicant certifying that any proposed
tower can accommodate collocation of additional antennas and that the applicant
shall enter into agreements for collocation with other providers.
      12.   A signed statement that the applicant agrees to remove the WCF and
equipment within ninety (90) days after the site's use is discontinued; and
that the WCF shall be designed and erected so as to comply with all EIA
standards and applicable federal, state and city laws and regulations,
including FAA regulations.
      13.   Certification that usage of the WCF will not interfere with other
adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions.
      14.   Proof that the applicant is licensed with the FCC.
      15.   A completed right of way use permit application if the WCF is to be
located within a public right of way if not on an existing utility pole.
      16.   The applicant must attach a copy of correspondence from the owner
of the land and/or building on which the WCF is to be located, acknowledging
the owner's approval of the use of the property for a WCF, the applicant's
ability to enter into leases with other providers for collocation, and
specifying the party responsible for removal of the WCF and attendant equipment
within ninety (90) days of discontinuance of its use. (2003 Code § 11-07-07)
11-7-8: HEIGHT STANDARDS:
   A.   A roof attached WCF shall not exceed ten feet (10') above the highest
portion of the roof membrane. The antenna and support system for whip antennas
shall not exceed ten feet (10') above the highest portion of that roof,
including parapet walls.
   B.   A facade attached WCF shall not extend higher than ten feet (10') above
the facade to which it is attached.
   C.   A utility pole attached WCF may extend fifteen feet (15') above the
height of the existing utility pole; provided, however, that the maximum height
from grade to top of the entire structure may not exceed seventy five feet
(75').
   D.   Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts
where located. Tower height shall be measured from grade and shall include the
tower structure itself, the base pad, and any other telecommunications
facilities attached thereto that extend more than twenty feet (20') over the
top of the tower structure itself.
   E.   Tower height shall be set as a condition of the special WCF permit.
(2003 Code § 11-07-08)
11-7-9: SETBACK STANDARDS:
No freestanding WCFs or equipment enclosures shall be located between the face
of a structure and a public street, bikeway, park or residential development,
except for approved facade attached WCFs. In addition to the foregoing
prohibition and the setback standards established for individual zoning
districts, the following regulations shall apply:
   A.   Utility Pole Attached WCF: None.
   B.   Facade Attached WCF: Maximum projection shall be eighteen inches (18").
   C.   Roof Attached WCF: The setback from the edge of the building shall be
equal to the height of the antenna and support system as measured from the roof
membrane.
   D.   Tower:
      1.   All towers up to one hundred feet (100') in height shall be set back
on all sides a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the
applicable zoning district.
      2.   Towers in excess of one hundred feet (100') in height shall be set
back one additional foot per each foot of tower height in excess of one hundred
feet (100'). Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in "Criteria For
Site Plan Development Modifications", so that a tower can be placed so as to
reduce its visual impact, e.g., adjacent to trees that may partially hide the
tower.
      3.   Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a
minimum of two hundred feet (200') or one hundred ninety five percent (195%) of
the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
   E.   Equipment Enclosures: In accordance with the underlying zoning
district. (2003 Code § 11-07-09)
11-7-10: ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS:
   A.   WCFs shall be prohibited in wetlands, and may be prohibited in wetland
buffer areas to minimize disturbance to the buffer areas.
   B.   No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any WCF. If any
hazardous materials are to be used on site, there shall be provisions for full
containment of such materials. An enclosed containment area shall be provided
with a sealed floor, designed to contain at least one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the volume of the hazardous materials stored or used on site.
   C.   Stormwater runoff shall be contained on site. Drainage plans and
calculations must be submitted and approved.
   D.   Applicants locating WCFs within any floodplain shall comply with any
additional placement standards required by the regulations for that area. (2003
Code § 11-07-10)
11-7-11: LIGHTING AND SIGNAGE STANDARDS:
   A.   Facility lighting shall be designed so as to meet but not exceed
minimum requirements for security, safety or FAA regulations. Lighting of
antennas or support structures shall be prohibited unless required by the FAA.
All lighting shall be designed so as to avoid glare and minimize illumination
on adjacent properties and shall comply with all city regulations.
   B.   Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the telephone
numbers to contact in an emergency, public safety warnings, certifications or
other required seals. These signs shall also comply with the requirements of
the city sign code regulations. (2003 Code § 11-07-11)
11-7-12: PARKING:
If the WCF is nonautomated, sufficient off street parking must be provided to
accommodate the maximum number of employees on site at any one time. (2003 Code
§ 11-07-12)
11-7-13: ACCESS:
In addition to ingress and egress requirements of the adopted building code,
ANSI, and such others as may be adopted by the city, access to and from WCFs
and equipment shall be regulated as follows: (2003 Code § 11-07-13; amd. 2012
Code)
   A.   No WCF or equipment shall be located in any required parking,
maneuvering or vehicle/pedestrian circulation area such that it interferes
with, or in any way impairs, the intent or functionality of the original
design.
   B.   The WCF shall be secured from access by the general public but access
for emergency services must be ensured. (2003 Code § 11-07-13)
11-7-14: FACADE ATTACHED AND UTILITY POLE ATTACHED STANDARDS:
   A.   Facade Attached WCFs: Equipment enclosures shall be attached to the
facade or roof of the support structure or placed or located underground if
site conditions permit. Otherwise, equipment enclosures shall comply with
applicable design standards set out below.
   B.   Utility Pole Attached WCF:
      1.   Attachment: Only one WCF shall be permitted on any one utility pole.
The antenna shall be equal to or less than six feet (6') in height, including
the support system, if any. Surface area of an antenna shall not exceed five
hundred eighty (580) square inches. The antenna shall be either fully concealed
within the utility pole or camouflaged to appear to be an integral part of the
utility pole. An antenna not flush mounted on the side of the utility pole
shall be centered on the top of the utility pole to which it is attached and
utilize stealth design.
      2.   Utility Separation: In the event that a utility located upon the
utility pole requires vertical separation between its utility facilities and
the antenna so attached, the antenna may be raised by a support system or pole
change out to accommodate the separation requirement to an elevation not
exceeding an additional fifteen feet (15') or the required separation,
whichever is less. Any such support shall not be greater in diameter than the
existing utility pole and shall be designed to blend into the colors and
textures of the existing utility pole.
      3.   Equipment Enclosures: No equipment enclosure may exceed six (6)
cubic feet in volume. An underground equipment enclosure may be connected to an
aboveground enclosure for a combined total volume of no greater than twelve
(12) cubic feet. No single dimension of any aboveground equipment enclosure
shall exceed three feet (3') and the structure shall be situated so as to
minimize its visual impact, including screening with evergreen landscaping.
      4.   Utility Relocation: In the event utilities located on a utility pole
are relocated underground, the WCF shall be relocated underground or to another
location pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-07-14)
11-7-15: SPECIAL USE WCF PERMIT:
The planning and zoning commission may approve a special use WCF permit, after
public hearing, upon a satisfactory showing that the proposal has met the
standards and conditions set out in this chapter. The planning and zoning
commission may establish conditions as it deems necessary to preserve the
health, safety, and welfare of the public. Any substantial or significant
change or addition to a special permit shall require a new permit application.
(2003 Code § 11-07-15)
11-7-16: SPECIAL USE WCF PERMIT PROCEDURES:
Applications for special use WCF permits shall be filed with the building
inspection department that shall be responsible for scheduling the hearing
before the planning and zoning commission. Applications shall be accompanied by
fees as set by resolution of the city council. The applicant must provide
mailing labels for all owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of
the proposed site. The department shall mail notices to said property owners
and publish a public hearing notice in the local newspaper at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing. The department shall prepare a staff report and
forward all information it gathers to the planning and zoning commission along
with the application for consideration at the hearing. The planning and zoning
commission shall conduct the hearing, analyze information, and issue written
findings and a decision. Any aggrieved party may file a written appeal with the
city clerk, within ten (10) days of the decision, for hearing before the city
council at the next available regular city council meeting. The city council
shall review the record of the hearing below and the written appeal and may
accept, reject or modify the decision. The city council may impose any
additional conditions that it deems necessary in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens in the event it decides to issue, or uphold
the issuance of, the permit. (2003 Code § 11-07-16)
11-7-17: SPECIAL USE WCF STANDARDS:
An applicant must demonstrate that all reasonable steps have been taken to
comply with the strict terms of this chapter and that a special use permit is
the sole solution. The following standards are to be utilized in reviewing any
application for a special use WCF permit:
   A.   The WCF should not create an unreasonable hardship upon surrounding
property owners.
   B.   The WCF should not unduly disrupt pedestrian, vehicular or air travel.
   C.   The WCF should not adversely affect public utilities, public parks or
the natural environment to a greater degree than uses permitted outright in the
zoning district.
   D.   The placement of the WCF should be consistent with the purposes set
forth in this chapter.
   E.   The WCF should be designed to be compatible in appearance and layout
with adjacent uses.
   F.   The WCF should be designed so as to minimize any adverse effects on
adjoining land. (2003 Code § 11-07-17)
11-7-18: TOWER DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL USE WCF:
   A.   Hazard Assessment: Applicant must supply written, technical evidence
from a qualified engineer acceptable to the fire department and the building
official that the proposed site of the tower or telecommunications facilities
does not pose a risk of explosion, fire or other danger to life or property due
to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such
as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous
chemicals.
   B.   Setbacks: Setback requirements for a tower shall be measured from the
base of the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is
located. Setback requirements may be modified so that a tower can be placed so
as to reduce its visual impact, e.g., adjacent to trees that may partially hide
the tower. (2003 Code § 11-07-18)
   C.   Structural Requirements: All towers must be designed and certified by
an engineer to be structurally sound and, at minimum, be in conformance with
the adopted building code and any other standards outlined in this chapter. All
towers in operation shall be affixed to land. (2003 Code § 11-07-18; amd. 2012
Code)
   D.   Separation Or Buffer Requirements: For the purpose of this section, the
separation distances between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a
straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower, drawn to scale.
Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured
from the base of a tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property.
The minimum tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from
other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city
jurisdictional boundaries.
      1.   Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a
minimum of two hundred feet (200') or a distance equal to one hundred ninety
five percent (195%) of the height of the proposed tower, whichever is greater.
      2.   Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation
requirements from existing towers or towers that have a development permit but
are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to
this chapter:
         a.   Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other
towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of
three hundred feet (300').
         b.   Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be
separated from all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of nine
hundred feet (900').
         c.   Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be
separated from all monopole towers by a minimum of three hundred feet (300').
   E.   Illumination: Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as
required by the federal aviation administration (FAA).
   F.   Exterior Finish: Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall
have an exterior finish that enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as
approved by the planning and zoning commission.
   G.   Landscaping: All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers,
antenna support structures or telecommunications facilities shall be in
accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district
where the tower, antenna support structure or telecommunications facilities are
located. The city may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in this
code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. (2003 Code §
11-07-18)
   H.   Access: All fire department and adopted fire code standards regarding
emergency vehicle access must be complied with, unless waived by the city.
(2003 Code § 11-07-18; amd. 2012 Code)
   I.   Stealth Design: All towers not located in an industrial zoning district
shall be of stealth design, unless an exception is granted by the city council.
(2003 Code § 11-07-18)
11-7-19: COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL REGULATIONS:
All WCFs shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the
FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the WCFs governed by this chapter shall bring said WCFs into
compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of
the effective date of the revised standards and regulations, unless a more
stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency.
Failure to bring WCFs into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owners'
expense upon fifteen (15) days' written notice via normal first class mail.
(2003 Code § 11-07-19)
11-7-20: ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE SAFETY:
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure
are safe and the surrounding areas shall not be negatively affected by support
structure failure, falling ice or other debris or interference. All support
structures shall be fitted with anticlimbing devices, as approved by the
manufacturer. (2003 Code § 11-07-20)
11-7-21: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Each permittee shall maintain its WCF in a good and safe condition,
preserving the original appearance and concealment, disguise or screening
elements incorporated into the design at the time of approval and in a manner
that complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements. Such
maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, such items as painting,
repair of equipment, and maintenance of landscaping. If the permittee fails to
maintain the facility, the city may undertake the maintenance at the expense of
the permittee or terminate the permit, and remove the WCF at owner's expense,
at its sole option upon fifteen (15) days' written notice via normal first
class mail.
   B.   Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and
shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods
and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause
damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Tower owners shall install and
maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and
other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the national
electrical safety code and all FCC, state and local regulations, and in such
manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. All towers,
telecommunications facilities and antenna support structures shall at all times
be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same
shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. All
maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications facilities or antenna
support structures shall be performed by city and state licensed maintenance
and construction personnel. All tower owners shall maintain the towers in
compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC.
   C.   If, upon inspection, the city concludes that the tower fails to comply
with such codes or standards and constitutes a danger to person or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
thirty (30) days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days
constitutes grounds for the removal of the tower at the owner's expense upon
fifteen (15) days' written notice via normal first class mail.
   D.   In the event that the use of a tower is discontinued by the tower
owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued and the
tower removed from the premises. (2003 Code § 11-07-21)
11-7-22: MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   New Permit Obtained: A new permit must be obtained prior to any
proposed change or addition to any WCF; provided, that routine maintenance or
replacement of any portion of the WCF with identical equipment in conformance
with this chapter shall not require application for a new permit.
   B.   Existing Uses: All WCFs existing on the effective date hereof shall be
allowed to continue their operation as they presently exist, subject to the
terms of this chapter relating to abandonment or discontinuance of use. Routine
maintenance shall be permitted, but construction involving the replacement of
support structure apparatus, antennas, or any exterior alteration must be done
in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   C.   Exception: Emergency service WCFs may obtain a waiver from the city
council if required for preserving the public health and safety. Issuance of
the waiver shall require a public hearing and a finding on the part of the city
council that the modifications cannot comply without undue burden on the
citizens of the city. (2003 Code § 11-07-22)
11-7-23: ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUATION OF USE:
   A.   Construction or activation of a WCF shall commence within ninety (90)
days of approval of the WCF permit or the permit shall be null and void. A
ninety (90) day written extension approval may be granted by the building
inspection department due to weather conditions or other extenuating
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant as determined by the building
inspection department, after written request by the permittee.
   B.   At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue
operation of a WCF, the carrier shall notify the city by first class U.S. mail
of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such
notice shall be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment or
discontinuation of operations. In the event that a licensed carrier fails to
give such notice, the WCF shall be considered abandoned, effective the day of
discontinuance.
   C.   The carrier shall remove the WCF no later than ninety (90) days after
the date of abandonment or discontinuation, properly dispose of all waste
materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid waste disposal
regulations, and restore the location to its before use state, landscaping and
grading excepted. Removal shall include, but not be limited to, removal of
antennas, support structures, equipment enclosures and security barriers from
the subject property.
   D.   If a carrier fails to remove a WCF in accordance with this section, the
city may cause the facility to be removed and all expenses of removal, disposal
and restoration shall be paid by the owner of the land where the facility is
located. (2003 Code § 11-07-23)
11-7-24: CONFLICTS:
All resolutions, ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed. (2003 Code § 11-07-25)
CHAPTER 8
EXCEPTIONS; ACCESSORY AND NONCONFORMING USES; FENCES
SECTION:
11-8-1: General Regulations
11-8-2: Accessory Uses
11-8-3: Nonconforming Uses
11-8-4: Zoning Rights Of Way And Annexed Land
11-8-5: Most Restrictive Regulations Govern
11-8-6: Public Services Excepted
11-8-7: Fence Regulations
11-8-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Intent: The following provisions shall be subject to the general
regulations of this chapter and to the special provisions and exceptions in
this and the following sections so as to secure the intent of this chapter. In
all cases of administration and enforcement of this chapter for which no other
specific provisions are made in this section and other provisions herein, the
planning and zoning commission shall provide for the same by order, resolution
or the adoption of a rule, regulation or bylaw, which provision shall be in
accord with and consistent with the objectives and standards of this chapter.
   B.   Original Lots Of Record: Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one
ownership, that was of record and a legal lot at the time of adoption hereof,
but does not meet the requirements of the district in which it is located for
minimum lot width or area, may be utilized for a permitted use if all other
requirements of this chapter are met. (2003 Code § 11-09-01)
11-8-2: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Permitted: An "accessory use", as defined in section
11-1-3 of this title and as regulated herein, is permitted in any district
where the principal use to which it is accessory is permitted.
   B.   Height Limit Exceptions: If allowed by conditional use permit, the
building height limits provided in the zone regulations may be exceeded by
towers, flagpoles, gables, spire, cupolas, water tanks and like structures,
including mechanical appurtenances, except that in no case shall the excepted
structure cover at any point above the height limit an area greater than
fifteen percent (15%) of the area of the lot.
   C.   Restrictions On Tower And Gable Structures: No tower, gable, spire or
similar structure shall be used for sleeping or eating quarters, nor for any
commercial purposes other than such as is incidental to the main use.
   D.   Permitted Uses In Any Yards: The following shall be permitted in any
yard:
      1.   Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural projections that do
not increase the volume of space enclosed by the building and do not project
into any required yard more than two feet (2'); provided, that an unroofed
stair and landing, together with a railing, may project not more than three
feet (3') into the minimum setback requirement.
      2.   Chimney, not more than eight feet (8') in width projecting no more
than twenty four inches (24") into the minimum setbacks.
      3.   Access driveways providing reasonable access to required private or
public areas, including garages. Driveways that extend through the setback in
other than a perpendicular manner may be approved if due to physical
limitations of the site or for aesthetic or safety purposes. The planning
director may approve such unusual driveways upon a determination that the
following are true:
         a.   The driveway is clearly for access to a garage or parking area;
and
         b.   The proposed driveway does not have a negative impact on adjacent
properties; and
         c.   The driveway is required because of physical limitations of the
site; or
         d.   The driveway is required to enhance the aesthetics of the site
such as preserving existing trees; or
         e.   The driveway is required for safety reasons, such as avoiding
backing into a busy street or a street with limited motorist visibility.
Driveways that are not approved by the zoning administrator/building director
require a variance from the planning and zoning commission.
      4.   Flagpoles shall conform to the height limit allowed within the zone
unless approved in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this
section.
      5.   Accessory structures under one hundred twenty (120) square feet in
area and under seven feet (7') in height are permitted in any yard area, except
in front of the main building.
   E.   Permitted Uses In Rear Yards: The following shall be permitted in rear
yards:
      1.   Unroofed balcony in rear yard; provided, that no such balcony shall
project more than four feet (4') into such yard.
      2.   "Backyard composting", as defined in section
11-1-3 of this title. (2003 Code § 11-09-02)
11-8-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Permitted: Any use or structure lawfully occupying a building or land
at the effective date hereof, or subsequent amendments thereto, or at the time
of annexation or rezone, which does not conform with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, shall be deemed a nonconforming use and may
continue to operate as it did prior to the ordinance. A nonconforming use shall
exist if the owner or developer of such use has lawfully, in reliance on
existing laws, ordinances or permits, made substantial expenditures or
otherwise committed himself, to a substantial disadvantage, before the law,
ordinance or permit is changed. Substantial shall be measured by consideration
of all factors evidencing a change of position.
   B.   Enlargement Of Nonconforming Use: No nonconforming use may be enlarged,
expanded or altered except to make it a conforming use. Maintenance and minor
repairs necessary to keep a nonconforming use in sound condition during the
continuance shall be permitted. The right to maintain a nonconforming use runs
with the land and is not terminated by a change in ownership, provided the
nonconforming use is not enlarged, expanded or altered.
   C.   Nonconforming Use Abandonment: Whenever a nonconforming use of land or
a building has been discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months, or
in the case of a building originally designed for a commercial or industrial
use for a continuous period of one year; or whenever there is otherwise evident
a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such
use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and the use of the premises
thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations for the district. Any
nonconforming use that is illegally expanded shall lose its nonconforming use
status.
   D.   Establishing Legal Nonconforming Use: A legal nonconforming use may be
established upon application through the staff level review process outlined in
subsection
11-3-5A1 of this title, subject to review of verification documentation
submitted by the applicant. Following is a list of some, but not all, types of
documentation that are accepted as verification of a legal nonconforming use
(grandfather right):
      1.   Documentation:
         a.   Licenses; such as beer, liquor, retail, or professional
occupation showing dates of use.
         b.   Rental property; receipts showing dates of use, directories,
utility bills, etc.
         c.   Business; receipts showing types of service or goods provided,
dated phone directories, Polk's directory, etc.
         d.   Statements from utilities, such as power, water or gas, that
indicate date and type of use, i.e., commercial, multi-family residential, etc.
         e.   Notarized statements from neighbors who have observed the
nonconforming use over the required time period.
      2.   Procedures: Every application for a certificate of legal
nonconforming use shall be deemed to be an application for a zoning
certificate. The zoning administrator/building director or his/her designee
must review the verifying documentation submitted and make a determination of
approval or denial of the application within fifteen (15) calendar days of
receipt of application and will submit the findings and conclusions in writing
to the applicant. The decision of the zoning administrator/building director
may be appealed by the applicant or any affected person within ten (10)
calendar days of the date of the approval or denial in accordance with section
11-3-7 of this title. (2003 Code § 11-09-03)
11-8-4: ZONING RIGHTS OF WAY AND ANNEXED LAND:
All streets, alleys, railroad rights of way, canal rights of way and other
public ways, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in
the same zoning district as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys,
streets, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way. (2003 Code § 11-09-
04)
11-8-5: MOST RESTRICTIVE REGULATIONS GOVERN:
Wherever the regulations made under the authority of this title require a
greater width or size of yards or courts, are more restrictive as to height of
building or permit of a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage
of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose standards that are more restrictive
than are required by any other city ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this title shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other city ordinance or
regulation require a greater width or size of yards or courts, or are more
restrictive as to the height of buildings or permit of a less number of
stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or
impose other standards that are more restrictive than are required by the
regulations contained herein, the provisions of such ordinance or regulation
shall govern. (2003 Code § 11-09-05)
11-8-6: PUBLIC SERVICES EXCEPTED:
This chapter shall not limit or interfere with the temporary use of any
property as a public voting place, or with the construction, installation or
operation of the following by any public agency or private corporation, when
such construction is otherwise in conformity with all federal, state, county
and city regulations:
   A.   Public street or highway.
   B.   Poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains,
wells, valves or any other similar distributing and transmitting equipment for
telephone or other communications, electric power, gas, water and sewer lines,
provided that the installation shall conform when applicable with the rules and
regulations of any federal or state commissions and agencies, or any other
authorities having jurisdiction and subject to other city ordinance provisions,
rules and regulations; except that poles, towers or similar installations of a
height of seventy feet (70') or greater are subject to subsection
11-6A-6J of this title. Electrical substations are considered a major utility
facility and are subject to the requirements of this title.
   C.   Railroad right of way, excluding yards and stations.
   D.   Incidental appurtenances to any of the above. (2003 Code § 11-09-06)
11-8-7: FENCE REGULATIONS:
No fence or wall shall be constructed or installed in any zone without the
review and approval of such by the zoning administrator/building director.
Permits are valid for one year from the date of approval. An administrative
application shall be submitted to determine compliance with the following
approval criteria:
   A.   Electric fences:
      1.   Electric fences may be permitted in Rural Ranchette zones or where
there are non-conforming agricultural uses where fencing must be sufficient to
keep farm animals on the subject property and built commensurate with the type
of animal and size.
         a.   Electric fencing systems must meet the most current adopted
electrical code.
         b.   Electric Fences must be installed to manufacturer’s
specifications.
         c.   Electric fences shall only be allowed to be installed on the side
of the fence wherein the animals are contained.
      2.   Electric fences are prohibited in all other zones or where there is
not a non-conforming agricultural use within the corporate limits of the city.
      3.   This fence regulation section is not intended to regulate or
prohibit underground electric fencing.
   B.   Barbed Wire Fences:
      1.   Barbed wire may be permitted in commercial and industrial zones only
when used as the top section for security fences.
         a.   Any barbed wire forming part of a security fence shall be a
minimum of seventy two inches (72") above grade.
      2.   Barbed wire may be permitted in Rural Ranchette zones or where there
are non-conforming agricultural uses where fencing must be sufficient to keep
farm animals on the subject property and built commensurate with the type of
animal and size.
      3.   Public correctional or penal facilities are exempted from this
limitation.
   C.   Walls And Screens: For the purposes of this section, walls, latticework
and screens are considered to be fences and shall be built and maintained in
compliance with the provisions hereof.
   D.   Use Of Specific Materials Prohibited: The use of boxes, sheet metal,
wafer board, OSB, damaged or broken materials, or any fencing material that
does not meet the city’s design loads is hereby prohibited.
   E.   Height Regulations:
      1.   Interior Lots: Solid or closed nonvision fences to a height of
thirty six inches (36"), or open vision type fences to a height of forty eight
inches (48"), may be built from the front yard setback to and including the
front property line. Fences to a height of seventy two inches (72") may be
built from the front yard setback to and including the rear property line.
      2.   Corner Lots:
         a.   Any fence, wall or planting on or within the clear vision
triangle shall be limited to thirty six inches (36") in height measured from
the crown of the street.
         b.   Solid or closed nonvision fences to a height of thirty six inches
(36") or open vision type fences to a height of forty eight inches (48"), may
be built along the front property line and along the side property line to the
front yard setback, except that a fence of seventy two inches (72") in height
may be built upon street and side property lines from the front yard setback to
and across the rear property line provided that no fence that exceeds thirty
six inches (36") in height may be erected in the clear vision triangle.
      3.   Variance: To vary the above requirement, the provisions of section
11-6A-10 of this title shall be complied with.
   F.   Concrete, Masonry Walls: Concrete and masonry walls and fences over
seven feet (7') tall must also be approved by the building department.
   G.   Location; Agreements With Adjoining Property Owners: The fence must be
built entirely upon the property that it was permitted for unless agreements
are made with the adjoining property owners. These agreements need not be
submitted with the application; however, the permit shall become void if the
applicant fails to procure them.
(2003 Code § 11-09-07; amd. Ord. 2277, 9-2-2025)
CHAPTER 9
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Definitions
11-9-3: Landscaping Requirements For Certain Yard Areas And Off Street Parking
And Other Vehicular Use Areas
11-9-4: Approved Tree Species
11-9-5: Spacing Of Trees
11-9-6: Distance Regulations For Tree Planting
11-9-7: Deferment Of Improvements And/Or Fees In Lieu Of
11-9-8: Protection Of City Trees
11-9-9: Public Trees And Local Improvement Districts
11-9-10: Public Tree Planting In Commercial Zoning Districts
11-9-11: Adjustment Of Standards
11-9-12: Other Applicable Regulations
11-9-13: Incentives
11-9-14: Nuisances Declared
11-9-15: Abatement Notice And Service; Appeal
11-9-16: Abatement Required; Time Limit
11-9-17: Enforcement
11-9-18: Administrative Appeals To City Council
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations is to guide and set a minimum standard for the
general appearance and arrangement of commercial, industrial and residential
uses in order to create attractive and dynamic business centers, assure the
compatibility of satellite commercial and industrial areas with their
surrounding neighborhoods, and assure the compatibility of dense residential
land uses with surrounding neighborhoods. (2003 Code § 11-12-01)
11-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUFFER YARDS: A landscape area that serves to physically and/or visually
separate land uses having incompatible facilities, activities, or differing
intensities of use.
ENVIRONMENTAL LANDSCAPING: The reduction of noise, glare, sun and air pollution
through the introduction of landscaping.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: A surface that cannot be penetrated or affected by water,
ice or combination of both, dry conditions, radiated heat or direct sunlight.
(Typically concrete or asphalt paving.)
LANDSCAPING: Shall consist of the following or combination thereof: living
material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines,
hedges or trees and nonliving durable material limited to pea gravel, walls or
fences, bark, decorative cinders and decorative rock. Nonliving durable
material may be used only for accent in landscaping areas.
SHRUBS: Those required by this chapter shall be self-supporting, woody,
evergreen species, as normally grown in Bingham County, Idaho.
TREES (CITY TREES/STREET TREES): Self-supporting wood plants of species that
normally grow to an overall height of a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in
Bingham County, Idaho.
XERISCAPE: Landscaping that requires little to no irrigation and includes
drought-tolerant plants that can be native or non-native.
(2003 Code § 11-12-02; amd. Ord. 2278, 9-2-2026)
11-9-3: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN YARD AREAS AND OFF STREET PARKING
AND OTHER VEHICULAR USE AREAS:
All areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles,
boats or construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are
self-propelled or not, and all land upon which vehicles traverse the property
as a function of the primary use of such property, hereinafter referred to as
"other vehicle uses", including, but not limited to, activities of a drive-in
nature such as filling stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks, restaurants,
and the like, shall conform to the minimum landscape requirements hereinafter
provided, save and except areas used for parking or other vehicular uses within
buildings, and parking areas serving single-family dwellings and duplexes.
   A.   Installation: All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanship
like manner and according to accepted planting procedures with the quality of
the plant materials as hereinafter described. All elements of landscaping shall
be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code
requirements. The building official, or representative, shall inspect all
landscaping and no certificates of occupancy or similar authorization will be
issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements herein provided.
      1.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan must be submitted describing:
         a.   Boundaries and dimensions of site.
         b.   All existing trees identified by species.
         c.   Trees and other vegetation that is to be retained.
         d.   The location and design of areas to be landscaped.
         e.   The location, number and type of plant material by common name.
         f.   Type and design of proposed irrigation.
      2.   Natural Vegetation Or Earthen Berm As Substitute:
         a.   Existing vegetation that is retained, may be used to satisfy
these regulations.
         b.   An earthen berm may be substituted for not more than three feet
(3') of the required height of any screening fence, wall or environmental
landscaping. Soil and slope stabilization must result after installation.
      3.   Retention Of Existing Trees: Existing trees shall be retained to the
maximum extent possible. Where retention of trees located in the public right
of way is not possible, replacement is required as established in sections
11-9-4,
11-9-5 and
11-9-9 of this chapter. Public or private trees retained to meet landscape
requirements shall comply with subsections A4 and A5 of this section.
      4.   Damaged During Construction: Existing trees or shrubs that are
retained to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be protected from
damage to bark, branches or roots during construction. Construction or
excavation occurring within the drip line of any public or private retained
tree or shrub may severely damage the tree or shrub. Any severely damaged tree
or shrub shall be replaced.
      5.   Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Impervious surfaces and grade
changes shall be allowed at a distance from the trunk equal to the diameter of
the tree trunk plus two feet (2') and the installation of an automatically
controlled drip irrigation system shall be required. (2003 Code § 11-12-03)
      6.   Prohibited Materials And Landscaping: No artificial trees, plants or
carpeting shall be used as a vegetation substitute. (2003 Code § 11-12-03; amd.
2012 Code)
      7.   Amount Of Coverage: All landscaping areas shall be planted so as to
achieve seventy five percent (75%) coverage of the area within three (3) years.
If this amount of coverage is not achieved, the area shall be planted
immediately or as soon as the planting season permits.
      8.   Completion Time: The planning department may authorize a delay in
the completion of planting during the months of October, November, December,
January, February and March. Should a delay occur, a bond equal to one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the costs of landscaping will be provided by the owner/
developer and held by the city until said landscaping is complete. No final
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the required landscaping is
complete. (2003 Code § 11-12-03)
   B.   Maintenance: The owner, tenant and/or their agent, if any, shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping.
Landscaping shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a live,
healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from weeds, refuse
and debris. Landscaped areas, except those utilizing nonliving durable
material, shall be provided with a readily available water supply with a
sprinkler irrigation system. All dead trees and shrubs shall be removed and
replaced no later than June 30 of the following growing season. These areas of
landscaping must be maintained to the standards described in city minimum
maintenance ordinance and adopted fire code. (2003 Code § 11-12-03; amd. 2012
Code)
   C.   Plant Material:
      1.   Quality: Plant material used to obtain compliance with this chapter
shall be of a high quality equivalent to that provided by local reputable
nurseries.
      2.   Trees: Shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of
greater than fifteen feet (15'). Trees shall not be less than one to one and
one-half inch (11/2") caliper size at time of planting; provided all trees must
be planted and staked, if necessary, according to professional nursery
standards. No tree or plant that may cause damage to public roadways or
sidewalks or that is regarded as a "trash" tree or plant shall be planted. A
list of acceptable trees, shrubs and ground cover species shall be maintained
by the building official for review by the public. Any other tree, shrub or
ground cover species may be planted only upon prior approval from the building
official.
      3.   Hedges: Hedges shall be composed of shrubs of a minimum of two feet
(2') in height when measured immediately after planting. Hedges, where
required, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken,
solid, visual screen within a maximum of three (3) years after planting.
      4.   Shrubs: Shrubs shall be not less than a three (3) gallon size when
planted.
   D.   Required Landscaping Adjacent To Public Rights Of Way: On the site of a
building or open lot providing an off street parking area or other vehicular
use area, where such area will not be entirely screened visually by an
intervening building or structure from any abutting right of way, excluding
dedicated alleys, there shall be landscaping provided between such area and
such right of way as follows:
      1.   A strip of land at least ten feet (10') in depth located between the
abutting right of way and the off street parking area, other vehicular use area
or structure and that which is exposed to an abutting right of way shall be
landscaped, such landscaping to include one tree for each fifty (50) linear
feet or fraction thereof. Such trees shall be located between the abutting
right of way and the off street parking area, other vehicular use area or
structure and shall be planted in a planting area of at least twenty five (25)
square feet with a dimension of at least ten feet (10'). The required
landscaping shall also include a hedge or a planting of at least one shrub for
each five (5) linear feet of the landscaped area. The remainder of the required
landscaped area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other
landscaping treatment, excluding pavement.
      2.   All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between
the right of way and the off street parking area or other vehicular use area
shall be landscaped with at least grass of other ground cover.
      3.   Necessary accessways from public right of way through all such
landscaping shall be permitted to serve the parking or other vehicular use
areas and such accessways may be subtracted from the linear dimension used to
determine the number of trees and shrubs required.
   E.   Parking Area Interior Landscaping: Off street parking areas and other
vehicular use area shall have interior landscaping covering at least eight
percent (8%) of the total parking lot area for lots with ten (10) or more
parking spaces. In addition, other vehicular use areas shall have two (2)
square feet of interior landscaping for each one hundred (100) square feet of
paved area. Where the property contains both parking area and other vehicular
use areas, the two (2) types of areas shall be treated separately for the
purpose of determining the required amount of landscaping. Each separate
landscape area shall contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet and shall have
a minimum dimension of at least five feet (5'). The landscaped areas may be
located so as to break up the expanse of paving or may be located adjacent to
any structures located on the property. One tree shall be planted for every two
hundred (200) square feet of interior landscaping. All remaining land in the
area designated for landscaping shall be covered by shrubs, ground cover or
other authorized landscaping materials not to exceed three feet (3') in height.
Plans showing location, size and type of plant materials for landscaping in
parking areas shall be included in all applications for a building permit and
compliance with this chapter shall be a condition to the issuance of such
permit or clearance.
   F.   Sight Distance For Landscaping Adjacent To Public Rights Of Way And
Points Of Access: When an accessway intersects a public right of way or when
the subject property abuts the intersection of two (2) or more public rights of
way, all landscaping within the triangular areas described below shall provide
unobstructed cross visibility at a level between three feet (3') and ten feet
(10'); however, trees or foliage extending into the cross visibility area shall
be allowed, provided they are so located so as not to create a traffic hazard.
Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer
than three feet (3') from the edge of any accessway pavement. The triangular
areas above referred to are:
      1.   The areas of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the
intersection of each side of the accessway and the public right of way line,
with two (2) sides of each triangle being ten feet (10') in length from the
point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of
the two (2) other sides.
      2.   The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection
of two (2) or more public rights of way with two (2) sides of the triangle area
being forty feet (40') in length along the abutting public right of way lines,
measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line
connecting the ends of the other two (2) lines.
      3.   When the city determines upon the basis of an existing traffic
investigation that such a traffic hazard exists, the city shall notify the
owner and order that the hazard be removed within fifteen (15) days. (2003 Code
§ 11-12-03)
11-9-4: APPROVED TREE SPECIES:
A list of the official public tree species for the city shall be established by
resolution of the city council. No species other than those included in the
list may be planted as a public tree without prior approval of the planning and
zoning commission, which approval will be based upon recommendations from the
city tree committee. (2003 Code § 11-12-04)
11-9-5: SPACING OF TREES:
   A.   The spacing of public trees located in the street right of way area
shall be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes as established
by resolution of the city council. No trees except trees planted in special
planting areas designated or approved by the planning and zoning commission
shall be planted closer together than the following:
      1.   Small trees: Twenty feet (20').
      2.   Medium trees: Thirty feet (30').
      3.   Large trees: Forty feet (40').
   B.   Street (public) trees required by subsections
11-9-3D and E of this chapter shall be placed on the abutting right of way
along the entire street frontage of the development no farther apart than the
following, except as otherwise prohibited by this chapter:
      1.   Small trees: Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Medium trees: Forty feet (40').
      3.   Large trees: Fifty feet (50'). (2003 Code § 11-12-05)
11-9-6: DISTANCE REGULATIONS FOR TREE PLANTING:
   A.   Distance From Curb And Sidewalk:
      1.   The distance trees may be planted from curbs and sidewalks shall be
in accordance with the three (3) species size classes established by resolution
of the city council, and no trees other than the exceptions listed in
subsections A2 and A3 of this section may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following:
         a.   Small trees: Two feet (2').
         b.   Medium trees: Four feet (4').
         c.   Large trees: Six feet (6').
      2.   Street (public) trees may be planted in the sidewalk right of way
locations in areas of commercial zoning or use subject to the provisions
outlined in sections
11-9-5 and
11-9-9 of this chapter.
      3.   The curb and sidewalk spacing requirements may be reduced by the
building official when the developer or his agent agrees to install root
control barriers between the proposed tree planting location and the adjacent
curb and sidewalks.
   B.   Distance From Streetlights: The distance trees may be planted from
streetlights shall be in accordance with the three (3) species size classes
established by resolution, and no tree may be planted closer to any streetlight
than the following:
      1.   Small trees: Fifteen feet (15').
      2.   Medium trees: Twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Large trees: Thirty five feet (35').
   C.   Distance From Utilities: No street (public) trees, other than those
species listed as "small trees" as established by resolution, shall be planted
under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any primary power overhead line. (2003
Code § 11-12-06)
11-9-7: DEFERMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS AND/OR FEES IN LIEU OF:
In those cases where the developer/agent pursuant to other sections of this
code, is permitted to defer improvements such as sidewalks, curbs and/or
paving, the developer/agent may also defer the installation of street trees, or
pay a fee in lieu thereof in an amount equal to the reasonable value of the
tree as determined by the city. In those cases where a fee is paid, the city
shall place the fee in a designated fund for the purposes set forth in this
chapter for the maintenance and acquisition of street trees. This section shall
not apply in those cases where location of the street trees can be identified
in the immediate future. (2003 Code § 11-12-07)
11-9-8: PROTECTION OF CITY TREES:
   A.   Prohibited Acts And Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Store oil, gasoline, chemicals and other materials that might be
harmful to the trees near public trees and shrubs.
      2.   Attach wires, signs and power sources to the trees, unless otherwise
authorized by the building official.
      3.   Dump paint thinner, paint, plaster or other toxic wastes, liquid or
solid, on the ground between the base of the tree and the point at which the
longest branch terminates, or uphill from any tree where the substance might
reach the roots through the leaching process.
      4.   Expose portions of trees in frequent contact with construction
equipment, unless protected by the owner/developer or contractor as directed by
the city.
      5.   Make cuts in the ground near roots of trees, unless appropriate
measures are taken to prevent exposed soil from drying out and causing damage
to tree roots.
      6.   Damage roots located on public property by excessive compacting or
filling on or around the base of a tree.
   B.   Root Barriers Required:
      1.   Root barriers shall be required in the following cases:
         a.   The installation of curbs, sidewalk or streets less than two feet
(2') from an existing tree.
         b.   During repair of a curb, sidewalk or street that has been damaged
or upheaved by roots of a tree or shrub, when such tree or shrub is not
removed.
      2.   Root barriers shall be installed as specified by nursery
professionals. If the installation of root barriers involves the removal of
roots larger than two inches (2") in diameter, recommendations from nursery
professionals will be required. (2003 Code § 11-12-08)
11-9-9: PUBLIC TREES AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS:
   A.   Removal: Any public tree removal due to local improvement districts
(LIDs) shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission. The commission
shall take the recommendations of the public works director into account in
making tree removal decisions.
   B.   Assessments: Assessments for local improvement districts shall include
an assessment for the cost of tree removal and replacement. (2003 Code § 11-12-
09)
11-9-10: PUBLIC TREE PLANTING IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
All trees planted in the public right of way in commercial zoning districts
shall meet the following restrictions:
   A.   Trees must be planted below finish grade level in accordance with
standards by the National Arborist Association.
   B.   A minimum width of six feet (6') of clear sidewalk must be provided as
measured from the top edge of the building to the proposed tree trunk location.
   C.   Noncolumnar trees selected for planting shall be of sufficient height
to allow for a minimum seven feet (7') of clearance measured from finish grade
level of sidewalk to the lowest branch.
   D.   All trees selected for planting in commercial districts must be
approved by the building official. The building official shall base approval or
denial on the following criteria:
      1.   Trees shall be of a species appropriate to existing conditions at
the planting site;
      2.   The species selected for planting in a commercial zone does not
comprise more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing species mix in these
districts;
      3.   The tree material is healthy.
   E.   A root control planter shall be required when the proposed tree
location contains less than one hundred (100) square feet of pervious surface
material surrounding the tree.
   F.   In all proposed public tree locations surrounded by less than one
hundred (100) square feet of pervious surface material, the owner/developer
shall be required to provide an adequate irrigation system.
   G.   Public tree planting specifications for rights of way in commercial
zoning districts shall be as specified in this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-12-
09.1)
11-9-11: ADJUSTMENT OF STANDARDS:
The building department, upon receipt of an application for adjustment of
landscaping requirements provided herein, shall have the authority and duty to
consider and act upon such application. The applicant shall, in the
application, clearly and in detail, state what adjustments of the requirements
are being requested and the reasons such adjustments are warranted, and shall
accompany the application with such supplementary data, such as sketches,
surveys and statistical information as is deemed necessary to substantiate the
adjustment. The building department may approve, modify or deny the requested
adjustment, but shall approve or modify only if it determines that approval of
any adjustment would be contrary to the public interest and would be in keeping
with and would preserve the intent of this chapter, and that literal
enforcement of the above standards would be impractical and would result in
unreasonable and unnecessary hardship. The building department shall act as
expeditiously as possible on the application, and shall state its decision in
the form of a short, concise statement of action taken that shall be served on
the applicant by mailing the same to him at the address on the application.
(2003 Code § 11-12-10)
11-9-12: OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to other applicable regulations
where such regulations are more restrictive and are not otherwise inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-12-11)
11-9-13: INCENTIVES:
The building official may reduce the parking requirements by up to five percent
(5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed landscaping plan
incorporates the retention of significant trees, particularly in the interior
of the site, or if the proposed landscaping exceeds the requirements of this
chapter by fifteen percent (15%) or more. The public works director may reduce
technical standards of the parking lot design where paving requirements
conflict with the retention of significant trees. (2003 Code § 11-12-11.1)
11-9-14: NUISANCES DECLARED:
No owner/developer shall permit a public nuisance to exist, as herein defined,
and found to exist by the building official or representative. (2003 Code § 11-
12-12)
   A.   Public Nuisances Designated: All trees defaced, broken, dangerous or
diseased, or that part of the tree that constitutes a hazard, or part of the
roots of any tree or shrub that interferes with or causes the surface of the
street, curb or sidewalk in public right of way to be upheaved or otherwise
disturbed, or any tree or shrub that has an infestation of pests, insects, or
the eggs or larvae that may spread or the continued existence thereof
constitute a serious hazard, or any tree or shrub or part thereof, whether
public or private that overhang a public right of way or are growing thereon in
such a manner as to obstruct or impair the free and full use of the right of
way, or that constitute a sight hazard, as defined in subsection
11-9-3F of this chapter, are declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Abatement Of Nuisance: If it is determined by the building official or
representative that a public nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter, the
building official shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance.
Such notice shall be headed "Notice To Abate Nuisance", shall contain a
description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify
the location of the nuisance, shall describe the nuisance in terms reasonably
sufficient to identify the same, shall direct the abatement of the nuisance,
shall specify the penalty and the appeal process as provided in this chapter.
(2003 Code § 11-12-12)
11-9-15: ABATEMENT NOTICE AND SERVICE; APPEAL:
   A.   Service Of Notice: The notice required by subsection
11-9-14B of this chapter may be served in the following manner:
      1.   By personal service on the owner/developer of said premises; and/or
      2.   By registered mail to the owner/developer of said premises;
      3.   If said owner/developer does not live within the city limits or
surrounding area, by registered mail to the owner/developer at the address on
the last available assessment roll or as otherwise known, and by personal
service on the account of the property if such person can be identified; or
      4.   Should the owner/developer not be known and have an available
address, by posting of such notice at a conspicuous place on the land or
abutting right of way, and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week
for a period of two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, and by personal service on the occupant of the property if such person
can be identified. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that
property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and
contain a general statement of the effect of such posting. The date of such
newspaper advertisement shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods
provided by this chapter.
   B.   Appeal: Within ten (10) days from date of posting, mailing or personal
service of the required notice or area affected, the owner/developer may appeal
to the planning and zoning commission. Such appeal shall be in writing and
filed with the planning and zoning secretary. At the next regular meeting of
the planning and zoning commission, the planning and zoning commission shall
proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. That decision can be appealed to the
city council in writing and filed with the city clerk within five (5) days. The
city council shall hear and make final decision on that appeal. The decision
shall therein be final and conclusive. (2003 Code § 11-12-13)
11-9-16: ABATEMENT REQUIRED; TIME LIMIT:
It shall be the duty of the owner/developer of any lot, place or area in the
city that has been declared a public nuisance, within ten (10) days from the
date of notification, or in case of an appeal to the planning and zoning
commission, within ten (10) days from the determination thereof unless the same
is sustained, to remove the public nuisance as required.
   A.   Failure To Abate; Legal Action: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of
any owner/developer so notified to remove the public nuisance within the time
specified in this section, the building official or representative as provided
in this chapter shall notify the city attorney in writing of the last known
legal owner and property description and general terms, and the city attorney
shall cause legal action to be undertaken.
   B.   Abatement At City Cost: At the city council's direction, upon failure,
neglect or refusal of any owner so notified to remove a public nuisance, as
herein defined, within the time specified in this section, the building
official or representative shall proceed with the work specified in the notice.
The cost of the work shall be transmitted to the city council, who shall cause
the same to be paid and levy a special assessment against the property. (2003
Code § 11-12-14)
11-9-17: ENFORCEMENT:
The building official or representative shall be charged with the enforcement
of this chapter. (2003 Code § 11-12-15)
11-9-18: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
An appeal from an administrative determination or interpretation made by the
building official or planning and zoning commission under this chapter, may be
made by the applicant within ten (10) days after written notice of decision has
been mailed to the applicant. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
city clerk, who shall place the matter before the next city council meeting.
The city council may approve, refer back to the building official and planning
and zoning commission, or deny the request. The decision shall be made within
fifteen (15) days of the meeting, and written determination shall be mailed to
the applicant at the address on the application. (2003 Code § 11-12-15.1)
CHAPTER 10
TREES
SECTION:
11-10-1: Statement Of Value
11-10-2: Purpose
11-10-3: Definitions
11-10-4: Establishment Of A Community Forestry Department
11-10-5: Term Of Office
11-10-6: Operation
11-10-7: Duties And Responsibilities; Meetings; Compensation
11-10-8: Species Of Trees Permitted
11-10-9: Utilities
11-10-10: Adjacent Property Owners' Responsibilities For Public Trees
11-10-11: Responsibilities For Private Trees
11-10-12: Responsibilities For Alley Trees
11-10-13: Licensing Of Private Tree Service Companies
11-10-14: Notification And Permits
11-10-15: Regulations For Planting Street Trees
11-10-16: Trees And Shrubs Overhanging Public Property
11-10-17: Abuse Of Public Trees And Shrubs
11-10-18: Street Tree Care
11-10-19: Tree Topping
11-10-20: Abatement Of Nuisances
11-10-21: Compensatory Payments
11-10-22: Interference With Community Forestry Department Or Other Violations
Of This Chapter
11-10-23: Adoption Of ANSI A300 And ANSI Z133.1
11-10-24: Appeal Process
11-10-25: Review By City Council
11-10-1: STATEMENT OF VALUE:
Established trees are valuable assets to the community of Blackfoot. In the
ecosystem typical of the area, trees are uncommon and dependent on human care
to survive. Healthy, strategically placed trees beautify, increase property
values, and make the community a more pleasant place to live. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-
2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to establish a Blackfoot community forestry department
and provide direction in planting and caring for trees. The major objective is
to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by
providing for the regulation of the planting, preservation, protection, and
proper maintenance of trees within city limits. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-
6-2015)
11-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ANSI A300: That certain standard tree, shrub and other woody plant maintenance
standard practice as set forth in ANSI A300 (part I) - 2001, as published by
the American National Standards Institute, Inc., and approved on May 22, 2001.
ANSI Z133.1: That certain safety standard regarding the planting and
maintenance of trees in proximity to utility lines as published by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc., May 22, 2001 edition.
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person(s) owning property adjacent to public
rights of way.
ARBORICULTURE: The management of trees; including planting, pruning, watering,
fertilizing, removal or any other action which affects the healthy growth and
maintenance of trees.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The sum of all trees and shrubs within the city.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in
all directions to a line ten feet (10') outside of the drip line.
DISEASE: A process that causes anatomical disruptions, physiological
dysfunctions, and energy disruptions that lead to decline and/or death of an
organism or any of its parts.
HAZARDOUS TREES: Public or private trees that create any unsafe situation for
persons using adjacent public property.
LICENSE: An annually issued license issued by the city which allows the city to
determine adequate liability insurance coverage and proper knowledge of ANSI
standards by any contractor doing tree contracting within the city limits.
OBSTRUCTIVE TREES, SHRUBS OR HEDGES: Public or private trees that prevent
appropriate passage or safe vision on any public right of way.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all area owned by the city or to which the
public has free access as a park.
PERMIT: Written approval issued by the city and required for any activity above
or below ground that may impact the canopy or the critical root zone of any
public tree.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company,
or other governmental entity or organization of any kind.
PEST: Any insect, disease, animal or other organism that causes harm or damage
to trees.
PRIVATE TREES: Any trees other than public trees.
PROPERTY OWNER: The recorded owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
PRUNING: The practice of managing tree health according to the national
standards as set forth in ANSI A300.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Real property owned, managed, or leased to the city and
dedicated to the public for present or future use.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated
to, or deeded to the public for pedestrians, vehicular or other public use. It
includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, access routes for
public utilities, and open public spaces.
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm or injury and/or
property damage resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using
public property.
PUBLIC TREES: Trees located upon public property owned by the city, including
street trees.
SHRUB: A woody perennial plant, branched at or near the base and which at
maturity is expected to grow less than fifteen feet (15') in height.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
(3") in diameter within the tree's crown or the removal of the top part (trunk
and limbs) of a coniferous tree, thereby removing the normal canopy and
disfiguring the tree.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, usually having one main stem or trunk and many
branches and which, at maturity is expected to exceed fifteen feet (15') in
height and two inches (2") in diameter. The failure to achieve such height at
maturity shall not preclude its consideration as a tree. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015,
eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMUNITY FORESTRY DEPARTMENT:
There shall be a community forestry department to serve and assist with issues
involving public trees. This includes issues involving planting, maintenance,
preservation, and removing of trees and shrubs within city limits. All
decisions and plans of the community forestry department are subject to
approval by the Blackfoot city council.
   A.   Membership: There shall be a total of four (4) members in the community
forestry department, consisting of the parks department superintendent, the
street department superintendent, and two (2) other members picked by the two
(2) superintendents. Membership should consist of people with interest in and
knowledge of issues involving trees and urban horticulture. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-
2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-5: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of the two (2) nonsuperintendent members shall be two (2) years, or
until his or her successor is appointed. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-6: OPERATION:
The community forestry department shall choose its own officers, make its own
rules and regulations regarding meetings, and keep a journal of its
proceedings. All rules and regulations shall be subject to city council
approval. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Members will maintain a seventy five percent (75%)
attendance rate at meetings and work sessions, or will be removed from the
department and his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of the term. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-7: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES; MEETINGS; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Responsibilities: The Blackfoot community forestry department shall
provide advice to the mayor, city council and public works department as to the
preservation, protection and management of the community forest of Blackfoot,
in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The department shall
have the following duties and responsibilities:
      1.   Assist the city in encouraging landscaping installation and
maintenance on private property by providing information on the value of
landscaping and the proper planting and care of trees and other vegetation;
      2.   Recommend policies and procedures to identify, mark, publicize and
preserve historic and notable trees on both public and private property;
      3.   Assist the city in promoting appreciation of trees and the community
forest through annual Arbor Day observances and other activities;
      4.   Encourage improvement of the community forest through planning and
policy development;
      5.   Assist city departments in every way possible to enhance the
community forest in the city;
      6.   Enhance opportunities for obtaining monetary funds for tree
purchases, related supplies and community forestry activities through local and
federal assistantship grants and donations;
      7.   Serve as an advocate of the city's community forest.
   B.   Meetings: This department will meet when needed.
   C.   Advisors: Advisors may also be called to serve under a nonvoting
status.
   D.   Compensation: Members and advisors of the committee shall serve without
compensation.
   E.   Quorum: A majority of the members shall be present for the transaction
of business.
   F.   Journal: The department shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The
city will provide an assistant to record notes and prepare minutes of each
meeting. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-8: SPECIES OF TREES PERMITTED:
The "Master List Of Public Trees" shall be the official guideline for the
selection and planting of trees on public property. It shall include tree
species recommended and species prohibited for planting on public property and
tree spacing suggestions. The "Master List Of Public Trees" shall be approved
by the city council as set forth in section
11-9-4 of this title.
The department and city forestry advisor shall maintain and periodically update
the "Master List Of Public Trees". The "Master List Of Public Trees" is
available at the Blackfoot City Hall and on the city of Blackfoot website.
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree within any public right of way or
planting median or immediately adjacent to a public street except those trees
identified in the "Master List Of Public Trees" unless advance, written
permission is granted by the city council. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-
2015)
11-10-9: UTILITIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any public or private tree
under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or
within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
electric transmission or distribution line, or other utility except the species
of trees identified in the "Master List Of Public Trees For Utility Planting".
   B.   It shall be unlawful to plant any public or private tree at any
location in any manner which does not comply with the safety standards for
planting and maintenance of trees in proximity to public utilities, as set
forth in ANSI Z133.1.
   C.   The city of Blackfoot will not be responsible for damage to any tree or
shrub located within a utility easement as a result of the operation or
maintenance of city utility lines. Damage to any public utility system caused
by trees improperly located within the public right of way or easement will be
repaired at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-10: ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS' RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PUBLIC TREES:
   A.   Permits: Adjacent property owners shall:
      1.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for work done
(including, but not limited to, pruning and removal) on any public trees.
      2.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior to
commencing repair of damage done to public streets or sidewalk adjacent to any
public trees.
      3.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for any tree
planting on public property.
   B.   Routine Public Tree Maintenance:
      1.   Adjacent property owners shall:
         a.   Prune and maintain trees planted according to ANSI A300, a copy
of which is available on the city of Blackfoot website.
         b.   Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not acceptable
forms of tree pruning and are not allowed on public trees.
         c.   Except as otherwise determined by the public works department,
branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide
sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to
interfere with public travel.
         d.   Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs that
are considered a public nuisance.
      2.   Control pests on trees located on public rights of way adjacent to
the owner's private real property.
      3.   Provide water sufficient to keep trees located on public rights of
way adjacent to the owner's private real property in a healthy, growing
condition.
   C.   Protection/Preservation:
      1.   Obtain a permit from the city before performing any activity, which
may harm any part of a public tree (inclusive of the critical root zone).
      2.   Notify the city when any part of a public tree is damaged or
destroyed. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-11: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PRIVATE TREES:
All owners of real property shall provide the following routine tree
maintenance:
   A.   Removal of trees located on the owner's private real property that are
considered a public nuisance.
   B.   Pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that are
considered a public nuisance. Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall
be pruned to provide sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street
so as not to interfere with public travel.
   C.   Control of pests on trees located on the owner's private real property
that may pose a threat to public trees upon determination by the community
forestry department or city forestry advisor.
   D.   Remove or barricade all debris (wood, branches and leaves) on public
property by the end of the working day on which any tree work is done. (Ord.
2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-12: RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ALLEY TREES:
Adjacent property owners shall prune, remove or otherwise abate public
nuisances caused by alley trees. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-13: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICE COMPANIES:
Tree service companies performing work on public trees are required to apply
for a license through the Blackfoot public works department. Applications are
then reviewed by designated members of the Blackfoot community forestry
department and the public works department. Upon approval, licenses shall be
issued by the Blackfoot public works department valid for one year from the
date of issue for a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   A.   Licensing Requirements:
      1.   International Society Of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist on
staff.
      2.   An ISA certified arborist to be on site while work is being
performed.
      3.   Liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      4.   Knowledge and compliance of OSHA regulations.
      5.   Knowledge and compliance of ANSI A300 standards, a copy of which
will be on the city of Blackfoot website.
   B.   Revocation Of License: The Blackfoot public works department with the
recommendation of the Blackfoot community forestry department may revoke a
license for violation of any section of this chapter. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015,
eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-14: NOTIFICATION AND PERMITS:
   A.   Notification: No person may perform any of the following acts without
first notifying the Blackfoot public works department. Contact the Blackfoot
public works department via mail, phone, fax, or e-mail at a minimum of two (2)
business days prior to commencement of the proposed work. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of
obtaining any additional permits as required by law:
      1.   Prune, cut, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to
public rights of way from watering or fertilizing such trees;
      2.   Attach any object to public tree(s);
      3.   Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the
critical root zone of any public tree(s).
   B.   Permit Application Procedures And Requirements For Public Tree(s)
Removal:
      1.   This is in no way intended to interfere with the immediate removal
of a tree that presents a hazardous or emergency situation;
      2.   Upon inspection, the Blackfoot community forestry department may
issue a permit through the Blackfoot public works department. Permits are
available at the Blackfoot City Hall during regularly scheduled business hours;
      3.   The Blackfoot public works department may condition the approval of
any permit;
      4.   Prior to the removal of any public, street, or alley tree, the
property owner or private tree service company intending to perform the work,
which is currently licensed by the city of Blackfoot, must make a request for
permit. All work must be completed within thirty (30) days of issuance of said
permit;
      5.   Whenever a public or street tree is removed, the stump of said tree
shall also be removed. Permit holders shall then replace the removed tree. Tree
replacement shall be a condition of issuance of a permit for removal, unless
the Blackfoot community forestry department for good cause shown waives such
requirement. Tree replacement is the responsibility of the permit holder. (Ord.
2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-15: REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING STREET TREES:
Street trees shall be classified in accordance with the three (3) species size
classes listed in the Blackfoot approved tree list. Street trees shall not be
planted closer together than the following: small trees, twenty feet (20');
medium trees, thirty feet (30'); large trees, forty feet (40'). No trees may be
planted closer to the back side of any curb or the nearest edge of any sidewalk
than the following: small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, four feet (4');
and large trees, six feet (6'). All distances shall be measured from the center
of the tree trunk at ground level. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-16: TREES AND SHRUBS OVERHANGING PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All owners, or persons in control of private real property upon which a street
tree or shrub is growing, shall remove or trim, at his or her expense, all
limbs or foliage which overhang or project into any public street, sidewalk,
alley or easement and which interfere with public travel or use of such public
way or easement or which do not satisfy the clear view requirements of the
landscaping regulations of the city. Street trees and shrubs shall be trimmed
from the ground level to at least twelve feet (12') above any public street,
public easement or alley, and to at least seven feet (7') above the curb and
sidewalk.
All owners, or persons in control of real property within the city of
Blackfoot, Idaho, shall remove or trim, at his or her expense, all trees,
bushes and shrubs or other ornamental foliage on such property which overhang
or project into any public street, sidewalk, alley or easement and which
interfere with public travel or use of such public way or easement or which do
not satisfy the clear view requirements of the landscaping regulations (chapter
9 of this title). Any such person who fails to comply with the provisions of
this section within ten (10) days after receiving written notice from the
Blackfoot street department to do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any
trees and shrubs not trimmed in accordance with this section may then be
trimmed by the city and the expenses therefor may be charged to the persons or
property owners who fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-17: ABUSE OF PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   Unless authorized by an appropriate public officer, it shall be
unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any public tree;
      2.   Permit any animal under his control to injure any public tree or
shrub;
      3.   Permit any fire to injure any portion of any public tree or shrub;
      4.   Cause any toxic chemical to be applied to, seep, drain or be emptied
on or about any public tree or shrub;
      5.   Attach any device or structure to or on public trees, in a manner
which harms or which may potentially harm a public tree;
      6.   Injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or ornamental plant growing,
standing or being on public property;
      7.   Make or cause excavations in the soil near roots of public trees
unless appropriate measures are taken to prevent exposed soil from drying out;
      8.   Damage the roots of a public tree by compacting or filling on or
around the base of the tree;
      9.   To top, prune or trim any public tree, except in accordance with the
provisions of ANSI A300;
      10.   Remove any public or street tree and fail to plant a replacement
tree. The replacement tree shall be an approved variety from the city of
Blackfoot "Master List Of Public Trees" and shall be a minimum of a ten (10)
gallon size specimen. Where utility lines are present, a class I type tree
(mature height not greater than 20 feet), shall be required. Replacement tree
shall be planted within thirty (30) days of removal of said tree, or as soon as
weather conditions allow.
      11.   Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit the pruning, removal,
treatment, care or maintenance of any public tree or shrub, provided such work
complies with the provisions of ANSI A300. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-
2015)
11-10-18: STREET TREE CARE:
The Blackfoot street department shall have the right to remove, trim, destroy
and control all street trees which are planted, grown or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this chapter. The street department shall have
the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove street trees within the lines of
all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-19: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prune or top any public tree or other
public tree, except in accordance with ANSI A300. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff.
10-6-2015)
11-10-20: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
   A.   The city hereby declares the following actions, practices or objects to
be a public nuisance:
      1.   Any living or standing private or public elm tree or part thereof
infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus (Marsham) or
Hylurgopinus rufipes (Eichhoff).
      2.   Any public or private dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs,
branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material not buried, burned, sprayed
with an effective elm bark beetle destroying insecticide, or from which the
bark has not been removed.
      3.   The cultivation, maintenance or allowing to grow of any private or
public tree which harbors any insect, disease or infestation by any living
creature which poses a threat to the health or safety of any other public or
private tree within the city or which poses a health or safety threat to any
person or property.
      4.   Any public or private tree infested by any insect, pest or disease
which is determined by the city forester to pose a threat to the health of any
other public or private tree.
      5.   Any public or private tree, the roots of which are growing beneath a
public sidewalk and which cause a public hazard to the safe and efficient
pedestrian travel upon such sidewalk.
      6.   Any public tree planted, growing or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any person who fails to commence the abatement of any nuisance within
ten (10) days after receiving written notice from the city, or who fails to
diligently prosecute and complete the abatement of such nuisance within a
reasonable time after the delivery of such notice, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Such notice shall be delivered to the owner or person in control
of any property upon which such nuisance shall exist. Notice shall be deemed
complete upon its deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of such
owner or person.
   C.   In the event any owner or person in control of private real property
fails to abate such nuisance in accordance with the time frame set forth above,
then the city may prevent, remove or abate such nuisance at the expense of such
owner or person and may levy a special assessment against the property upon
which such nuisance is located, in accordance with the provisions of Idaho Code
section 50-334. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-21: COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:
In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree except as
otherwise required by law, that person shall be required to replace such tree
with a tree(s) of equivalent dollar value on public property, unless otherwise
determined by the community forestry department. The value of a tree shall be
determined by the city forestry advisor in accordance with accepted plant
appraisal methods set forth in the 9th edition of "The Guide For Plant
Appraisal" published by the International Society Of Arboriculture or the same
as amended from time to time. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of
the tree removed or if the replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person
causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city of
Blackfoot equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and any
replacement tree(s). Any public tree that is determined by the city forestry
advisor to be damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be
considered to be devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the city
by the person causing the damage. Compensatory payments shall be paid into a
fund established for that purpose and restricted to use for community forestry
programs. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city of Blackfoot from
negotiating agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and
compensatory payment for removal, damage or destruction of public trees. (Ord.
2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-22: INTERFERENCE WITH COMMUNITY FORESTRY DEPARTMENT OR OTHER VIOLATIONS
OF THIS CHAPTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
community forestry advisor, the community forestry department, or any of the
city departments, or their agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park
trees, or trees on public property, as authorized in this chapter. Any
violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and subject the
person to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days in the county jail.
(Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-23: ADOPTION OF ANSI A300 AND ANSI Z133.1:
There is hereby adopted as an official code for the maintenance of trees,
shrubs and other woody plants that certain standard maintenance practice as
published in ANSI standard A300 (part I) - 2001, as published by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc., and approved on May 22, 2001. There is also
hereby adopted as an official code, that certain safety standard for planting
and maintenance of trees in proximity to utility lines, known as ANSI Z133.1 as
published by the American National Standards Institute, Inc., May 22, 2001
edition. One copy of such codes shall be filed with and maintained in the
office of the city clerk, for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2137,
10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
11-10-24: APPEAL PROCESS:
All portions of this chapter are appealable to the planning and zoning
commission or hearing examiner and subsequently, to the mayor and city council,
provided the applicant, or their representative, exercises that right, timely,
by filing an appeal. A mediation process is also available. All procedures
herein to be conducted pursuant to this code. (Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-
2015)
11-10-25: REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall consider input from the citizens as well as the
community forestry department and shall make the final decision on issues
properly brought before city council. On all issues brought before city
council, the decisions made by city council shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 2137, 10-6-2015, eff. 10-6-2015)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Authority
12-1-3: Applicability And Jurisdiction
12-1-4: Purposes
12-1-5: Definitions
12-1-6: Enactment
12-1-7: Amendments
12-1-8: Fees And Mitigation
12-1-9: Enforcement And Penalties
12-1-10: Interpretation, Conflict And Separability
12-1-11: Savings Provision
12-1-12: Reservations And Repeals
12-1-13: Exceptions And Waivers Of Conditions
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall officially be known, cited and referred to as the
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BLACKFOOT, IDAHO. (2003 Code § 12-01-01)
12-1-2: AUTHORITY:
   A.   This title is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the city
pursuant to article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, Idaho Code title
67, chapter 65, and title 50, chapter 13.
   B.   The provisions of this title shall be administered to ensure orderly
growth and development and shall supplement and implement provisions of the
comprehensive plan, this code and the capital improvements plan. By virtue of
provisions of this title, the city council, planning and zoning commission and
administrative staff of the city are vested with the authority to review,
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove applications for the
subdivision of land. (2003 Code § 12-01-02)
12-1-3: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
   A.   These regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land within the
city limits and within the city area of impact, unless exempt as provided in
this title. All divisions of land that were the result of a legal conveyance in
compliance with prior subdivisions ordinances of the city or the county prior
to the effective date hereof, and that meet the requirements of the underlying
zoning classification, shall be considered eligible to apply for building
permits. Certain provisions of this title shall apply to the division of any
tract of land outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the area of
city impact as agreed between the city and the county pursuant to Idaho Code.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out actions constituting
the subdivision of land without first complying with the provisions of this
title, and any other provisions of this code.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer ownership of lots
constituting the subdivision of land as defined or required by this title
before a plat has been prepared and recorded pursuant to procedures in Idaho
Code title 50, chapter 13, or its successor, and all required improvements have
been constructed and accepted by the city or suitably guaranteed.
   D.   Exemptions to this title include:
      1.   Divisions of a tract of land made pursuant to testamentary
provisions, the laws of descent, or similar orders of partition entered by
court proceedings to distribute undivided interests. Parcels of land so created
must comply with lot size, frontage and other standards established by this
code and other applicable laws to be eligible for a building permit or to
qualify for establishment of a regulated land use.
      2.   Divisions made for the purpose of lot line adjustments where no
additional lots are created and where the resultant tracts comply with the
requirements of the underlying zoning classification.
      3.   Divisions made as the result of exercise of the powers of eminent
domain as defined and allowed for by Idaho Code.
      4.   Divisions made for the expansion or acquisition of road rights of
way by a public agency.
      5.   Divisions for conveyance of land to the city, a public entity,
homeowners' association or public utility for a public or common purpose (well
site, drainage site, fire station, school site, park site, etc.).
      6.   Divisions made for cemeteries or burial plots. (2003 Code § 12-01-
03)
12-1-4: PURPOSES:
   A.   Land proposed for subdivision must be suitable and safe for building
without danger from flood or other natural or manmade hazard pursuant to FEMA
(federal emergency management agency) standards. Proposed public improvements
shall conform to and not be in conflict with goals and policies set forth in
the comprehensive plan. It is intended that these regulations shall complement
and implement provisions and standards contained in building codes, zoning
ordinances, the comprehensive plan and the capital improvement plan of the
city.
   B.   This title is adopted to provide for the orderly division of land
within the city, and:
      1.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the city.
      2.   To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance
with the comprehensive plan.
      3.   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of
all parts of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development
of the community's lands.
      4.   To guide public and private policy in order to provide adequate and
efficient streets, water, sewerage, drainage, parks and other public
facilities.
      5.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to
ensure proper legal description and monumentation of subdivided land.
      6.   To ensure that public facilities and services are available
concurrent with development and will have sufficient capacity to serve the
subdivision.
      7.   To ensure that the community will bear no more than its fair share
of any cost of providing services by requiring the developer to pay fees,
furnish land, or establish mitigation measures to provide a fair share of
capital facilities needs generated by the development.
      8.   To assure the adequacy of drainage facilities to safeguard the water
table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources to
preserve the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land.
      9.   To provide open space through the most efficient design and layout
of the land, while preserving the density of development as established in the
zoning ordinance of the city. (2003 Code § 12-01-04)
12-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases and words shall
have the meaning given in this chapter:
When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory, unless the
express language of the ordinance provides otherwise. Except as expressly
defined herein, words used in this title shall be given their ordinary meaning
consistent with common usage and context.
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC): The average number of cars per day that pass by or
through a given location.
ADMINISTRATOR: The building official, public works inspector, planning and
zoning administrator, or his/her designee or another official expressly
appointed by the mayor to administer all or part of this title.
ALLEY: A right of way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear
of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPROACH: The location at which a driveway intersects with a public street.
ARTERIAL ROUTE: See LHTAC manual for highway and street standards.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct views and/or
intercept noise, and/or to provide separation.
BICYCLE LANE: A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH: A pathway usually separated from the roadway, designed to be used
by bicyclers.
BLOCK: A contiguous group of lots within defined boundaries established by
plat.
BUFFER: An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel
with the property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or
created by the installation of trees, shrubs, fences and/or berms, designed to
provide separation and limit the view of and/or sound transmission from a site
to adjacent sites.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street that carries traffic from residential streets to
arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land within or related to a development, not individually
owned or dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended for the common
use of the residents of the development. It may include structures and
improvements.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An adopted document that herein may be referred to as a
comprehensive plan or comprehensive development plan. The document shall show
the general location and extent of present and proposed development, including,
but not limited to, housing, industrial and commercial uses, streets, parks,
schools and other community facilities.
CONCEPT PLAN: A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a
proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of
discussion and classification.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real
property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or
interests in real property, or in any combination thereof.
CONDOMINIUM PLAN: A plat of the ground in a condominium project along with the
legal description of the individual ownerships within the project.
CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement that more particularly
describes the duties and obligations of the parties for the development of a
subdivision or portion of a subdivision. The purpose is to establish specific
construction details and guarantees necessary for the timely construction of
public infrastructure improvements and such other improvements as may be
necessary. The construction improvement agreement may be an addendum to the
development agreement.
COVENANT (PROTECTIVE COVENANT): A written promise or pledge.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having the other end for
the reversal of traffic movement.
DEDICATION: An act conveying property rights or interests to the public.
DENSITY: The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to be
developed.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
included in a proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or contract
to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in
such land.
DEVELOPMENT: A project involving substantial property improvement and, usually,
a change of land use character within the site; the act of using land for
building or extractive purposes.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement setting forth the responsibilities of the
city and the developer, conditions applicable to the development and
development schedules, entered into after subdivision approval has been granted
but prior to construction. Entering into a development agreement shall be a
condition of approval of any subdivision unless no improvements are to be made.
A development agreement is typically not required for a minor subdivision.
DIVIDED STREET: A street having an island or other barrier separating traffic.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner to specific persons or to the public to
use land for specific purposes. Also, a right acquired by prescription.
EXCEPTION: Any requested alternative design or change in subdivision ordinance
requirements.
FINAL APPROVAL: The official action of the city council taken on an approved
subdivision after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have
been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed,
or guarantees properly posted for their completion.
FINAL PLAT: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision that is
presented for final approval. (See also definition of Plat.)
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area of low land adjoining the channel of a
river, stream, lake or other body of water that has been or may be covered by
water of a flood of 100- year frequency. The floodplain includes the channel,
floodway and floodway fringe, as established per the engineering practices as
specified by the army corps of engineers, as follows:
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
Flood: The temporary inundation of land adjacent to and inundated by overflow
from a river, stream, lake or other body of water.
Flood Of 100-Year Frequency: A flood magnitude that has a one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Floodway: The channel or a watercourse and those portions of the floodplain
adjoining the channel that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
floodwater of any watercourse.
Floodway Fringe: That part of the floodplain that is beyond the floodway. Such
areas will include those portions of the floodplain that will be inundated by a
flood of 100- year frequency but which may be developed when such development
will not have a significant effect upon the floodwater carrying capacity of the
floodway and the floodwater levels. Such areas are characterized by shallow
flood depths and low velocities of water flow.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A service street that is parallel to a higher order street that,
for purposes of safety, provides access to abutting properties and separation
from through traffic.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan outlining general, rather than detailed,
development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a development
proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. As such, it allows
general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the extensive costs
involved in submitting a detailed proposal.
GUARANTEE: See definition of Performance Guarantee.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT: Development that occurs within the boundaries of the city
and is most often associated with smaller parcels (2 acres or less) of land
skipped over by larger developments or land that falls between larger
developments that made use of city utilities from another direction or source.
Developments that extend the city's boundaries will not be considered infill
development.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot extending along an adjacent primary platted
right of way.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot
or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A realignment of boundary lines between adjoining lots
where no additional lots are created.
MANUFACTURED HOME: See definition of mobile home in section
11-1-3 of this code.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A service street that is parallel to a higher order
street that, for purposes of safety, provides access to abutting properties and
separation from through traffic.
MEDIAN: That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic proceeding
in opposite directions.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING: A document that memorializes the review process
and sets forth the conditions of approval of a minor subdivision that is signed
by the administrator and the developer after approval by the city council.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision containing four (4) or fewer lots and
proposing no new streets, extensions to existing streets, and where
infrastructure is in place or available.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following
characteristics:
   A.   Designed for long term occupancy, and combining sleeping
accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities,
with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside
systems.
   B.   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on
flatbed or other trailers or detached wheels.
   C.   Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete,
including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation
supports, connection to utilities and the like.
OFF SITE: Not located on the property that is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right of way.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking
structure or private driveway.
ON SITE: Located on the lot in question or on the property being developed.
ON STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space that is located on a dedicated street
right of way.
OPEN SPACE: Land, essentially free of structures, set aside, dedicated,
designated or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the
use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such
open space.
PARKING LANE: A lane usually located on the sides of streets, designed to
provide on street parking.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: Security in a form that serves as a guarantee that the
public or identified common improvements required as part of the approval of a
development are satisfactorily completed.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed as a combination
of residential, commercial and industrial uses planned for a tract of land to
be developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which is developed
for the purpose of selling individual lots or estates, whether fronting on
private or dedicated streets, which may include two (2) or more principal
buildings.
PLAT: The reproducible and permanent drawing of a subdivision and dedications
and easements, prepared for filing and recording with the county recorder in
accordance with state law.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE: A meeting among developers, city staff, and other
representatives that affords developers the opportunity to present their
proposals informally.
PRIVATE STREET: A street designed, constructed and maintained on private
property.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: A parcel of land or right of use conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the city, state or county agency, or other public body for
recreational or conservation uses by the public.
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land reserved by a developer for future development
and sale. The strip generally lies between a road or easement and the
undeveloped property. See section
12-6-16 of this title.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of residential
land area, including streets, easements and open space portions of a
development.
SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE: A committee consisting of a representative from the
following: traffic safety, street department, sewer department, water
department, fire department, affected school district, city engineer, parks
department, the affected ditch company, and building and public works
construction inspector. The city engineer shall serve as chairperson of the
committee and the building and public works construction inspector shall serve
as vice chairperson of the committee.
SKETCH PLAN: A rough plan of a proposed subdivision showing the general
location streets and lots in enough detail to be reviewed.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or
more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale or development,
subject to the exemptions set forth in this title.
SUBDIVISION (MINOR): A minor subdivision is a subdivision of four (4) or fewer
lots that create no new streets.
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL: The approval status of a subdivision proposal prior to
plat approval after specific elements of a subdivision plan have been approved
by the city council.
SUBDIVISION PLAN: A drawing indicating the proposed layout of a development
showing locations of rights of way and lots and blocks and related information
that is submitted for preliminary approval.
TRIP: A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area.
"Trips" can be added together to calculate the total number of vehicles
expected to enter and leave a specific land use or site over a designated
period of time.
UTILITIES: Installations for conducting water, sewage, gas, electricity,
television, cable, fiber optics, telephone, stormwater and similar facilities
providing service to and used by the public.
WAIVER OF CONDITIONS: A request for special conditions of subdivision approval
as requested by an applicant.
WARRANTY GUARANTEE: A percentage of the cost of public subdivision improvements
provided as cash in escrow, bond or irrevocable letter of credit to warrant the
design, construction materials and workmanship of the improvements for a
specified period of time. (2003 Code § 12-02-01)
12-1-6: ENACTMENT:
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and
policies, this title is hereby adopted and shall become effective upon its
passage and publication according to law. All applications for subdivision
approval, including final approval, pending on the effective date of these
regulations, shall be reviewed pursuant to the ordinances in effect at the time
an original completed application was accepted for processing. Pending
applications that are allowed to lapse due to inaction by the applicant shall
be governed by this title if refiled after it becomes effective. (2003 Code §
12-01-05)
12-1-7: AMENDMENTS:
When necessary to further its purposes, this title may be amended in the manner
prescribed by Idaho Code. (2003 Code § 12-01-06)
12-1-8: FEES AND MITIGATION:
   A.   Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs may be charged.
The city council may, by resolution, adopt fees for services associated with
review, processing and inspection of subdivisions. Such fees shall be
reasonably related to the costs of services provided by the city with respect
to the subdivision of land.
   B.   The city may, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, require
mitigation of the effects of development on the ability of the city, and other
political subdivisions, to deliver services without compromising quality or
imposing substantial additional costs to current residents. Such conditions may
not exceed the actual impact of the development unless the developer agrees to
such conditions. In lieu of such mitigation or as a complement thereto, the
developer may pay fees that will be used by the city to mitigate such impacts.
(2003 Code § 12-01-07)
12-1-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be the authority of the building and public works construction
inspector and the public works director or his/her designees to enforce the
provisions of this title.
   B.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building
or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the
provisions of these regulations, nor shall the city have any obligation to
issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel
created or established in violation of this title. (2003 Code § 12-01-08)
   C.   Violations of the provisions of this title may be deemed an infraction,
or a misdemeanor crime, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this
code, with each day such violation continues constituting a separate offense.
The city shall have recourse to such civil remedies in law and equity as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations. (2003
Code § 12-01-08; amd. 2012 Code)
12-1-10: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY:
   A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be
required if it is demonstrated that such standards are necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except as provided in these regulations. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or
other provision of law, the provision that is more restrictive or imposes the
standards most likely to protect the public health, safety and general welfare
shall control.
   C.   These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, private
covenant or any other private agreement or restriction; provided, that where
the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulation, the requirements of these regulations shall govern
irrespective of private contractual provision.
   D.   The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence,
clause or phrase of this title is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
title. The remainder shall be interpreted to further the purposes of this
title.
   E.   The provisions of this title serve to supersede prior ordinances
regulating subdivision of land in the city. (2003 Code § 12-01-09)
12-1-11: SAVINGS PROVISION:
   A.   The adoption of these regulations shall not abate any action now
pending under prior subdivision regulations or abate, modify, or alter any
penalty accruing or about to accrue.
   B.   These regulations shall not waive any right of the city under any
section or provision existing at the time of adoption, or vacate or annul any
rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation by lawful action of the city
except as expressly provided for herein. (2003 Code § 12-01-10)
12-1-12: RESERVATIONS AND REPEALS:
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the previously enacted
subdivision ordinance of the city, as amended, hereby is repealed, except as
provided above. (2003 Code § 12-01-11)
12-1-13: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS OF CONDITIONS:
   A.   Where strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of
these regulations may be better served by an alternative proposal, the city
council may approve exceptions and/or waiver of conditions to these
regulations. The granting of an exception or waiver of conditions shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. The
city council shall not permit exceptions and/or waiver of conditions unless it
finds, based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case, that:
      1.   The granting of the exception, or waiver of conditions will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other
property.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the
property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to
other property.
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular and
unnecessary hardship to the owner would result if the strict application of
these regulations is applied.
      4.   The change sought will not vary the provisions of the zoning
ordinance or comprehensive plan, except that those documents may be amended in
the manner prescribed by law.
   B.   In approving exceptions or waivers of conditions, the city council may
require conditions that will secure the purposes of this title. An exception is
any alternative design, or proposed change in subdivision ordinance
requirements that is requested by the developer. The exception requested must
be reviewed as an integral part of the overall review process as outlined in
this title. A request for an exception shall be submitted in writing by the
developer at the time that the subdivision application is filed and shall be
reviewed along with the subdivision. The request shall specify which ordinance
provisions shall be subject to exception along with the proposed changes and
the reasons why the changes are necessary. The planning and zoning commission
shall make a recommendation to the city council specific to the exception
requested. The city council shall render a decision on the requested exception
at the time the subdivision is reviewed.
   C.   A waiver of conditions is a request to change the conditions of
subdivision approval as agreed to in the development agreement. A request for a
waiver of conditions must be in writing and submitted to the planning
department prior to acceptance by the city of construction improvements or
recordation of the final plat. The request shall specify the condition needing
to be waived and the reasons the waiver would be justified. Upon receipt of a
request, the administrator will place the request on the agenda of the planning
and zoning commission for hearing. Notice of hearing shall be provided in the
same manner as hearing for subdivision approval. The request will be reviewed
and the planning and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city
council. The city council shall review the recommendation and shall render a
decision on the waiver of conditions. (2003 Code § 12-01-12)
CHAPTER 2
APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL
SECTION:
12-2-1: Purpose
12-2-2: Preapplication
12-2-3: Subdivision Application
12-2-4: Submittal Of Subdivision Application
12-2-5: Minor Subdivision Review And Approval
12-2-6: Subdivision Review And Approval
12-2-7: Conformance To Regulations; Approval Duration
12-2-8: Phasing Or Sectionalizing Subdivisions
12-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures for review and
action on applications for subdivisions. The procedure is intended to provide
orderly and expeditious processing of subdivision applications.
(2003 Code § 12-03-01)
12-2-2: PREAPPLICATION:
   A.   Submit Preliminary Plat: Prior to submittal of a subdivision
application, the developer shall submit one (1) digital copy and, for
commercial developments only, one (1) hard copy of a preliminary plat plan to
the site plan review committee.
   B.   Review Scheduled: The city engineer shall schedule and hold the
preliminary site plan review within thirty (30) days from the submittal date,
unless the developer agrees to additional time.
   C.   Review: A preliminary site plan review allows the developer an
opportunity to meet with municipal staff and other representatives deemed
appropriate by the city engineer. A representative of the various public works
departments shall be invited to all preliminary site plan review meetings.
Items to be reviewed:
      1.   The general subdivision process.
      2.   Overall design, lot sizes and street layout.
      3.   Preliminary utility design.
      4.   Conformity to the comprehensive plan.
      5.   Potential off site impacts/mitigation.
      6.   Off site/on site improvements.
   D.   Additional Review: Additional preliminary site plan review may be
scheduled by the city engineer when, in the collective judgment of staff, the
proposed subdivision is extraordinarily complex, proposes large impacts to city
utility systems, or requires extraordinary staff time. Total time for
preliminary site plan review shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the date of
submittal unless the developer agrees to additional time.
   E.   Written Report: At the conclusion of the preliminary site plan review
process, the city engineer shall provide the developer with a written site plan
review report, which includes a statement of issues, concerns and
recommendations deemed important by the city staff based upon the level of
information available at the time of preliminary site plan review. The site
plan review report allows the developer to submit an application for
subdivision review. A site plan review report states that the proposed
subdivision has been reviewed by appropriate staff and agencies and is eligible
to submit an application and does not constitute an approval in any way. Such
notice may include comments, concerns and recommendations of the staff and
participating agencies.
   F.   Validity; Extension: A site plan review report is valid for a period of
one hundred eighty (180) days. The city engineer may extend the duration of
site plan review report for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days if
conditions of the preliminary site plan review have not changed materially.
After expiration of a site plan review report, the developer shall be required
to resubmit for a preliminary site plan review.
(2003 Code § 12-03-02; amd. Ord. 2246, 10-3-2- 2023; Ord. 2279, 9-2-2025)
12-2-3: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION:
   A.   Submittal: Applications for subdivisions shall be submitted and
accepted at least forty five (45) days before the date of the public hearing at
which it is to be reviewed. Minor subdivisions may be submitted to the city
engineer at any time. No application for a subdivision shall be accepted until
a preliminary site plan review has been completed and a written site plan
review report has been issued by the city engineer. The city engineer may waive
the preliminary site plan review for a minor subdivision.
   B.   Direction Of City Engineer: The developer shall have the option of
seeking the direction of the city engineer as to which approvals are required
and the appropriate review process, or of filing an application the developer
believes to be appropriate. The city engineer's determination shall be presumed
to be correct. (2003 Code § 12-03-03)
12-2-4: SUBMITTAL OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATION:
   A.   Intent: The documents submitted are intended to provide the approving
authority with sufficient information and data to assure compliance with all
municipal codes and specifications and ensure that the proposed development
meets the design and improvement standards contained in this title.
   B.   Waiver May Be Permitted: Documents to be submitted are listed and
described in this section. In specific cases and for documented reasons, the
city engineer may waive the submission of a particular document. All documents
must be submitted, unless waived in writing, before an application is accepted
and processed.
   C.   Minor Subdivision: An application for a minor subdivision or
subdivision shall include the following:
      1.   An application form, provided by the planning and building
department, filled out completely and signed by the developer.
      2.   The names and addresses of the owners of real property within three
hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
      3.   Plans of the proposed minor subdivision or subdivision. The number
of copies will be determined by the city engineer. In addition to the plans,
one (1) digital copy and, for commercial developments only, one (1) hard copy,
eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") in dimension, shall be provided.
      4.   Plans submitted shall include the elements listed in table 1,
"Subdivision Plan Elements", of this section.
      5.   Preliminary construction plans shall be submitted for all required
improvements, including sanitary sewer, water supply, stormwater collection and
disposal, streets, sidewalks and any other elements determined to be necessary
during preliminary site plan review. Preliminary construction plans shall be
prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the state. Listed elements may be
waived, or additional items added by the city engineer at the preliminary site
plan review. The waiving or the addition of elements to the plans shall be in
writing and made a part of the site plan review report. A list of elements to
be included on preliminary construction plans is found in table 2, "Preliminary
Construction Plan Elements", of this section.
   TABLE 1. SUBDIVISION PLAN ELEMENTS
Elements Required Subdivision Minor Subdivision
Elements Required                                 Subdivision Minor Subdivision
1. Name of subdivision, name and address of the   X           X
developer
2. A vicinity map                                 X
3. Existing/proposed zoning                       X           X
4. North arrow and scale                          X           X
5. Metes and bounds description with dimensions   X           X
of the site
6. Acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of   X           X
an acre
7. Show location of existing structures and       X           X
setbacks from proposed lot lines
8. Location, width and names of all existing or
platted streets or other public ways within or    X           X
immediately adjacent to the tract
9. Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of
existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other  X           X
underground structures within the tract and
adjacent thereto
10. All adjacent streets, including swales, curb  X           X
and sidewalk
11. Location and size of proposed water and sewer X
lines
12. Location of existing and proposed             X           X
streetlights
13. All proposed streets. Show width, curb,       X
swales and sidewalks
14. Location, dimensions and area of all parcels
of land to be set aside for parks, open space or  X           X
other public use, or for the use of property
owners in the proposed subdivision
15. Location and typical size of proposed lots    X           X
16. Any existing or proposed easements and right  X           X
of way dedications
17. Development phases, or stages, if the project X
will be done over several years
18. Existing vegetation (trees and significant    X           X
vegetation)
19. Streams, watercourses, natural drainage       X           X
patterns, wetlands or floodplains
20. Proposed street names                         X
21. Topography shall be shown at an appropriate
contour interval. Slopes of over 5 percent shall  X
be shown in 5 foot intervals
22. Data table showing number of lots, density in X           X
lots per acre, and average lot size
 
   TABLE 2. PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION PLAN ELEMENTS
Items Required Subdivision Minor Subdivision
Items Required                                 Subdivision   Minor Subdivision
1. Proposed utility infrastructure plans,
including sanitary sewer, water and stormwater X
management
2. Soil erosion and sediment control plan if   X if required X if required
required by the city engineer
3. Street and paving cross sections. Indicate  X             X if required
slopes in excess of 5 percent
4. Proposed street names                       X
5. Streetlighting plans                        X             X if required
6. Site identification signs, traffic control  X             X
signs and directional signs
7. Pedestrian circulation plans                X             X
8. Right of way landscape plan and details     X             X
9. Traffic studies, if required by the city    X if required
engineer
10. Areas of cuts or fills of more than 4 feet X             X
 
   (2003 Code § 12-03-04; amd. Ord. 2270, 6-3-2025)
12-2-5: MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of minor subdivision review is to provide a
simplified procedure for processing minor subdivisions administratively. Minor
subdivisions are subdivisions of four (4) or fewer lots that create no new
streets. The process is intended for the creation of lots along existing
streets where infrastructure is available. A minor subdivision may be part of a
planned unit development. A developer proposing to create additional lots on
the same original parcel within a single five (5) year period (multiple minor
subdivisions from 1 parcel) as a minor subdivision may be required by the city
engineer to use the full subdivision review process if the city engineer
determines that the multiple minor subdivisions may have a significant impact
on public facilities to be used by the development.
   B.   Schedule Staff Review: Upon receipt of a complete application, the city
engineer shall schedule a minor subdivision review with staff and the
developer. A date for the review will be established within seven (7) days from
the date of application acceptance.
   C.   Copies Of Documents Submitted; Notice To Adjacent Property Owners: The
city engineer shall provide copies of submitted documents, as necessary, to
outside agencies and jurisdictions, that, in the opinion of the city engineer,
may be affected by the proposal. In addition, the city engineer shall provide
written notice to the owners of property adjacent to the property proposed for
development. The notice shall provide the adjacent property owners a plan of
the minor subdivision, general information concerning the proposal, and the
time frame for submitting written comments. The period of time for comment or
response shall not be less than fourteen (14) days nor greater than twenty one
(21) days from the date of notice.
   D.   Hearing Officer; Review: The city engineer shall act as hearing officer
and shall conduct a minor subdivision review, along with appropriate staff, to
ensure that all applicable ordinance provisions are followed or completed.
Minor subdivision review shall include but not be limited to:
      1.   Review of lot size and dimensions for conformance to the zoning
ordinance.
      2.   Determination that there are adequate provisions to serve the minor
subdivision with sewer and water.
      3.   Review of the location of fire hydrants.
      4.   Review the location for the installation of streetlights if
determined to be necessary by the public works department.
      5.   Determine if mitigation of any impact is warranted.
      6.   Define the scope of improvements and dedications required (curb,
sidewalk, paving, water, sewer, drainage, easements, right of way dedication,
etc.).
      7.   Evaluation of the location of potential rights of way to access
adjoining parcels.
   E.   Decision; Notice: A decision shall be rendered within seven (7) days of
the review unless circumstances require otherwise, such circumstances to be set
forth in writing to the applicant. The city engineer shall, by written
decision, grant approval, approval with conditions, or deny the minor
subdivision. Notice of the action taken by the city engineer shall also be
mailed to the owners of real property adjacent to the minor subdivision. A
decision to deny shall be in writing and indicate reasons for denial and
indicate what steps are necessary to obtain approval. In the case of approval
or approval with conditions, a memorandum of understanding shall be prepared
that details the conditions of approval and the responsibilities of the
developer. The memorandum of understanding shall be signed by the developer and
the city engineer prior to proceeding to plat review.
   F.   Appeal: The developer or any affected party may appeal the decision of
the city engineer by filing a notice of appeal with the city council, with a
copy to the city engineer, no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of
the city engineer's decision. The appeal shall set forth in clear and concise
fashion the basis for appeal. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall schedule the
appeal for consideration at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
council at which it can be accommodated. The appellant shall be allowed to make
a presentation under procedures established by the city council. Those opposing
the appeal shall have an opportunity to present and rebut the appellant's
presentation. Staff may provide a staff report. The city council, after
consideration of the elements of the appeal, shall render a decision affirming
or reversing the city engineer within forty five (45) days from the date on
which the notice of appeal is filed, unless circumstances require that more
time be taken to reach a decision, the reason therefor being stated in a formal
motion by the city council.
   G.   Effective Period Of Approval; Extension: The approval of a minor
subdivision shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of
approval. If a plat is not submitted for approval within the one year period,
the minor subdivision approval shall be null and void, and the developer shall
be required to submit a new application. Prior to the expiration date of the
effective period, the developer may request an extension, in writing, from the
city engineer. The city engineer may grant an extension, not to exceed twelve
(12) months, upon a showing of good cause by the developer. The city engineer
shall decide a request for extension within fourteen (14) days of the receipt
of the written request. The developer may appeal the city engineer's decision
to deny extension to the mayor.
   H.   Amendments:
      1.   At any time after minor subdivision approval and before submission
of a subdivision plat, the developer may request of the city engineer that an
amendment be made to the minor subdivision plan or to conditions of approval.
If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan and consistent with
conditions of approval, the city engineer may grant the amendment in writing
within ten (10) days of the request, unless the city engineer determines that
additional time is necessary for reasons stated in writing. If the amendment is
major or involves a change in the conditions of approval, the city engineer
shall schedule a review with staff, and notify adjoining landowners, in his
discretion, to review the proposed amendment. The date for the review shall be
scheduled within twenty one (21) days of the request.
      2.   Upon completion of the review for the amendment request, the city
engineer may grant the amendment if the minor subdivision is not substantially
changed and does, in fact, remain a minor subdivision. If the proposed
amendment changes the plan to cause it to become a subdivision, the city
engineer shall disapprove the amendment and notify the developer to adhere to
the approved plan or to apply for the full subdivision review process. (2003
Code § 12-03-05)
12-2-6: SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this process is to provide a timely and
efficient review of subdivisions. A subdivision is any division of a lot,
tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots and accompanied by proposed
new streets or extensions to existing streets, and/or extensions of municipal
sewer and water services. A subdivision may be part of a planned unit
development (PUD).
   B.   Official Submission Date: The date that a completed application is
accepted by the city engineer and the zoning administrator shall be the
official submission date.
   C.   Public Hearing Before Planning And Zoning Commission; Notice: Upon
acceptance of an application for subdivision approval along with all of the
required submittals, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing
before the planning and zoning commission. The public hearing shall be held at
least forty five (45) days after but within seventy five (75) days of the
official submission date if the agenda of the planning and zoning commission
permits. The zoning administrator shall:
      1.   Submit a notice for publication in the official newspaper of the
city. Such notice shall provide the time and place of the public hearing, a
description of the location of the subdivision, a brief statement summarizing
the request, and a vicinity map. Notice shall be published at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the public hearing.
      2.   Mail notices to all owners of property within three hundred feet
(300') of the boundaries of the land proposed to be subdivided and to such
owners as the zoning administrator believes should receive notice. The
developer shall provide a current mailing list of all property owners within
three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the subdivision. Such notice
shall provide the time and place of the public hearing, a description of the
location of the subdivision, a brief statement summarizing the request and a
vicinity map. Notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
public hearing.
      3.   Post notice on the property. The notice shall provide the time and
place of the public hearing, a brief statement summarizing the request, and a
phone number to call for information. Notice shall be posted on the property at
least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
      4.   Notice and request for comment shall be mailed to agencies,
utilities and other jurisdictions deemed appropriate by the city engineer or
required by Idaho Code no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing date. The notice and request for comment shall include application
information, notice of the public hearing date, additional staff comments and a
date by which comments are to be received. A copy of the application and a copy
of the subdivision plan shall be included.
   D.   Report Required: The zoning administrator shall prepare a report for
the planning and zoning commission that provides information about the site and
the subdivision to aid the commission in making a recommendation. The report
should include, but is not limited to, the following information, whether part
of the application materials or otherwise:
      1.   The current zoning and comprehensive plan policies relevant to the
proposed subdivision.
      2.   Existing land use on the site of the subdivision as well as the
surrounding land use.
      3.   The location, size and adequacy of capacity of existing sewer and
water lines.
      4.   A description of the physical characteristics of the site to include
a basic inventory of vegetation and any unique features.
      5.   A description of existing streets serving the site of the
subdivision and a synopsis of the proposed streets.
      6.   A preliminary site plan report.
      7.   An analysis of the impact of the subdivision on the infrastructure
of the community. This shall include deficiencies in existing infrastructure
and what improvements would be needed to bring the infrastructure up to an
acceptable level of service.
      8.   Recommended conditions if the subdivision should be approved.
   E.   Recommendation To City Council: After the planning and zoning
commission has reviewed the subdivision plan, preliminary construction plans,
staff report and testimony and exhibits submitted at the public hearing, the
commission shall forward a recommendation to the city council. The planning and
zoning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval of the subdivision within thirty (30) days of the public hearing,
unless circumstances require a longer review period for reasons set forth in a
motion adopted by the commission. The zoning administrator shall notify the
developer, in writing, within seven (7) days of the action by the planning and
zoning commission. Such notification shall specify any recommended conditions
or changes requested and shall advise the developer that the subdivision will
be placed on the agenda of the city council only upon the developer's written
request.
   F.   Decision Of City Council: The city council, upon receipt of a site plan
report and recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, and after an
opportunity to review the file and minutes of the public hearing, shall act
upon the request. The city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the subdivision within thirty (30) days of the date of the council
meeting at which it is reviewed, or in such time as it may be determined by
motion approved by the city council. The city engineer shall notify the
developer in writing of the decision of the city council and, in the case of
approval or approval with conditions, shall prepare a development agreement for
signature by the developer and the city.
   G.   Required Findings: No subdivision shall receive a recommendation of
approval from the planning and zoning commission or be approved by the city
council, unless findings and conclusions are made that:
      1.   Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is
adequate in terms of quantity, and quality for the type of subdivision
proposed.
      2.   Adequate provisions have been made for a public sewage system and
that the existing municipal system can accommodate the proposed sewer flows.
      3.   Proposed streets are consistent with the transportation element of
the comprehensive plan and comply with current city design criteria.
      4.   Adequate provisions have been made for stormwater collection,
retention and/or conveyance. Facilities are sized according to city drainage
policy and design criteria.
      5.   All areas of the proposed subdivision that may involve soil or
topographical conditions presenting hazards have been identified and that the
proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions.
      6.   The area proposed for subdivision is zoned for the proposed use and
the use conforms to other requirements found in this code.
      7.   The developer has made adequate plans to ensure that the community
will bear no more than its fair share of costs to provide services by paying
fees, furnishing land or providing other mitigation measures for off site
impacts to streets, parks and other public facilities within the community. It
is the expectation that, in most cases, off site mitigation will be dealt with
through the obligation to pay service availability fees. A fee schedule shall
be set by city council resolution.
   H.   Preparation Of Construction Plans: The developer shall have
construction plans prepared by a civil engineer, licensed in the state. Such
plans shall adhere to the design and improvement standards set forth in this
title. No construction of any kind shall take place on the site of an approved
subdivision until final construction plans are reviewed and approved by the
public works department, and a development agreement is. Systems reviewed and
subject to staff approval include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Streets, including curbs and sidewalks.
      2.   Water delivery system and water supply.
      3.   Sanitary sewer system.
      4.   Stormwater collection and treatment plans, including stormwater
management during construction.
      5.   Streetlight plans.
      6.   Off site improvements (streets, traffic signals, sidewalks,
lighting, etc.).
   I.   Developer To Proceed With Construction: The developer may proceed with
construction of the subdivision if:
      1.   The city council has approved the subdivision.
      2.   The city engineer and planning and zoning administrator has approved
the subdivision.
      3.   A development and construction agreement has been completed.
      4.   All applicable permits are obtained.
   J.   Time Limits: Time limits contained within this section are directory.
Violation of time limits established in this section shall not be the basis for
damages and shall have no effect on the approval or disapproval of a
subdivision. Time limits provided herein may be extended for good cause. The
city engineer shall be informed of any failure of staff to meet time limits,
and shall take appropriate action to ensure that limits are conformed to when
circumstances allow. (2003 Code § 12-03-06)
12-2-7: CONFORMANCE TO REGULATIONS; APPROVAL DURATION:
   A.   Conformance Required: Every subdivision shall conform to zoning and
subdivision regulations applicable at the official submission date.
   B.   Effective Period Of Approval: The approval of a subdivision shall be
effective for a period of one year from the date that the development agreement
is approved unless a different time period is requested by the developer, in
writing at the time of application, and agreed to by the city council in a
development agreement. By the end of the time period, the developer must have
submitted a plat for review and approval. If a plat is not submitted for final
approval within the one year period, the subdivision approval shall be null and
void, and the developer shall be required to submit a new application.
   C.   Extension: Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the
developer may request an extension, in writing, from the city engineer. The
city engineer may grant an extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, upon a
showing of good cause by the developer. The city engineer shall render a
decision to grant or not grant an extension within fifteen (15) days of the
date of submittal to the city engineer. The developer may appeal the decision
of the city engineer to the mayor.
   D.   Amendments: At any time after subdivision approval and before
submission of a subdivision plat, the developer may request of the city
engineer, in writing, that an amendment be made to the subdivision plan or to
conditions of approval. If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the
plan, the city engineer may grant the amendment in writing. If the amendment is
major or involves a substantial change in the conditions of approval, the city
engineer shall schedule a public hearing at least thirty (30) days after the
receipt of the request. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed amendment in accordance with the same requirements for
a public hearing for subdivision approval.
   E.   Public Hearing For Major Amendments: A public hearing on a proposed
major amendment shall be limited to whether the proposed amendment should or
should not be approved. The planning and zoning commission may approve, approve
with modifications, or disapprove any proposed major amendment and may make any
modifications in the terms and conditions of subdivision approval reasonably
related to the proposed amendment. The planning and zoning commission shall
render a decision on the proposed amendment within thirty (30) days from the
date of the public hearing or in such time as it may determine by motion
approved by the planning and zoning commission. Any proposed changes to
conditions shall be forwarded to the city council for review as would be the
case for a new subdivision proposal. Any changes approved by the city council
shall be included in an addendum to the development agreement for the project.
(2003 Code § 12-03-07)
12-2-8: PHASING OR SECTIONALIZING SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Permitted: Large developments may be phased or sectionalized, to be
developed in portions periodically according to a proposed schedule. The
developer shall indicate plans for phasing or sectionalizing at the time of
application. The plans, subject to review and approval, shall show proposed
phasing boundaries. Proposed interim or temporary solutions to sanitary sewer
and water systems and to the handling of traffic on local streets, collectors
and arterials within the subdivision, shall be shown on plans submitted along
with a narrative description of assurance of completion of permanent system
improvements.
   B.   Development Agreement: The development agreement for each subdivision
must ensure that the dedication of public streets and improvements will occur
according to the phasing plans, subject to conditions imposed by the city
council during subdivision review. The city council may, in the interest of
public safety and welfare, require that certain collector streets and arterials
be dedicated and constructed in their entirety regardless of the phasing plan.
   C.   Guarantees: In approving a subdivision to be developed in phases, the
city council may require that the development agreement indicate the phasing
plans and that the amounts calculated for guarantees are commensurate with the
phasing plan. The city council may require that the guarantee amount be that
amount calculated for each phase and may defer the remaining amounts of the
guarantee until the remaining sections of the subdivision are platted.
   D.   Phasing Plan: A phasing plan shall coordinate required infrastructure
systems, dedications, off site improvements, open space/parks, landscaping,
private utilities, or other elements of a subdivision. The plan may indicate
times or triggering mechanisms for improvements. Agreements between the
developer and the city concerning the acceleration or deceleration of
development of the subdivision may be included in the development agreement.
Provisions of a development agreement shall endeavor to the greatest extent
possible to tie together the contingencies of development of a phased project.
(2003 Code § 12-03-08)
CHAPTER 3
PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
SECTION:
12-3-1: Purpose
12-3-2: Application
12-3-3: Review
12-3-4: Approval
12-3-5: Recordation
12-3-6: Applicable Laws
12-3-7: Model Homes
12-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure for plat review. The
procedure is intended to provide orderly and expeditious processing and
recordation of subdivision plats. (2003 Code § 12-04-01)
12-3-2: APPLICATION:
Following approval of a subdivision or minor subdivision, the developer shall
file, within the permitted time period, an application for final plat review
with the city engineer. The application for final plat review shall:
   A.   Be made on forms provided through the planning and building department.
   B.   Include the entire subdivision, minor subdivision, or section/phase
thereof as determined by a phasing plan approved during subdivision review.
   C.   Comply in all material respects with the approved subdivision or minor
subdivision plan, whichever is applicable.
   D.   Include all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of
all streets, local government uses, utilities, additional rights of way, parks,
and easements in a form approved by the city attorney.
   E.   Be accompanied by a public works department certification that all the
streets, water system, sanitary sewers, stormwater facilities and other public
improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the
subdivision, have been completed and accepted as required in these regulations,
or that a guarantee has been submitted in the proper form. (2003 Code § 12-04-
02)
12-3-3: REVIEW:
Upon submittal of the plat to the city engineer, a staff review will be
completed within twenty eight (28) days of acceptance. The review will
determine whether all conditions of the approved development agreement have
been completed and whether the final plat is consistent with the approved
subdivision. Such review shall determine that:
   A.   The plat is in conformance with Idaho Code section 50-1301 et seq.,
plats and vacations.
   B.   The plat layout is as approved by the city council during subdivision
review or as approved by the city engineer during minor subdivision review.
   C.   A development agreement has been completed.
   D.   Language on the dedication section of the plat reflects what was agreed
to in the development agreement and that any dedications are accurately
described.
   E.   The appropriate signature blocks are on the plat and that all
signatures have been obtained except for the signatures of the city engineer,
mayor, city clerk and county recorder.
   F.   Construction plans have been reviewed and approved.
   G.   All required on site and off site improvements have been constructed
and accepted by the public works department, or have been suitably guaranteed.
   H.   Any mitigation required or determined in a development agreement, has
been satisfied or other suitable arrangements approved by the city council have
been made. (2003 Code § 12-04-03)
12-3-4: APPROVAL:
When staff review of the plat is completed and all required terms and
conditions are satisfied, staff may forward the plat to the city clerk
recommending that it be submitted to the city council for approval. The city
clerk shall place the request for plat approval on the next available city
council agenda. The city council shall review the subdivision and plat and,
upon a finding that all of the requirements have been satisfied, shall
authorize the mayor and the city clerk to sign. The city engineer's signature
shall be the final approval assigned to the plat. (2003 Code § 12-04-04)
12-3-5: RECORDATION:
After the plat is signed by the mayor, city clerk and city engineer, the
developer shall record the plat with the county recorder, and provide the city
engineer with a reproducible mylar copy of the recorded plat. Upon recordation
of the plat and receipt of a reproducible mylar of the recorded plat, building
permits may be issued for the lots created. (2003 Code § 12-04-05)
12-3-6: APPLICABLE LAWS:
To obtain plat approval, the developer shall be in compliance with all federal,
state and local laws applicable at the time that the plat is reviewed for
approval. The developer shall be in compliance with all local laws and
regulations applicable at the time that the subdivision was approved by the
city council, or in the case of minor subdivisions, at the time the minor
subdivision was approved by the city engineer. A plat shall not be authorized
for recordation if there exists a violation of relevant ordinances or statutes.
(2003 Code § 12-04-06)
12-3-7: MODEL HOMES:
In approved residential subdivisions, prior to plat approval but subsequent to
construction plan approval and in accordance with terms of the development
agreement, a building permit or permits may be issued for the construction of a
home or homes to be used as models. Model homes shall not be open to the public
until the public works department has determined that the homes can be safely
accessed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor shall utilities be
used by a resident, until streets and utility systems are accepted by the
public works department and the plat is recorded. (2003 Code § 12-04-07)
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
12-4-1: Purpose And Authority
12-4-2: Scope Of Development Agreements
12-4-3: Elements Of Agreement
12-4-4: Covenants
12-4-5: Third Party Rights
12-4-6: Limitations On Liability
12-4-7: Developer's Compliance
12-4-8: Agreement To Run With The Land
12-4-9: Amendments To Agreement
12-4-10: Construction Improvement Agreement
12-4-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of a development agreement is to specify certain land use and
development regulations that will apply to the relevant property, to establish
conditions of approval, to establish terms of mitigation, to describe the scope
of construction improvements, and to foster an understanding between the city
and the developer. It shall be a requirement of compliance with this title that
a development agreement and construction improvement agreement be entered into
and approved by the city prior to initiating physical construction of
subdivision improvements or recordation of a subdivision plat. (2003 Code § 12-
05-01)
12-4-2: SCOPE OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A development agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the
developer of a proposed subdivision and the city (the "parties") and shall
contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the parties and those required
by this title. The staff of the city, in conjunction with the city attorney, is
authorized to negotiate development agreements on behalf of the city. The
development agreement shall be adopted by the city council and recorded in the
county recorder's office. Development agreement requirements may be waived for
certain minor subdivisions upon a finding by the city engineer that they will
serve no purpose. (2003 Code § 12-05-02)
12-4-3: ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT:
The development agreement shall be negotiated by the staff and city attorney
and approved by the city council prior to signature by the parties. A brief
statement shall be included describing the subdivision, its location, legal
description, number of lots, and the date of subdivision approval by the city
council. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Any conditions of approval from the review and approval process.
   B.   Time limit and provisions for extension or extinguishing the agreement.
   C.   Phasing plans, if any, and a description of any required temporary
improvements and the terms of those improvements.
   D.   A description of construction improvements to be installed on site and
off site.
   E.   Covenants, if any, made by the developer to the city.
   F.   Covenants, if any, made by the city.
   G.   Details of dedications beyond those required in chapter 6 of this
title, design and improvement standards.
   H.   Construction improvement elements as detailed in section
12-4-10 of this chapter. (2003 Code § 12-05-03)
12-4-4: COVENANTS:
The city may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise
would constitute a breach of any covenant contained in a development agreement
if it makes a determination, on the record, that the action is necessary to
avoid a substantial risk to public health, safety and general welfare. All such
covenants shall be subject to an additional proviso that the city may, without
incurring any liability, engage in action that would constitute a breach of any
such covenant if the action is required by federal or state law. (2003 Code §
12-05-04)
12-4-5: THIRD PARTY RIGHTS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in a development agreement, the
development agreement shall create no rights enforceable by any party that is
not a party to the development agreement. Purchasers of lots in approved
subdivisions are not deemed to be third party beneficiaries of development
agreements. (2003 Code § 12-05-05)
12-4-6: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY:
Any breach of a development agreement by the city shall not give rise to
monetary damages, but shall be enforceable only by resort to an action for
specific performance. No provision of any development agreement that is
contrary to law may be enforced. (2003 Code § 12-05-06)
12-4-7: DEVELOPER'S COMPLIANCE:
Performance of the city's duties pursuant to a development agreement are
expressly conditioned upon the developer's substantial compliance with each and
every term, condition, provision and covenant of the agreement, and all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. (2003 Code § 12-05-
07)
12-4-8: AGREEMENT TO RUN WITH THE LAND:
A development agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs
and assignees of the developer. The development agreement, including addenda,
shall be filed with the county recorder to give notice to any prospective
purchaser. The development agreement would expire at the agreed upon date set
forth within the agreement or, when the city shall file a release with the
county recorder, when the terms of the agreement have been satisfied or are no
longer valid. (2003 Code § 12-05-08)
12-4-9: AMENDMENTS TO AGREEMENT:
Should amendments to the agreement be necessary and if all parties are in
agreement, an addendum to the agreement shall be negotiated subject to review
by the city attorney for signature of the parties. Either party may propose
amending the agreement by notifying other parties to the agreement in writing
of the nature of the amendment and the reasons why the amendment is necessary.
The party requesting the amendment shall be responsible for any costs
associated with the preparation of the addendum to the development agreement,
unless the parties agree to share the costs. Such cost sharing arrangement
shall be determined and agreed to, by the parties, prior to negotiating the
addendum to the agreement. Amendments must comply with the formalities of
approval, including approval by the city council, which govern original
development agreements. (2003 Code § 12-05-09)
12-4-10: CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
A component of a development agreement that sets forth the specific public
improvements to be constructed in the subdivision, the manner and timing of the
construction, duties and responsibilities of the developer, estimated costs of
the improvements, performance guarantee, maintenance warranty and standards of
construction must be accepted by the city council prior to start of
construction. (2003 Code § 12-05-10; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENTS
ARTICLE A. ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
12-5A-1: Completion Of Improvements
12-5A-2: Performance Guarantee
12-5A-3: Guarantee Amount
12-5A-4: Release Of Performance Guarantee
12-5A-5: Dedications
12-5A-6: Maintenance
12-5A-7: Warranty Of Improvements
12-5A-8: Warranty Guarantee
12-5A-1: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All required improvements shall be completed within one year of the effective
date of the development agreement, unless a different time period is approved
by city council. Before a plat is signed by the city engineer, the developer
shall be required to complete all street, sanitary and other public
improvements, including lot improvements on individual lots as required in
these regulations and as approved by the city council, or the developer shall
provide a suitable performance guarantee. No building shall be occupied, nor
shall any use be established in a subdivision, until all necessary improvements
have been installed and accepted for maintenance by the city or other public
service providers. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure to the greatest
extent possible that the health and safety of the public and the residents of
new subdivisions are protected. (2003 Code § 12-06-01)
12-5A-2: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
The developer may guarantee to complete all of the agreed upon improvements
within one year of the effective date of the construction improvement agreement
or within such alternative time period approved by city council by providing to
the city one or more of the following instruments in an amount equal to at
least one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of improvements to be
guaranteed:
   A.   Performance Bond: The developer may provide a performance bond from a
company qualified by law to act as a surety in the state. The bond shall be in
the form approved by the city and name the city as the obligee and the
developer as principal.
   B.   Escrow: The developer may deposit funds in an escrow with a bank or
financial institution qualified by law to do business in the state. The
disbursement of the escrow funds shall be governed by an escrow agreement in a
form approved by the city.
   C.   Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: The developer may cause a bank or
financial institution, qualified by law to do business in the state, to issue
an irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the city. (2003 Code §
12-06-02)
12-5A-3: GUARANTEE AMOUNT:
   A.   The performance guarantee amount shall be one hundred fifty percent
(150%) of the estimated costs of all improvements, not including those to be
constructed by private utilities. The developer's engineer shall have prepared,
documented and certified each cost estimate. The estimated costs shall be
submitted by the developer to the city engineer for approval. The estimated
cost of all improvements shall be the sum of the estimated cost approved by the
city engineer.
   B.   If the developer is not in default under the terms of the development
agreement, the city may allow a proportionate reduction in the amount of the
performance guarantee in increments not less than twenty five percent (25%) of
the surety amount. The amount of the performance guarantee shall always be
greater than or equal to the amount of the cumulative required warranty amount.
(2003 Code § 12-06-03)
12-5A-4: RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
As soon as any one of the following occurs, the city may release any
performance guarantee that has not been used or encumbered under provisions of
the development agreement or this title:
   A.   The final acceptance of all improvements and the posting of warranty
guarantee as set forth in this title.
   B.   The expiration of the warranty period as provided in this title. (2003
Code § 12-06-04)
12-5A-5: DEDICATIONS:
Acceptance of dedication of streets or other public areas or facilities shall
be by the city council after review and recommendation by the city engineer.
Any dedications for property and/or public improvements shall be free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances. (2003 Code § 12-06-05)
12-5A-6: MAINTENANCE:
The developer shall perform capital maintenance of each required public
improvement until the city has expressly accepted the improvements. Details of
the maintenance provisions shall be included in the construction improvement
agreement. (2003 Code § 12-06-06)
12-5A-7: WARRANTY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   The developer shall warrant the design, construction materials, and
workmanship of the improvements installed pursuant to this title against any
failure or defect in design, construction, material or workmanship for a period
of one year.
   B.   This warranty shall cover all direct and indirect costs of repair or
replacement, and damage to the property, improvements or facilities of the city
or any other person, caused by such failure or defect or in the course of
repairs, any increase in cost to the city of operating and maintaining a city
improvement resulting from such failures, defects, or damages.
   C.   The warranty shall not extend to any failure or defect caused solely by
changes in design, construction, or materials required by the city as a
deviation from regular requirements established by this title. (2003 Code § 12-
06-07)
12-5A-8: WARRANTY GUARANTEE:
   A.   To secure the developer's performance of the warranty of improvements,
the performance guarantee provided by the developer pursuant to this title
shall remain in effect until the end of the warranty period or the developer
shall provide a warranty guarantee by one or more of the instruments described
above by the following table:
 
Actual Cost Of Improvements  Percent To Secure Warranty
Less than $500,000.00           10%
$500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00    7.50%
Over $1,000,000.00              5%
 
   B.   In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such
work within the period of time required by conditions of the guarantee for the
completion of public improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the city
to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this, the city
shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating the
cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or negotiable
bond that the subdivider may have deposited in lieu of a surety bond, or may
take such steps as may be necessary to require performance by the bonding or
surety company and as included in a written agreement between the city council
and the subdivider. (2003 Code § 12-06-08)
ARTICLE B. STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-5B-1: Responsibility For Plans
12-5B-2: Required Public Improvements
12-5B-3: City Participation In Extension Of Public Improvements
12-5B-4: Reserved Utility Lines (Reimbursement For City Utility Extension
Costs)
12-5B-5: Exception To Required Public Improvements
12-5B-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the subdividers of every proposed subdivision
to have prepared by a licensed engineer, a complete set of construction plans,
including profiles, cross section, specifications and other supporting data,
for all required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such
construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans, which have been
approved with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with
the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible
public agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with
the public agencies' standards or specifications. (2003 Code § 12-08-01)
12-5B-2: REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and other
improvements in accordance with the conditions and specifications as follows:
   A.   Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code section
50-1303.
   B.   Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the city council.
   C.   Curbs And Gutters: Vertical back curbs and gutters shall be constructed
on all streets. All construction shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the city council.
   D.   Bicycle Pathways: A bicycle pathway shall be provided within all
subdivisions, as part of the public right of way or separate easement, as may
be specified in an overall bicycle plan as adopted by the city council when
identified by a relevant master plan.
   E.   Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utility facilities are
required.
   F.   Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the
public works department, highway district or state highway department.
   G.   Storm Drainage: An adequate storm drainage system shall be required in
all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision shall be
established by the city council. Construction shall follow the specifications
and procedures established by the city council.
   H.   Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: All public water supply or sewer
systems (serving 2 or more separate premises or households) shall be
constructed in accordance with any adopted local plans and specifications. All
new public water supply or sewer systems shall be an extension of an existing
public system whenever possible. In the event that the proposed public water
supply or sewer system is not an extension of an existing public system, there
shall be a showing by the subdivider that the extension is not feasible and not
to the best interest of the public. Idaho Code section 50-1326 requires that
all water and sewer plans be submitted to the state department of environmental
and community services or its authorized agent for approval.
   I.   Maintenance And Operation Of Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: The
subdivider shall provide for a perpetual method of construction and operation
of the public water supply or sewer system (serving 2 or more separate premises
or households) to ensure the continued usefulness of the system.
   J.   Fire Hydrants And Water Mains: Adequate fire protection shall be
required in accordance with the appropriate fire district standards.
   K.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the
appropriate locations at each street intersection in accordance with the local
standards and shall comply with title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
   L.   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both
sides of the street and shall be five feet (5') in width, except in business
districts, where the sidewalks shall be eight feet (8') in width.
   M.   Greenbelt: Greenbelts or landscaping screening may be required for the
protection of residential properties from adjacent major arterial streets,
waterways, railroad rights of way or other features. Subdivision plats shall
show the location of any greenbelt areas.
   N.   Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be installed throughout the
subdivision. A subdivider shall conform to the requirements of the city and the
public utility providing such light. (2003 Code § 12-08-02)
   O.   Secondary Water Systems For Irrigation: The delivery of irrigation
water shall be executed in accordance with Idaho Code section 31-3805 and the
following:
      1.   The use of the city's potable water supply as the primary source of
irrigation water in all new developments shall be prohibited. For purposes of
this subsection, the term "new development" means any new subdivision or any
development of any parcel of land of three-fourths (3/4) of an acre or larger
that is not part of a subdivision. The existence of a secondary water system
for irrigation within a subdivision does not prohibit the use of municipal
water services for irrigation when the secondary water system is not reasonably
available or operational.
      2.   All new developments shall include an operating pressure irrigation
system constructed to city standards and approved by the city engineer. There
shall be no cross connections allowed between the irrigation system and the
city's domestic water system. The city engineer shall encourage developers to
participate in a regional system as long as the pump station is operational
before the first building permit is issued for that station's service area.
      3.   The city may assume ownership and responsibility for the
development, maintenance, repair, and any associated costs involved with the
secondary irrigation water system. When ownership is assumed, the city will
administer these systems as separate enterprise funds within the city's water
department, assessing only those charges necessary to maintain and operate the
specific systems developed. These charges will include all necessary and
appropriate charges from irrigation entities.
      4.   The city may authorize in specific cases a variance from the
requirement of a pressure irrigation system, if not contrary to the public
interest. In order to qualify for a variance the following information must be
provided for consideration:
         a.   A letter from the irrigation district, company, or other purveyor
of water explaining the difficulties, expense, or other issues with supplying
the development secondary water; and
         b.   Information verifying whether or not the development has visible
access to surface water; and
         c.   An irrigation study may be required to confirm that a secondary
water system is not reasonably available or operational in relation to the size
of development; and
         d.   Anytime surface water is not available, a feasibility study will
be required for the use of municipal water services for irrigation; and
         e.   Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the city.
         f.   Special conditions may include, but are not limited to, small
developments in terms of acreage, developments without viable access to
irrigation water delivery, or developments without water shares.
         g    Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience or
profit.
      5.   The city engineer shall not authorize a variance from the
requirement of an operating pressure irrigation system unless an alternate
provision has been approved by the city engineer. Alternates may include, but
shall not be limited to, required xeriscaping (i.e., landscaping in ways that
do not require supplemental irrigation), payment of an in lieu fee equal to the
estimated cost of construction of an operating pressure irrigation system
(including land acquisition), or some combination of these or other acceptable
options.
      6.   All preliminary plats shall be accompanied by proof of transferable
irrigation water rights. All subdividers are required to complete the transfer
of irrigation water rights and installation of the irrigation water system as
proposed. One share of water for each acre of property within the subdivision
shall be deeded to the city before the filing of the final plat for use in the
pressurized irrigation system. (Ord. 2154, 3-7-2017, eff. 3-7-2017; amd. Ord.
2269, 6-3-2025)
12-5B-3: CITY PARTICIPATION IN EXTENSION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   In order to encourage infill development and to provide developers
limited financial relief from past development policy oversights, the city may,
at its own discretion, participate with land developers in extending water
mains, sewer mains and stormwater mains. The city may participate in extending
these utilities up to one hundred fifty feet (150') per development and up to
an accumulative total of one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') per utility,
per fiscal year. Footage will be measured from the mainline connection and
through the perpendicular frontage of the corner lot. Minimum pipe sizes are as
follows:
        Water main - 8"
        Sewer main - 8"
        Storm drain laterals - 12"
   B.   If larger diameter pipes are required, the developer shall pay the
price difference between the minimum size and the required size.
   C.   The city may, at its discretion, perform the work with city crews,
equipment and materials, or pay a portion of the contracted price, or a
combination of both, whichever is in the best interest of the city.
   D.   The city's participation in infill development does not include fire
hydrants, service lines or appurtenances, unless it is deemed in the city's
best interest.
   E.   Infill participation is limited to utility extensions within rights of
way that are perpendicular to streets with utilities. Terms of the
participation shall be detailed in the development agreement. Development prior
to September 18, 2001, is not eligible. (2003 Code § 12-08-03)
12-5B-4: RESERVED UTILITY LINES (REIMBURSEMENT FOR CITY UTILITY EXTENSION
COSTS):
   A.   Developer Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the developer to
bear the cost of installing city utilities (i.e., water, sewer, storm drains)
through the entire frontage of a development.
   B.   Requirement To Pay; Inflation Factor: If or when development occurs
opposite of the development, the developer who bore the cost of installing the
city utilities may at his/her option require the new developer to pay for half
the cost of said improvements. A three percent (3%) inflation factor per year
may be applied. Cost of said improvements must be broken down into per foot
basis.
   C.   Per Foot Cost To Be Filed: If the original developer wishes to become
eligible for reimbursement, he/she must provide to the city a per foot cost of
each utility line that will be filed with the development file. The city
engineer will then determine if the costs are reasonable and in agreement with
this section. If and when new development occurs opposite to said development,
the city engineer shall determine how many feet of the new development should
be paid toward existing utilities.
   D.   Time Limit: A ten (10) year limit shall be placed on any eligible
reimbursements.
   E.   Utilities Beneficiaries: Anyone who may connect to the new lines in a
perpendicular fashion most likely on the opposite side of the public right of
way from said development.
   F.   Exceptions: Consecutive developments (not opposite to said development)
are not expected to participate in the cost of said improvements, but rather
become eligible for this policy.
   G.   City Acting As Developer: In cases where the city acts as the
developer, the city may impose said "reserved utility lines" clauses.
Furthermore, no time limits will be placed on "city" installed lines. (2003
Code § 12-08-04)
12-5B-5: EXCEPTION TO REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Application; Hearing: A subdivider may apply to the planning and zoning
commission for an exception or modification to providing one or more of the
required public improvements set forth in section
12-5B-2 of this article. Upon application for such exception, the planning and
zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the matter. Such
application must be made in conjunction with the initial application by the
subdivider.
   B.   Considerations: The planning and zoning commission may take one or more
of the following factors, in addition to other relevant factors, into
consideration in determining whether to recommend approval of the exception:
      1.   Size of the lot(s).
      2.   Drainage factors, including drainage qualities of the soil.
      3.   Availability of city water and sewer services.
      4.   Aesthetics of the surrounding and adjoining neighborhoods.
   C.   Recommendation; Conditions: Upon conducting a public hearing on the
matter, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend approval or denial
of the requested exception or modification to the city council. The planning
and zoning commission may attach conditions to their recommendation.
   D.   City Council Consideration: The issue shall then be scheduled to be
presented to the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting. A public hearing shall not be required at the city council meeting,
but may be held in the discretion of the mayor. At such meeting, the city
council may accept, reject, partially accept, or partially reject the
recommendations of the planning and zoning commission. In addition, the city
council may add, delete or modify conditions to granting the exception. (2003
Code § 12-08-05)
CHAPTER 6
DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Purpose
12-6-2: Minimum Design Standards Required
12-6-3: Streets
12-6-4: Conformance To Street Standards
12-6-5: Relation To Adjoining Street System
12-6-6: Projection Of Arterial Streets
12-6-7: Streets To Be Carried To Property Lines
12-6-8: Street Jogs Prohibited
12-6-9: Dead End Street Or Cul-De-Sac Standards
12-6-10: Frontage Roads
12-6-11: Street Widths
12-6-12: Intersections
12-6-13: Street Deflections
12-6-14: Reverse Curves
12-6-15: Subdivision Into Tracts Larger Than Ordinary Building Lots
12-6-16: Reserve And Planting Strips
12-6-17: Street Grades
12-6-18: Railroad On Or Abutting Subdivision
12-6-19: Half Streets Prohibited
12-6-20: Street Names And Numbering
12-6-21: Access To Streets Across Ditches
12-6-22: Street Vacations
12-6-23: Private Streets
12-6-24: Hardship To Owners Of Adjoining Property Avoided
12-6-25: Alleys
12-6-26: Easements
12-6-27: Blocks And Lots
12-6-28: Dedications And Reservations; Public Sites And Open Spaces
12-6-1: PURPOSE:
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the master planned official map.
(2003 Code § 12-07-01)
12-6-2: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and all
subdivisions, improvements and facilities done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards
set forth hereinafter in this chapter; provided, however, that any higher
standards adopted by any highway district, state highway department or health
agency shall prevail over those set forth herein. (2003 Code § 12-07-02)
12-6-3: STREETS:
Within a proposed subdivision, streets that will or should be classified as
arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all cases;
in general, all other streets shall also be dedicated to public use. (2003 Code
§ 12-07-03)
12-6-4: CONFORMANCE TO STREET STANDARDS:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the official map and master plan and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Where not shown on the
official map or master plan, the arrangement and other design standards of
streets shall conform to the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC)
standards. (2003 Code § 12-07-04)
12-6-5: RELATION TO ADJOINING STREET SYSTEM:
The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the
continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas. (2003 Code § 12-07-05)
12-6-6: PROJECTION OF ARTERIAL STREETS:
Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets. (2003
Code § 12-07-06)
12-6-7: STREETS TO BE CARRIED TO PROPERTY LINES:
When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible of being
subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the
tract proposed to be subdivided. (2003 Code § 12-07-07)
12-6-8: STREET JOGS PROHIBITED:
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet
(125') shall be avoided on arterial streets. (2003 Code § 12-07-08)
12-6-9: DEAD END STREET OR CUL-DE-SAC STANDARDS:
Dead end streets or cul-de-sacs, designed to be so permanently, shall not be
longer than six hundred feet (600') and shall be provided at the closed end
with a turnaround having an outside right of way radius of at least sixty two
feet (62'). If a dead end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround
shall be provided and provision made for future extension of the street into
the adjoining properties, including utility extensions terminated with a fire
hydrant for water lines and a manhole for sanitary sewer lines and stormwater
lines if appropriate. (2003 Code § 12-07-09)
12-6-10: FRONTAGE ROADS:
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing arterial street, the mayor
and city council may require frontage roads or other such treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection for residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic. (2003 Code § 12-07-10)
12-6-11: STREET WIDTHS:
   A.   Street widths shall be as set forth in the local highway technical
assistance council (LHTAC) manual for highway and street standards.
   B.   In front of areas designed and zoned or where a petition for a change
in zoning is contemplated for commercial use, to permit such use the street
width shall be increased by such amount on each side as may be deemed necessary
by the mayor and city council to assure the free flow of through traffic
without interference by parked or parking vehicles and to provide safe parking
space for such commercial or business district. (2003 Code § 12-07-11)
12-6-12: INTERSECTIONS:
The intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided
except where it is impracticable to secure a proper system otherwise. Streets
shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as possible,
and no intersections of streets at angles less than seventy degrees (70°) shall
be approved. Street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of twenty feet
(20') measured at the back of curbs when the said intersection occurs at right
angles. If an intersection occurs at an angle other than a right angle, it
shall be rounded with a curve of a radius acceptable to the mayor and city
council. In business districts, the mayor and council may permit comparable
cutoffs or chords.
   A.   Sight Triangles: See the local highway technical assistance council
(LHTAC) manual for highway and street standards.
   B.   "T" Intersections: "T" intersections may be used wherever such design
will not restrict the free movement of traffic. (2003 Code § 12-07-12)
12-6-13: STREET DEFLECTIONS:
See the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC) manual for highway
and street standards. (2003 Code § 12-07-13)
12-6-14: REVERSE CURVES:
A tangent at least two hundred feet (200') long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. (2003 Code § 12-07-14)
12-6-15: SUBDIVISION INTO TRACTS LARGER THAN ORDINARY BUILDING LOTS:
Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots
(lots greater than 1 acre), such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the
opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. (2003 Code § 12-
07-15)
12-6-16: RESERVE AND PLANTING STRIPS:
   A.   Reserved Utility Line: Where city owned utility lines that have been
installed at the cost of a developer, landowner or the city to serve new
development and where adjacent (usually opposite of the right of way)
landowners may benefit by connecting to said utility lines for service, the
adjacent landowner must pay, or reimburse the developer, landowner or city, a
fair portion of the actual cost of the respective utility line extensions.
   B.   Planting Strips: Planting strips shall be required to be placed next to
incompatible features such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial
uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screening shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') wide, and shall not be a part of the normal street
right of way or utility easement. (2003 Code § 12-07-16)
12-6-17: STREET GRADES:
See the local highway technical assistance council (LHTAC) manual for highway
and street standards. (2003 Code § 12-07-17)
12-6-18: RAILROAD ON OR ABUTTING SUBDIVISION:
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or limited
access highway right of way, the mayor and city council may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way at a distance
for the approximate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate
districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. (2003 Code § 12-
07-18)
12-6-19: HALF STREETS PROHIBITED:
Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of
these regulations and where the mayor and city council find it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(2003 Code § 12-07-19)
12-6-20: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERING:
All new streets shall be named and numbered pursuant to title 8, chapter 5 of
this code. (2003 Code § 12-07-20)
12-6-21: ACCESS TO STREETS ACROSS DITCHES:
The subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets, across all
ditches, in a standard method approved by the city engineer. (2003 Code § 12-
07-21)
12-6-22: STREET VACATIONS:
The mayor and city council shall not authorize the vacation of any street or
part of a street so dedicated for public use, if such vacation interferes with
the uniformity of the existing street pattern or any future street plans
prepared for the area. (2003 Code § 12-07-22)
12-6-23: PRIVATE STREETS:
Private streets shall be allowed within planned unit developments only. Public
utilities such as water, sewer, storm drains, etc., shall become privately
owned facilities at the right of way line. However, water meter boxes and
appurtenances shall remain the property and responsibility of the city. (2003
Code § 12-07-23)
12-6-24: HARDSHIP TO OWNERS OF ADJOINING PROPERTY AVOIDED:
The street arrangement shall not be such as to cause hardship to owners of
adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access
to it. (2003 Code § 12-07-24)
12-6-25: ALLEYS:
   A.   Residential Areas: Alleys shall be avoided in residential areas except
where deemed necessary by the city council for the continuing of existing city
utilities and the repair and maintenance of such utilities. Where such alleys
are required there shall be deducted as an alley, ten feet (10') on each side
of each rear lot line.
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Districts: Alleys shall be provided in
commercial and industrial districts, except that the mayor and city council may
waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for
service access, such as off street loading, unloading and parking consistent
with and adequate for the uses proposed.
   C.   Width: The right of way width of an alley shall be twenty feet (20')
minimum.
   D.   Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall not be permitted, except that
the mayor and city council may waive this requirement where such dead end alley
is unavoidable and where adequate turnaround facilities have been provided.
(2003 Code § 12-07-25)
12-6-26: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements Provided For Drainage: Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel or street, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right of way conforming substantially with the
lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose. Side lines of lots shall follow the natural
watercourse.
   B.   Utility Easements: Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided
along front lot lines, rear lot lines, and side lot lines when deemed
necessary; total easement width shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
   C.   Noncity Utility Easements: Unobstructed noncity utility easements shall
be provided along front lot lines, rear lot lines, and side lot lines when
deemed necessary; total easement width shall not be less than five feet (5').
(2003 Code § 12-07-26)
12-6-27: BLOCKS AND LOTS:
   A.   Factors Governing Dimensions: Block length and width or acreage within
bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the
area by this title and to provide for convenient access, circulating control
and safety of street traffic.
   B.   Lengths: Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand four hundred feet
(1,400'), or be less than five hundred feet (500').
   C.   Arrangement: A block shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers
of lots.
   D.   Crosswalks: In blocks over six hundred feet (600') long, pedestrian
crosswalks may be required by the planning and zoning commission in locations
deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. Such crosswalk
shall be eight feet (8') wide and be straight from street to street. Sidewalk
easements may be required through the blocks to permit foot traffic.
   E.   Dimensions: Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of this title.
   F.   Future Arrangements: Where parcels of land are subdivided into
unusually large lots (such as when large lots are approved for septic tanks),
the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for future
resubdividing into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the
ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks.
Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan
thereof shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to the
taking of such action.
   G.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
to straight lines or radical to curved street lines.
   H.   Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. Lots
abutting on a pedestrian walkway shall be treated as a corner lot.
   I.   Uninhabitable Lots: Lots subject to flooding and lots deemed by the
mayor and city council to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential
occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or
property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plat be set
aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
   J.   Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size leftover after
subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than
allowed to remain unusable parcels. (2003 Code § 12-07-27)
12-6-28: DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS; PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
   A.   Public Uses: Subdivisions containing fifteen (15) dwelling units or
more may be required to provide up to four hundred (400) square feet of park or
playground space for each dwelling unit therein.
   B.   Natural Feature: Existing natural features that add value to
residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such
as trees, watercourses, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets) shall
be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
   C.   Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and
large scale developments, the planning and zoning commission may require
sufficient park or open space facilities of acceptable size, location and site
characteristic that may be suitable for the proposed development.
   D.   Shown On Master Plan: Where a proposed park, playground, school or
other public use shown in a master plan is located in whole or in part within a
subdivision, the subdivision will dedicate or reserve adequate space for such
purpose in such area within the subdivision when the mayor and city council
finds the requirement to be reasonably necessary to the public health and
welfare.
   E.   Acceptance By City Required: The requiring of the dedication of public
spaces as provided in this title shall not constitute an acceptance of the
dedication by the city, unless such dedication is accepted by the mayor and
city council. (2003 Code § 12-07-28)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Purpose
12-7-2: Planned Unit And Condominium Subdivisions
12-7-3: Mobile Home Subdivisions
12-7-4: Large Scale Development Subdivisions
12-7-5: Cemetery Subdivisions
12-7-6: Subdivision Within Floodplain
12-7-7: Subdivision Within An Area Of Critical Concern
12-7-8: Tiny House Subdivisions
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify various types of developments that
normally pose special concerns to the commission and elected officials when
reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests. This chapter outlines the plan
submittal requirements and design standards that shall be taken into
consideration when acting on special developments. The provisions of this
chapter are in addition to the plan requirements, design standards and
improvement standards that are required by chapter 5, article B and chapter 6
of this title. (2003 Code § 12-09-01)
12-7-2: PLANNED UNIT AND CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   General: Planned unit and condominium developments shall be subject to
requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance and also subject to all
provisions within this title.
   B.   Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the Planning and
Zoning Commission with a colored rendering of adequate scale to show the
completed development that will include at least the following:
      1.   Architectural style and building design.
      2.   Building materials and color.
      3.   Landscaping.
      4.   Screening.
      5.   Garbage areas.
      6.   Parking.
      7.   Open space.
   C.   Private Streets: Private street construction standards shall be based
upon recommendations from the City Engineer. Adequate construction standards
may vary depending on the size of the development and the demands placed on
such improvements.
   D.   Homeowners' Association: The homeowners' association bylaws and other
similar deed restrictions, which provide for the control and maintenance of all
common areas, recreation facilities or open space, shall meet with the approval
of the City Council. Any and all powers as specified in such agreements may
also be assigned to the City Council for the purpose of assessing property for
delinquencies and enforcement of motor vehicle speed to protect the best
interests of the owners involved and of the general public.
   E.   Storage Areas: Storage areas shall be provided for the anticipated
needs of boats, campers and trailers. For typical residential development, one
adequate space shall be provided every two (2) living units. The City Council
may reduce this if there is a showing that the needs of a particular
development are less.
   F.   Parking Space: One additional parking space beyond that which is
required by the zoning ordinance may be required for every three (3) dwelling
units to accommodate visitor parking.
   G.   Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size
and location to be suitable for the service needs that are necessary for the
repair and maintenance of all common areas.
   H.   Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the
development and shall be of such shape and area to be usable and convenient to
the residents of the development.
   I.   Control During Development: Single ownership or control during
development shall be required and a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the
development is built and constructed as planned. (2003 Code § 12-09-02)
12-7-3: MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   General: Mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to any requirements
set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Special Requirements: Mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to the
following special requirements:
      1.   Developed as a planned unit development with a minimum lot area for
the planned development of five (5) acres.
      2.   Screening from adjacent areas, other than subdivisions of the same
type, by aesthetically acceptable fences, walls, living planting areas, and
existing natural or manmade barriers.
      3.   Creation of a homeowners' association to assure that all common
areas are adequately maintained. (2003 Code § 12-09-03)
12-7-4: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
Due to the impact that a large scale development would have on public utilities
and services, the developer shall submit the following information along with
the preliminary plat:
   A.   Identification of all public services that would be provided to the
development (i.e., fire protection, police protection, central water, central
sewer, road construction, parks and open space, recreation, maintenance,
schools and solid waste collection).
   B.   Estimate the public service costs to provide adequate service to the
development.
   C.   Estimate the tax revenue that will be generated from the development.
   D.   Suggested public means of financing the services for the development if
the cost for the public services would not be offset by tax revenue received
from the development. (2003 Code § 12-09-04)
12-7-5: CEMETERY SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Function: The developer shall provide the planning and zoning
commission with written documentation that will sufficiently explain the
functions of the proposed cemetery for either human or animal remains.
   B.   Compliance With Idaho Code: The developer shall submit a written
statement that has been prepared by an attorney that adequately assures the
compliance of the proposed cemetery with the procedural management requirements
that are outlined in Idaho Code title 27. (2003 Code § 12-09-05)
12-7-6: SUBDIVISION WITHIN FLOODPLAIN:
   A.   Flood Areas: For any proposed subdivision that is located within a
floodplain, the developer shall provide the planning and zoning commission with
a development plan of adequate scale and supporting documentation that will
show and explain at least the following:
      1.   Location of all planned improvements.
      2.   The location of the floodway and the floodway fringe per engineering
practices as specified by the army corps of engineers.
      3.   The location of the present water channel.
      4.   Any planned rerouting of waterways.
      5.   All major drainageways.
      6.   Areas of frequent flooding.
      7.   Means of floodproofing buildings.
      8.   Means of insuring loans for improvements within the floodplain.
   B.   Justification For Development:
      1.   Upon the determination that buildings are planned within the
floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated within the
floodplain area that will alter the flow of water, the developer shall
demonstrate conclusively to the planning and zoning commission that such
development will not present a hazard to life, limb or property, or will not
have adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or
drainage channel or the natural environment.
      2.   No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills,
structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually
or collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages. If only
part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, the City Council shall
limit development to that part and shall require the development proceed
consistent with that determination. (2003 Code § 12-09-06)
12-7-7: SUBDIVISION WITHIN AN AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN:
   A.   General: Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as areas of
critical concern by the City Council or by the State. Special consideration
shall be given to any proposed development within an area of critical concern
to assure that the development is necessary and desirable and in the public
interest in view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous or unique areas
that may be designated as areas of critical concern are as follows:
      1.   Avalanche paths.
      2.   Earthquake locations.
      3.   Unstable soils.
      4.   Unique animal life.
      5.   Unique plant life.
      6.   Scenic areas.
      7.   Historical significance.
      8.   Floodplain.
      9.   Other areas of critical concern.
   B.   Plan Submission: The developer shall prepare and submit an
environmental impact statement along with the preliminary plat application for
any development that is proposed within an area of critical concern.
   C.   Content Of Environmental Impact Statement: The content of the
environmental impact statement shall usually be prepared by an
interdisciplinary team of professionals that shall provide answers to the
following questions:
      1.   What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a
result of the proposed development?
      2.   What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur
so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
      3.   What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
      4.   What beneficial or detrimental effect would the development have on
the environment (i.e., animal life, plant life, social concerns, economic
noise, visual and other)? (2003 Code § 12-09-07)
12-7-8: TINY HOUSE SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   General: Tiny house planned unit developments shall be subject to
requirements outlined in the zoning ordinance and also subject to all
provisions within this section. This section intends that tiny home
subdivisions create a highly vegetated, park-like environment, where the
emphasis is placed on minimalist living. This section only allows for tiny
homes on permanent foundations and does not allow tiny homes on wheels (THOWs).
THOWs are encouraged and accommodated in the City of Blackfoot in designated RV
subdivision developments.
Benefits sought by this section are: increased housing stock, increased
affordable housing, facilitating intergenerational living, attracting new
residents, increased Municipal revenue, supporting vulnerable populations, and
generally providing residents with more lifestyle freedom. Infill of
underdeveloped single-family areas of the City is considered a strong benefit
of tiny house subdivision.
   B.   Site Development Plan: The developer shall provide the Planning and
Zoning Commission with a colored rendering of adequate scale to show the
completed development that will include at least the following:
      1.   Building Envelopes/Lot Layout: Development density shall not exceed
fourteen (14) units per acre.
      2.   Required Design Standards: Allowed building materials and color/
finish schedules. The developer will provide a schedule of the proposed
materials to be allowed in the development along with color/finish schedules.
      3.   Perimeter Landscaping, Pathways, And Vegetation Plan: This plan
shall include vegetative buffers made up of a combination of trees, hedges,
bushes, and/or shrubbery providing privacy and a parklike environment around
the perimeter of the development. An engineered pathway system must be
integrated into this landscaping plan.
      4.   Individual Shade And Screening Plan: This plan shall include
vegetative buffers made up of a combination of trees, hedges, bushes, and
shrubbery providing privacy and separation between housing units and areas as
well as a landscaping plan including both trees and shrubbery around the
perimeter of the development.
      5.   Screened Garbage Collection Areas: Garbage collection areas must be
screened and gated by a decorative masonry wall and gate system.
      6.   Roads And Visitor Parking: Roads and common area visitor parking.
      7.   Designated Usable Open Space And Recreation Facilities: Open space
requirements will be governed by the maximum lot coverage requirements of the
individual overlying zone.
      8.   Utility Infrastructure: Designate locations for water, sewer, power,
maintenance building, and site drainage infrastructure.
This Site Development Plan must be reviewed and recommended for approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission before a preliminary plat application is
submitted.
   C.   Private Streets And Pathways: Private street construction standards
shall be based upon recommendations from the City Public Works and Fire
Department. Streets will meet minimum access standards. Construction standards
may vary depending on the location and size of the development and the demands
placed on such improvements. Roads are anticipated to be constructed with a
reduced street section that may or may not include curb and gutter. A Site
Drainage Plan is required. An engineered Pedestrian Pathway System is required
and replaces the City sidewalk requirement. Generally, parking will not be
allowed on streets or access ways other than in approved turnouts and other
common parking areas.
   D.   Homeowners' Association: Homeowners' association bylaws and other deed
restrictions, which provide for the control and maintenance of all common
areas, recreation facilities, and open space, shall be submitted and be
approved by the City.
   E.   Storage Areas: Screened storage areas or lots shall be provided for the
anticipated needs of boats, campers, and trailers - one (1) 220-square foot
space shall be provided for every three (3) living units.
   F.   Parking Space: One parking space of 12 feet x 22 feet is required for
each living unit, and an additional visitor parking space is needed for two (2)
dwelling units. These may be provided as distributed pullouts, or as a central
parking area/lot.
   G.   Maintenance Building: A maintenance building shall be provided, size
and location to be suitable for the service needs that are necessary for the
repair and maintenance of all common areas.
   H.   Open Space: The location of open space shall be appropriate to the
development and shall be of such shape and area to be usable and convenient to
the residents of the development. Open space requirements will comply with the
maximum lot coverage requirements of the applicable overlying zone.
   I.   Control During Development: Single ownership or control during
development shall be required and a time limit may be imposed to guarantee the
development is built and constructed as planned.
   J.   Lot Square Footage: Within a tiny house subdivision, lot square footage
shall be a minimum of the building footprint plus the one required parking area
of 12 feet x 22 feet. This parking area shall be paved upon application for a
building permit.
   K.   Plat And Public Hearing Requirements: Tiny house subdivisions will
follow all other requirements for platting and public hearing required by this
title, not in conflict with this section and although no minimum acreage for a
plat shall be required, tiny house subdivision plats are not anticipated to be
approved larger than twenty (20) acres. Tiny house subdivisions do not qualify
for a short plat subdivision process due to the statutory requirements of this
section requiring a new road system and other amenities. (Ord. 2175, 2-5-2019)
TITLE 13
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
13-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Purpose, Objectives, Severability And Repeal
Of Conflicting Provisions
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: General Provisions
13-1-4: Administration
13-1-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
13-1-6: Variance And Appeal Procedures
13-1-7: Penalties For Violation
13-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES, SEVERABILITY AND REPEAL
OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho by Idaho
Code sections 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to
adopt a floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies
floodplains and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains
that are designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of
its citizenry.
   B.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      1.   Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
      3.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development within the
area of special flood hazard which may increase flood damage or erosion;
      4.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
      5.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers that help to store or channel floodwaters.
   C.   Objectives: The objectives of this chapter are to:
      1.   Protect human life, health and property;
      2.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
      3.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
      4.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      5.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      6.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
   D.   Severability: If any provision of this chapter or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to that end the provisions of this chapter are severable.
   E.   Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions: Upon enactment of this chapter all
other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby
repealed. All sections of the aforementioned ordinances repealed by this
chapter shall remain in force as to the authorization and enforcement of said
ordinances prior to the effective date hereof.
   F.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Blackfoot or by
any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2129,
3-3-2015)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation
of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, V. Also known as the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded each year. Also known as the "regulatory flood".
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood
in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on
the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BOARD: The elected governing city council of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from
which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points
has been the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical
datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring
heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial
improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of
mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials;
specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term
"development" does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair
of any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or
drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to
lawful rights and obligations.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk
and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before November 15, 1979.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 15,
1979.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the national flood insurance program.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by
floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the
federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard
and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance
administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, floodway
boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
   B.    The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the
elevation of the one percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood), plus any
increase in flood elevation due to proposed floodway encroachment, plus 0.1
foot of freeboard. Therefore the flood protection elevation for Bingham County
is equal to the BFE, plus proposed encroachment, plus 0.1 foot of freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN 1 : The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is
surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood
fringe.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY/REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and
those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge
and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood
and delineated on the FIRM.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety added above a BFE level for the purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic
effects of urbanization in a watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for HAG related to
building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or to a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the secretary of the interior, or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
      1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LETTER OF MAP CORRECTIONS (LOMC): Official FEMA determination letters used to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following
categories:
Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment by FEMA
as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum national flood
insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or
revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps,
or flood insurance studies.
Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data showing that
a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area.
A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes
that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard area.
Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data showing that,
usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood elevations,
floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type
of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination that a structure of parcel has been
elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is excluded from the
special flood hazard area.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the
structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for LAG related
to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement)
used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking and eating,
or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could
be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl space. An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a
structure's lowest floor. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood
insurance premium for a building, home or business.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced
after November 15, 1979, and includes subsequent improvements to the structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pad(s) is
completed on or after November 15, 1979).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis,
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection,
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty
truck, and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
market value of the structure should be: a) the appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or b) in the
case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless
of the actual amount of repair work performed.
The term does not include either:
   A.   A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this
chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 2129, 3-
3-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 46-1021.
13-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter applies to all
special flood hazard areas within the areas of the city of Blackfoot, Idaho.
All persons, entities and government units, including their political
subdivision, shall comply with this chapter unless specifically exempted by
state or federal law. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need to
conform to appropriate state or federal regulations and the need to obtain any
other required permits or to allow uses or structures that are otherwise
prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Basis For Area Of Special Flood Hazard: The special flood hazard areas
identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance
study (FIS) for the city of Blackfoot, Idaho, with accompanying flood insurance
rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other
supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter.
The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the planning and zoning and city hall
offices.
   C.   Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain
development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special
flood hazard areas established in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)
13-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator: The building
official is hereby appointed as the floodplain administrator who is responsible
for administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Procedures: Application for a floodplain development permit
shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by the
administrator or the administrator's designee prior to starting development
activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Application Stage:
         a.   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project
area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures,
earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage
facilities;
         b.   Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or
highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including crawl spaces or
basements, of all proposed structures;
         c.   Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed;
         d.   Design certification from a registered professional engineer or
architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure not exempted
by V-D will meet the floodproofing criterion in section
13-1-5 of this chapter;
         e.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development.
      2.   Construction Stage:
         a.   For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit
holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification
of the floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation
or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential
structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
         b.   Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain
administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the
corrections may be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop work
order for the project.
      3.   Technical Review:
         a.   If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the
technical data that is part of the application, the community may contract for
an independent engineering review or require a review by FEMA through the
letter of map revision process.
         b.   The applicant will pay the costs of an independent technical
review.
      4.   Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
         a.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days.
         b.   A floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty
(180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially
begun and thereafter is pursued to completion.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator: Duties of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      2.   Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have
been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law. Copies of such permits shall be provided by the applicant
and maintained on file.
      3.   When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available,
then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are not
available, the floodplain administrator shall take into account the flood
hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building
site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
      5.   Obtain, and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical
datum on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor
level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved
structures.
      6.   Obtain, and record the actual elevation, in relation to the vertical
datum on the effective FIRM to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      7.   When floodproofing is required for a structure as per section
13-1-5 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification
of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect.
      8.   Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
chapter.
      9.   All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in the city of Blackfoot's planning and zoning office and shall be
open for public inspection. (Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)
13-1-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   Subdivision Standards:
      1.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
      2.   All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include
the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for
subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five
(5) acres, whichever is less.
      4.   All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
      5.   All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   B.   Construction Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard the
following provisions are required:
      1.   New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      2.   New construction and substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage and
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing
structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, that
includes a fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the
foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an unfinished or
flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings with:
            (1)   A total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately
below the opening;
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwater in both directions without manual intervention.
         b.   To comply with the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of
vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises, or entry to the elevated area.
         c.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
         d.   For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the
guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located in
special flood hazard areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance,
specifically:
            (1)   Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the
velocity of floodwaters exceed five feet (5') per second;
            (2)   Interior grade of the crawl space below the BFE must not be
more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
            (3)   Height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the
lowest interior grade of the crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must
not exceed four feet (4') at any point;
            (4)   Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawl space.
      4.   All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all
electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other facilities shall be designed and/
or elevated to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding.
      5.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
      8.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure
that is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken
only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety
standards.
   C.   Manufactured Home Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard where
the flood protection elevation is established, these standards for manufactured
homes and recreational vehicles that are an allowed use under the zoning
ordinance shall apply:
      1.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:
         a.   On individual lots or parcels.
         b.   In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or
subdivisions.
         c.   In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or
subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a
flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood
protection elevation.
      2.   Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the
flood protection elevation or one foot (1') above the level of the base flood
elevation, whichever is higher.
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by
reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent
strength) of no less than thirty six inches (36") above the highest adjacent
grade.
      3.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements.
      4.   Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the
flood vent requirements in subsection B4 of this section.
   D.   Accessory Structures: Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than
three thousand (3,000) square feet. Such a structure must meet the following
standards:
      1.   It shall not be used for human habitation;
      2.   It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      3.   It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      4.   It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      5.   Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated
or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
      6.   It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection B4 of this
section.
   E.   Recreational Vehicle Standards: In all areas of special flood hazard,
recreational vehicles must either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition;
or
      3.   The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new
construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements.
   F.   Floodway Standards: The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:
      1.   A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment
review to determine its effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must
include:
         a.   Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or
construction of a structure will not obstruct flood flows and will not cause an
increase in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the project site;
         b.   Determination and documentation that grading, excavation, channel
improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an obstruction, do
not cause increases in downstream flood flows;
         c.   Certification and documentation by a licensed professional
engineer that the project will not result in a rise in flood heights;
         d.   The administrator may make the encroachment determination for
minor projects, such as projects that do not increase the natural grade (e.g.,
paving a driveway or parking lot at existing grade, open fences and small
isolated obstructions such as a mailbox or telephone pole).
      2.   Upon demonstrating that there are no alternatives, the applicant may
propose an encroachment in the floodway that will cause an increase in the base
flood elevation in excess of the allowable level provided that the applicant
obtain a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA before the development
can be approved and permitted.
   G.   Standards For Zones With Base Flood Elevations: In special flood hazard
areas designated A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following
provisions are required:
      1.   New Residential Construction And Substantial Improvements:
         a.   Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction
or substantial improvement of any residential structure or manufactured home
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the
community's flood protection elevation.
         b.   If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction or the substantial
improvement of any nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH
must be floodproofed if the new construction or improvement is not elevated.
The structure and attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed
to be watertight to the flood protection elevation or to one foot (1') above
the base flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect must certify that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting these provisions, and shall provide certification to the
administrator.
      3.   Places Where Floodway Not Determined: Where the floodway has not
been determined, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted in zones A1-30 and AE on the
effective FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. Applicants of
proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one foot
(1') are required to obtain and submit to the floodplain administrator, a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.
      4.   Postconstruction Application: Postconstruction, the applicant must
apply to FEMA for a letter of map revision for changes to the flood hazard map
proposed in the CLOMR.
      5.   Drainage Paths: In AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide floodwater around and away from proposed and existing structures.
   H.   Standards For Zones Without Base Flood Elevations And/Or Floodway (A
Zones): These standards apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist
but no base flood elevation data have been provided (A zones), or where base
flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated.
      1.   When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified
by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If data
are not available from any source, only then provisions of subsections H2 and
H3 of this section shall apply.
         a.   Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood
elevation data, applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot (1') shall obtain a conditional letter of map
revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision postconstruction.
      2.   No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located
within an area equal to the width of the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever
is greater, measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless certification by
a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment will not
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.
      3.   In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new
construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the
lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawl space)
elevated no less than two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade at the
building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in
subsections B and C of this section.
   I.   Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones): Shallow flooding
areas designated AO zones, are areas of special flood hazard that have base
flood depths of one to three feet (3'), with no clearly defined channel. The
following provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the adjacent grade at least as high as the flood depth number
specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no flood depth
number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at
least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in
accordance with the construction standards in subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant
utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be watertight to the
specified base flood level or at least two feet (2') above highest adjacent
grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these
provisions, and shall provide certification to the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away
from all proposed and existing structures.
   J.   Alteration Of A Watercourse: A watercourse is considered altered when
any change occurs within its banks.
      1.   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional
engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not
be diminished.
      2.   Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Idaho
department of water resources stream channel alteration program must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a water source. Evidence of
notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and to the
federal emergency management agency.
      3.   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished.
      4.   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in subsections K1 and K2 of this section when an alteration of a watercourse
results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area,
including the placement of culverts.
   K.   Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
      1.   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date
such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         a.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         b.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area in accordance with subsection A3 of this section;
         c.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts;
         d.   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring
establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection A3 of this
section.
      2.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data
prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or
letter of map revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for
these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 2129,
3-3-2015)
13-1-6: VARIANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Variance:
      1.   An application for a variance must be submitted to the floodplain
administrator on forms provided and include at a minimum the same information
required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis for the
variance request.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance
request will be set for a public hearing before the board.
      3.   Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published
in the official newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. In
addition to the newspaper publication, written notice shall be provided to all
adjoining property owners by parcel post.
      4.   The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the
criteria set out herein is on the applicant.
   B.   Criteria For Variances:
      1.   Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the
elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structure constructed below the base flood
level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   Variances may be issued upon:
         a.   A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
      5.   Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants,
economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in
densely populated residential neighborhoods.
   C.   Variance Decision: The decision to either grant or deny a variance by
the board shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval
and denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on
notice along with the written decision that the permitted building will have
its lowest floor below the flood protection elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage
risk.
   D.   Appeals: The board shall hear and decide appeals from the
interpretations of the administrator.
      1.   An appeal must be filed with the administrator within fourteen (14)
days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the administrator.
Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure to exhaust the
administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the
administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the
appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for
a public meeting to be heard by the board. The board shall consider the
following in ruling on an appeal:
         a.   All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, including:
            (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to
the injury of others;
            (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
            (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
            (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
            (5)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
            (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
            (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
            (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
            (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
            (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;
            (11)   The cost of providing government services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   E.   Decision: The board's decision on appeal shall be in writing and set
out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the decision.
(Ord. 2129, 3-3-2015)
13-1-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered
unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than
one hundred eighty (180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues may be
considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Blackfoot from taking such
other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord.
2129, 3-3-2015)
