COUNTY OF BONNEVILLE, IDAHO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 270-25, 10-16-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
    TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Acceptance
   
10.03   Amendments
   
10.04   Maintenance of county code
   
10.05   Repeal of general ordinances
   
10.06   Public utility ordinances
   
10.07   Saving clause
   
10.08   General constructional rule
   
10.09   Plural and singular words
   
10.10   Masculine and feminine gender
   
10.11   Priority of ordinance
   
10.12   Definitions
   
10.13   Captions
   
10.14   Severability
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   This codification of the general ordinances of the County of Bonneville is
declared to be the official code of ordinances of the County of Bonneville.
§ 10.02 ACCEPTANCE.
   Any official copy of the code shall be received without further proof in all
courts and in all administrative tribunals of the state.
§ 10.03 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Any ordinance amending the code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended. All such ordinances
shall comply with the provisions of the code and Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter
9, regarding passage, execution and publication of ordinances.
   (B)   All such amendments shall be promptly forwarded to the codifiers by
the County Clerk, and such ordinance shall be promptly published and inserted
in its proper place in each copy of the county code.
§ 10.04 MAINTENANCE OF COUNTY CODE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of each published ordinance from the codifiers, the
County Clerk shall promptly forward a copy of each page thereof to each person
having an official copy of the county code.
   (B)   The County Clerk may collect a fee for each copy of the county code
and an annual fee for maintenance thereof; provided, that such fees shall be
established by resolution or ordinance duly passed by the Board of County
Commissioners.
§ 10.05 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the county are hereby repealed, except as herein
specifically preserved or are, by implication, reserved from repeal, subject to
the saving clauses herein contained, excluding, without limitation, the special
ordinances relating to the following subjects: tax levies; appropriation of
public moneys; boundaries and annexations; franchises; ordinances granting
special rights to persons or correspondence; contracts; issuance of warrants;
public salaries; ordinances establishing name or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement districts; bonds; local elections; the sale or
exchange of real estate; sign ordinances; economic development; urban renewal;
public utilities; zoning; and all special ordinances of any kind, except for
those provisions in such special ordinances which the code expressly amends.
§ 10.06 PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance or section thereof relating to railroad or railroad crossings
of streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service
or rates of public utilities, shall be repealed by the adoption of the code or
by §
10.05, except as this code specifically provides for such repeal.
§ 10.07 SAVING CLAUSE.
   Any ordinance amending or repealing any section of the code shall not be
deemed or construed to abate any pending action based upon such amended or
repealed section, nor shall the passage of such ordinance prevent the arrest,
prosecution and punishment of any violation of such section committed prior to
the effective date of such ordinance.
§ 10.08 GENERAL CONSTRUCTIONAL RULE.
   Except as expressly stated in the code, all words shall have their ordinary,
generally accepted meaning.
§ 10.09 PLURAL AND SINGULAR WORDS.
   Whenever any word in the code is used in either the singular or in the
plural form, then such word shall be deemed to include both the plural and
singular forms of such word, unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.
§ 10.10 MASCULINE AND FEMININE GENDER.
   When any person is referred to in any section of the code by use of the
masculine gender, then such reference shall be deemed to include the feminine
gender unless the context indicates an intent otherwise.
§ 10.11 PRIORITY OF ORDINANCE.
   In the event of any discrepancy or conflict between the code and any
ordinance passing or amending the same section of the code, then the provisions
of the ordinance shall prevail.
§ 10.12 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting on behalf of another.
   BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of the County of Bonneville, Idaho.
   COUNTY. The County of Bonneville, Idaho.
   CRIME. An act in violation of this code.
   FELONY. A crime as defined under Idaho Code § 18-111.
   IDAPA. Idaho Administrative Regulations. A numbering designation for all
administrative rules in the state which denotes rules promulgated in accordance
with the State Administrative Procedure Act, Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 52.
   INFRACTION. A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is
punishable only by a penalty not exceeding $100 and for which no incarceration
may be imposed.
   LICENSE. The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, trade,
profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR. Every crime, except a felony.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.
   OFFENSE. A crime or other violation of this code.
   OPERATOR. The person who is generally in charge of or responsible for
conducting any business, profession or enterprise.
   OWNER. Any person owning real or personal property, including any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, remainderman or person
holding a life estate or reversionary interest of any kind.
   PERSON. A human being and any public or private corporation, firm,
partnership, trust, estate, sole proprietorship, association, organization,
government or any other entity recognized under state law.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Money, goods, chattels, effects, rights in action and all
written instruments evidencing any pecuniary obligation.
   PROSECUTING ATTORNEY. The Prosecuting Attorney of Bonneville County.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   STATE. The State of Idaho.
   STREET. All public roads, ways, alleys and rights-of-way used for the
movement of vehicular traffic, including any public sidewalks adjacent thereto.
   TENANT. Any person who occupies any building or real property for a
consideration to the owner.
§ 10.13 CAPTIONS.
   The captions and titles used at the commencement of each section or division
of the code are used only to indicate the content of the section and shall not
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions thereafter.
§ 10.14 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this code are hereby declared to be severable and if any
provision of this code or the application of such provision to any person or
circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by other county
ordinances, every offense declared to be a misdemeanor is punishable by
imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine not
exceeding $300, or by both.
(Ord. 123-81, passed 6-23-1981)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
      
31.   LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
33.   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
      
34.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section
   
30.01   Purpose
   
30.02   Requirements
   
30.03   Form of petition
   
30.04   Verification of petitions
   
30.05   Conduct of election
   
30.06   Form of initiative and referendum ballot
§ 30.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is passed pursuant to the laws of the state and in accordance
with the authority vested in the Board of County Commissioners to provide for
direct legislation by the people of the county through initiative and
referendum.
(Ord. 115-79, passed 10-29-1979)
§ 30.02 REQUIREMENTS.
   In order for an initiative or referendum to be placed on the ballot in the
county, the following requirements must be met.
   (A)   Petitioners for initiative or referendum shall be registered voters
equal to 20% of the total number registered to vote at the last general
election in the county.
   (B)   Petitions for referendum shall be filed not less than 60 days
following the final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum.
   (C)   A special election for initiative or referendum shall be provided not
more than 90 days following the certification of the petitions, provided that
in the event a general or primary election will occur within the 90 days, the
initiative or referendum shall be submitted at the time of the general or
primary election, provided that the petition is submitted for certification
within 45 days of the scheduled general or primary election, then the
initiative or referendum will be submitted at a special election, unless the
Clerk has sufficient time to prepare the initiative or referendum for the
electors at the time of the general or primary election.
(Ord. 115-79, passed 10-29-1979)
§ 30.03 FORM OF PETITION.
   (A)   A petition for county initiative or referendum shall be instituted by
filing with the County Clerk a verified written petition requesting such
initiative or referendum. The petition must be signed by registered electors of
the county equal in number to 20% of the number of electors registered to vote
at the last general election held in said county.
   (B)   The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form.
 
Initiative Petition
To the Honorable                               County Clerk for the County of Bonneville
 
We, the undersigned, citizens and registered electors of the County of Bonneville, respectfully demand that the following
proposed Bonneville County Ordinance, to-wit: (setting out full text of ordinance proposed) shall be submitted to the
electors of Bonneville County for their approval or rejection at a special (or primary or general) election to be held on
the                   day of              , A.D., 20                 , and each for himself or herself says: I have
personally signed this petition; I am a registered elector of the County of Bonneville; my name; residence; mailing
address; and the date I signed the petition are correctly and legibly printed or written after my signature.
 
Signature, name (printed), mailing address (Post Office), residence and date.
(Here follow 20 numbered lines for signatures)
 
   (C)   The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the County
Commissioners shall be in substantially the same form, with appropriate title
and changes, setting out in full the text of the act to be referred to the
people for their approval or rejection.
   (D)   (1)   Before or at the time of beginning to circulate any petition for
initiative or referendum, the person or persons, organization or organizations
under whose authority the initiative or referendum petition is to be circulated
shall send or deliver to the County Clerk a copy of such petition duly signed
by at least 20 electors eligible to sign such petition. The County Clerk shall
immediately examine the petition and specify the form and kind and size of
paper on which the petition shall be printed and circulated for further
signatures. All petitions for initiative or referendum and sheets for
signatures shall be printed on a good-quality bond or ledger paper, on eight
and one-half inches in width by 13 inches in length, with a margin of one and
three-fourths inches at the top for binding, and the sheets for signatures
shall have numbered lines thereon from one to 20 for signatures. The petition
shall be prepared in sections, with each section numbered consecutively.
      (2)   Each section of the petition must have a printed copy of the
petition as the first page, and each section shall have attached to it not more
than ten sheets for signatures.
      (3)   The County Clerk shall indicate in writing on the initiative or
referendum petition that he or she has approved it as to form and the date of
such approval. The County Clerk shall inform the person or persons,
organization or organizations under whose authority the petition is to be
circulated, in writing, that the petition must be perfected with the required
number of certified signatures within 60 days following approval as to form.
Any petition that has not been perfected with the required number of certified
signatures within the 60 days allowed shall be declared null and void.
   (E)   Each section of each petition containing signatures shall be verified
in substantially the following form by the person who circulated said section
of the petition, by his or her affidavit thereon, as a part thereof, to wit:
 
State of Idaho         )
)   S.S.
County of Bonneville   )
 
I,                                 swear, under penalty of perjury, that every person who signed this sheet
of the foregoing petition signed his or her name thereto in my presence. I believe that each has stated his
or her name and the accompanying required information on the signature sheet correctly, and that the person
was eligible to sign this petition.
Signature                                 
Post Office Address                                 
                                 
 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this                     day of                       , 20               
 
 
                                 
Notary Public
 
Notary
Seal    Residing at                                     
 
(Ord. 115-79, passed 10-29-1979)
§ 30.04 VERIFICATION OF PETITIONS.
   (A)   All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented to the
County Clerk, and a cursory examination of the petitions shall be made to
determine whether the petitions apparently contain the necessary number of
signatures.
      (1)   If the total number of signatures on the petition is not sufficient
to satisfy the number required by §
30.03, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by the
Clerk who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition of the number
of signatures needed, and further signatures may be gathered.
      (2)   If the cursory examination of the signature sheets reveals:
erasures on any signature; illegible or undecipherable signatures; signatures
not properly identified by all of the information required on the sheet;
duplicate signatures; or signatures of persons who have requested in writing to
have their names removed from the petition, the officer making such cursory
examination shall summarily reject such signatures, and such rejected
signatures shall not be counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through
with ink and initialed by the rejecting officer. If the total number of
signatures not rejected is not sufficient to satisfy the number required by §
30.03, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be retained by the
officer who shall notify in writing the person filing the petition of the
number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be gathered.
   (B)   All initiative or referendum petitions presented to the County Clerk
found to apparently contain the necessary number of signatures, after the
examination provided for above, shall be filed with the County Clerk and become
public records of the county not to be returned. The County Clerk shall examine
each signature purported to be that of a registered elector from his or her
county and compare each such signature with the registration documents
available to the County Clerk. The County Clerk shall summarily reject all
signatures as listed in division (A)(2) above, and all which are not the
signatures of registered electors, and such rejected signatures shall not be
counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed
by the rejecting officer.
   (C)   The County Clerk shall certify each signature found to comply with all
of the requirements of this act by an appropriate mark before each signature.
   (D)   The County Clerk shall total the number of certified signatures and,
if found to total the number of signatures required by §
30.03, shall proceed as provided. The County Clerk may take not to exceed ten
days after filing of the petition to complete his or her examination.
   (E)   In the event that a petition filed with the County Clerk does not
contain the required number of certified signatures, the County Clerk shall
inform the person or organization under whose authority the petition was
circulated that the petition is defective for lack of certified signatures, and
shall specify the number of additional signatures required to make the petition
valid. The petition must be perfected within 30 days of the date that the Clerk
finds the petition defective for lack of certified signatures. If the petition
is not perfected within the 30-day period, the Clerk shall declare the petition
null and void.
   (F)   In the event that a petition filed with the County Clerk is found by
the County Clerk to contain the required number of certified signatures, the
County Clerk shall promptly, by certified mail, inform the petitioner that the
initiative or referendum petition is in proper form.
(Ord. 115-79, passed 10-29-1979)
§ 30.05 CONDUCT OF ELECTION.
   In the event that the petition contains the proper number of registered
voters and complies in all other respects to the requirements of this chapter,
a special election shall be called by the County Clerk within 90 days of the
certification of the petition by the County Clerk, unless a general or primary
election will occur within the 90 days, in which case the initiative or
referendum will be held in conjunction with the general or primary election as
provided in §
30.02(C).
(Ord. 115-79, passed 10-29-1979)
§ 30.06 FORM OF INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM BALLOT.
   (A)   In the event of an initiative election, the title shall be given,
followed by a statement by the Prosecuting Attorney giving the purpose of the
proposed initiative. Provisions will be made for electors to vote “yes” or “no”
on the proposal.
   (B)   In the event of a referendum election, the ballot presentation shall
follow substantially the same form.
   (C)   The Board of County Commissioners will act as board of canvassers as
provided in Idaho Code § 31-804. In the event a majority of the electors vote
“yes” to an initiative, the County Clerk shall immediately after the completion
thereof, proclaim the results, from which date the ordinance shall be in full
force and effect.
   (D)   In the event a majority of the electors vote “yes” to a referendum,
the ordinance in question will immediately become null and void.
(Ord. 115-79, passed 10-29-1979)
CHAPTER 31: LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
31.01   Aid for public training
   
31.02   Sheriff’s Reserve
§ 31.01 AID FOR PUBLIC TRAINING.
   Pursuant to the authority vested in the Board of County Commissioners under
Idaho Code Title 19, Chapter 51, it is hereby ordered as follows.
   (A)   The County Commissioners declare that it desires to qualify to receive
aid for public training from the Law Enforcement Planning Commission under the
provisions of Idaho Code § 19-5118.
   (B)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 19-5117, the county, while receiving aid from
the Law Enforcement Planning Commission pursuant to said Chapter 51, will
adhere to the standards for employment and training established by the State
Peace Officer Standards and Training Advisory Council.
(Ord. passed 2-9-1971)
§ 31.02 SHERIFF’S RESERVE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COUNTY. Bonneville County, Idaho.
      COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of Bonneville County,
Idaho.
      MEMBER. A member of the Bonneville County Sheriff’s Reserve.
      RESERVE. The Bonneville County Sheriff’s Reserve.
      SHERIFF. The Sheriff of Bonneville County, Idaho.
   (B)   Sheriff’s Reserve created. The County Sheriff’s Reserve is hereby
created. Said Reserve shall consist of as many members as may be determined by
the Sheriff.
   (C)   Unlawful to interfere. Members shall perform only such duties and
services as may be directed by the Sheriff. It shall be unlawful and a petty
misdemeanor for any person to willfully resist, delay, interfere with or
obstruct any member in the discharge, or in the attempt to discharge, any of
his or her duties of office.
   (D)   Rules, regulations and operating policy. Rules, regulations and
operating policy, governing the operation of the Reserve, shall be established
by the Sheriff, and members shall comply with such policy.
   (E)   Members are peace officers. In the enforcement of the laws of the
county and the state, and in the performance of other such duties as may be
designated by the Sheriff, all duly authorized members shall be deemed to have
all the powers of a peace officer during the hours such member is assigned to
duty.
   (F)   Unlawful to impersonate. It shall be unlawful for any person to
falsely impersonate or represent himself or herself to be a member, or to wear,
use display or possess a badge or identification card of the reserve unless he
or she is a member of the Reserve. No member shall wear his or her uniform or
display his or her badge except at those times and in the manner prescribed by
the Sheriff.
   (G)   Compensation and insurance.
      (1)   Members shall receive compensation from the county for any service
rendered in such amounts as may be prescribed by the County Commissioners, but
in no event shall such compensation exceed the amount which would be paid to a
first-year Deputy Sheriff of the County Sheriff’s Department for similar
service.
      (2)   In the event of injury or death of a member while he or she is
discharging duties assigned to him or her by the Sheriff, said member or his or
her beneficiaries shall be entitled to benefits as may be provided in a special
risk insurance policy to be maintained and paid for by the county.
      (3)   Vehicle operation and false arrest and detention coverage will be
provided in the general liability insurance policy of the county the same as
would be provided for the Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff of the county.
   (H)   Resignation and dismissal. Each member of the reserve shall have the
right to resign from said reserve at any time. The Sheriff may dismiss a member
at any time without hearing.
(Ord. passed 3-20-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
Emergency Management Planning and Administration
   
32.01   Purpose
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   County Emergency Management Organization
   
32.04   County Emergency Management Services Director
   
32.05   Continuity of county government
   
32.06   Local disaster emergency declarations
   
32.07   Overall authority
   
32.08   Non-discrimination
   
32.09   Immunity from liability
Consolidated Emergency Communication System
   
32.20   Creation of system
   
32.21   Definitions
   
32.22   Financing
   
32.23   Service area
   
32.24   Governing board
   
32.25   Administrator
   
32.26   Net savings
   
32.27   Emergency communications fee
   
32.28   Joint powers
   
32.29   Authorization of governing board to appoint official
   
32.30   Right to fee not affected by non-service
   
32.31   Treasurer’s account
   
32.32   Pay phone conversion
 
   
32.99   Penalty
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLANNING AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 32.01 PURPOSE.
   The declared purposes of this subchapter are to provide for the preparation
and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within
this county in the event of a disaster or emergency; to set forth the line of
succession of authority for continuity of county government; and to provide for
the coordination of the emergency management functions of this county with all
other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and
organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency
management activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed
conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and
property of the county.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made
cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave
action, volcanic activity, explosion riot or hostile military or paramilitary
action.
   EMERGENCY. An occurrence or imminent threat of a disaster or condition
threatening life or property which requires state emergency assistance to
supplement local efforts to save the lives and protect property or to avert or
lessen the threat of a disaster.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and carrying out of all emergency
functions to prevent, minimize, respond to and repair injury and damage
resulting from a disaster other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible or for search and rescue missions that are the
responsibility of the Sheriff. It shall not include, nor does any provision of
this subchapter apply, to any condition relating to a labor controversy.
   LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY. A local disaster emergency may be declared only by
a mayor or Chairperson of the County Commissioners, within their respective
political subdivisions. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven days, except by or with the consent of the governing board of
the political subdivisions. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or
terminating a LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed promptly with the local County Recorder.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.03 COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Membership. The County Emergency Management Organization consists of
the following six major groups:
      (1)   Executive group. The Board of County Commissioners and the County
Emergency Management Services Director. A mayor becomes a part of the executive
group when a disaster emergency is declared in their municipality;
      (2)   Services group. Members of the county administrative services
staff, legal representatives and the Emergency Public Information Annex
Coordinator;
      (3)   Analysis group. The Damage Assessment and Radiological Protection
Annex Coordinators;
      (4)   Operations group. The Fire; Law Enforcement; Communications;
Warning; Evacuation; Public Works; Health, Medical and Mortuary; and Hazardous
Materials Incident Response Annex Coordinators;
      (5)   Support group. Resource Management; Human Services; and Shelter,
Reception and Care Annex Coordinators; and
      (6)   Liaison agencies group. Representatives or state and federal
agencies; industry; public utilities; schools; volunteer agencies; and mayors.
   (B)   Duties. The County Emergency Management Organization is hereby
empowered to review and recommend for adoption, by the Board of Commissioners,
emergency management and emergency operations plans, mutual aid agreements and
such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as are necessary to
implement such plans and agreements.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.04 COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of the Emergency Management Services is the
administrative head of the County Office of Emergency Management Services and
Director of the Emergency Operations Center. The Director shall be appointed by
the Board of Commissioners and reports to the Chairperson of the Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   The Director is hereby empowered to:
      (1)   Act as chief of staff of the County Emergency Management
Organization and to direct county efforts to accomplish the purposes of this
subchapter;
      (2)   Facilitate coordination and cooperation between divisions, services
and staff of the Emergency Management Organization of this county and to
resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;
      (3)   Develop emergency operations plans and programs for emergency
preparedness, response and recovery actions which are consistent with national
and state plans and programs, and shall have such other duties as may be
assigned by the Board of Commissioners;
      (4)   Establish and maintain an Emergency Operations Center for
coordinating and directing emergency operations;
      (5)   Represent the Emergency Management Organization of this county in
dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergency management and
disaster relief;
      (6)   Provide for updating and testing of the county’s emergency
operations plan;
      (7)   Coordinate mutual aid agreements between the county, cities, towns
and municipalities; and
       (8)   In the event the County Emergency Management Services Director is
absent or unable to function in that capacity, the Chairperson or a designated
member of the Board of County Commissioners shall serve as, or shall appoint an
alternate, as Director. The County Sheriff and the joint City/County Dispatch
Center shall be advised as to who is acting Director and how the acting
Director can be contacted in a disaster/emergency.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.05 CONTINUITY OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT.
   The line of succession of authority for the continuity of government under
such circumstances as an emergency or catastrophic disaster, and the authority
to declare a local disaster emergency is as follows:
   (A)   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners;
   (B)   The Commissioner with longest time in office;
   (C)   Another Commissioner;
   (D)   Sheriff;
   (E)   Clerk;
   (F)   Assessor;
   (G)   Treasurer;
   (H)   Prosecuting Attorney; and
   (I)   Coroner.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.06 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY DECLARATIONS.
   (A)   A declaration of local disaster emergency shall activate the county’s
emergency operations plan and shall be the authority for use or distribution of
any supplies, equipment, materials or facilities assembled or arranged to be
made available pursuant to such plans.
   (B)   This subchapter provides authority and enforcement power for the
County Emergency Management Organization to take whatever action is necessary
to protect life and property during a declared local disaster emergency,
including the following, when authorized by competent authority:
      (1)   Suspend or limit the sale, dispersing or transportation of
alcoholic beverages, firearms, ammunition, explosives and combustibles;
      (2)   Establish curfews, including, but not limited to, the prohibition
of or restrictions, on pedestrian and vehicular movement, standing and parking,
except for the provision of designated essential services, such as fire,
police, emergency medical services and hospital services, including the
transportation of patients, utility emergency repairs and emergency calls by
physicians;
      (3)   Utilize all available resources of the county government as
reasonably necessary to cope with the disaster emergency;
       (4)   Require the emergency services of any county officer or employee,
and in the event of the proclamation of a state disaster emergency by the
Governor in the region in which this county is located, to command the aid of
as many citizens of this county as is necessary for successful completion of
emergency measures. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits
and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency management
services worker or volunteers;
      (5)   Declare certain areas off limits;
      (6)   Make provisions for the availability and use of temporary emergency
housing and the emergency warehousing of materials;
      (7)   Establish emergency operating centers and shelters in addition to
or in place of those identified in the emergency operations plan;
      (8)   Declare that during an emergency it shall be unlawful and an
offense against the county for any person, firm or corporation operating within
the county to charge more than the normal average retail price for any
merchandise, goods or services sold during the emergency; and
      (9)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people,
and bind the county for the fair market value thereof, and, if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.07 OVERALL AUTHORITY.
   Chiefs of city and county government have responsibility and accountability
for and final authority over emergency operations as they do day-to-day
government.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.08 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The county’s program of non-discrimination in disaster assistance will be
carried out and is in accordance with Idaho Code § 67-5905, applicable federal
laws and implementing regulations.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 32.09 IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY.
   Authorized personnel engaged in emergency management or disaster relief
activities and persons, agencies or any other entity providing building or
premises designated by proper authority as emergency shelters have immunity
from liability for property damage, bodily injury or death, as cited in §§ 46-
1016 and 46-1017 of the State Disaster Preparedness Act of 1975, and where
willful misconduct on the part of the property owner does not exist.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
CONSOLIDATED EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
§ 32.20 CREATION OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   There is hereby created, for the purpose of providing for the public
health, safety and welfare of the public, a consolidated emergency
communication system, also known as a 911 telephone system, in the county, all
as permitted and sanctioned by Idaho Code Title 31, Chapter 48.
   (B)   The purpose for the creation of the emergency communications system is
to provide a countywide 911-telephone system.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS LINE. Any telephone line, trunk line, network access register,
dedicated radio signal or equivalent that provides switched telecommunications
access to a consolidated emergency communications system from either a service
address or a place of primary use within this state. In the case of wireless
technology, each active dedicated telephone number shall be considered a single
ACCESS LINE.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person, officer or agency designated to operate a
consolidated emergency communications system and to receive funds for such
operation.
   EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS FEE. The fee provided for in Idaho Code § 31-4803.
   EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SYSTEM or CONSOLIDATED EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION
SYSTEM. Facility, equipment and dispatching services directly related to
establishing, maintaining and enhancing a 911 emergency communications service.
   ENHANCED CONSOLIDATED EMERGENCY SYSTEM. Consolidated emergency systems that
provide enhanced wireless 911 service and include, but are not limited to, the
technological capability to provide call back numbers, cell site location and
the location of calls by latitude and longitude and made through the systems of
wireless carriers.
   GOVERNING BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of Bonneville County, Idaho.
   911 SERVICE AREA. The entire area of the county in which area the residents
have voted to establish a consolidated emergency communications system.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE. The residential street address or the primary business
street address in the state where the customer’s use of the wireless service
primarily occurs.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person providing exchange telephone service
to a service address within this state or any wireless carrier providing
telecommunications service to any customer having a place of primary use within
this state.
   WIRELESS CARRIER. A cellular licensee, a personal communications service
licensee and certain specialized mobile radio providers designated as covered
carriers by the federal communications commission in 47 C.F.R. § 20.18 and any
successor to such rule.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.22 FINANCING.
   The financing of the consolidated emergency communications system shall, in
whole, be by communications user fee in an amount not greater than $1 per month
to be used to fund an emergency telephone system, commonly known as 911
service.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.23 SERVICE AREA.
   The service area for the emergency communications system shall be the
entirety of the county, as described in Idaho Code § 31-112.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.24 GOVERNING BOARD.
   The governing board of the emergency communications system shall be the
Board of County Commissioners as duly elected.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.25 ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Administrator for the emergency communications system shall be such
person, officer or agency designated to operate the emergency communications
system as appointed by the governing board.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.26 NET SAVINGS.
   The net savings from the operation expenditures realized by the county from
implementation of the consolidated emergency communications system shall be
used by the county for reduction of the property tax charges of said taxing
district.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.27 EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS FEE.
   (A)   (1)   If the voters of any county or 911 service area have previously
approved funding of a consolidated emergency communications system in the
manner provided in Idaho Code § 31-4803, no further vote is necessary to
authorize the emergency communications fee set forth in this subchapter.
      (2)   Effective October 1, 2004, and every year thereafter, the emergency
communications fee set forth in this subchapter shall be reviewed and modified
as required by the Board of Commissioners of a countywide system or the
governing board of a 911 service area as follows.
         (a)   The level of the emergency communications fee shall be reviewed
and as appropriate and necessary, readjusted by action of the Board of
Commissioners or the governing board on an annual basis. The Board of
Commissioners or governing board shall set the level of the fee based upon the
revenue requirements necessary to implement an annual budget prepared under the
direction of the Board of Commissioners or governing board for the initiation,
maintenance, operation, enhancement and governance of a consolidated emergency
communications system, including both basic and, if applicable, enhanced
consolidated emergency system.
         (b)   The revenues from the emergency communications fees shall be
exclusively expended pursuant to the budget established in division (A)(2)(a)
above. Use of such revenues for any other purpose is expressly prohibited.
         (c)   The process of reviewing and setting the level of emergency
communications fees shall be governed by the meeting and public notice
provision of Idaho Code § 31-710(4). For the purpose of this section, the
setting of a fee shall be deemed to be the promulgation of a rule such that
public participation provisions of Idaho Code § 67-5222 shall apply to the
meetings of the Board of Commissioners or of a governing board pursuant to this
section.
   (B)   The emergency communications fee shall be a uniform amount not to
exceed $1 per month per access line, and such fee shall be used exclusively to
finance the initiation, maintenance, operation, enhancement and governance of
the consolidated emergency communication system within the county. The fee
collection of the monthly emergency communications fee shall be collected from
the customers on a monthly basis by all telecommunications entities which
provide local telecommunications service within the county, and may be listed
as a separate item on the customers’ monthly billings. All emergency
communications fees collected and expended pursuant to this section shall be
audited by an independent, third-party auditor ordinarily retained by the
governing board for auditing purposes. The purpose of the audit as related to
emergency communications system is to verify the accuracy and completeness of
fees collected and cost expended.
   (C)   All such telecommunications providers shall remit such fee to the
County Treasurer’s Office or to the Administrator as designated by the
governing board. This will be based on the 911 service area from which the fees
were collected from every remittance to the governing board made on or before
the date when the same becomes due, the telecommunications provider required to
remit the same shall be entitled to deduct and retain 1% of the collected
amount as the cost of administration for collecting the charge.
Telecommunications providers will be allowed to list the surcharge on a
separate item in the telephone subscriber’s bill, and shall not be obligated to
take any legal action to enforce the collection of any charge, nor be held
liable for such uncollected amounts. In the event the telecommunications
provider remits such fee based upon the emergency communications fee billed to
the customer, a deduction shall be allowed for uncollected amounts when such
amounts are treated as bad debt for financial reporting purposes.
   (D)   The emergency communications fee provided hereunder shall be used only
to pay for the lease, purchase or maintenance of emergency communications
equipment for basic and enhanced consolidated emergency systems, including
necessary computer hardware, software, database provisioning, training,
salaries directly related to such systems, cost of establishing such systems
and agreed-to reimbursement costs of telecommunications providers related to
the operation of such systems. All other expenditures necessary to operate such
systems and other normal and necessary safety or law enforcement functions,
including, but not limited to, those expenditures related to overhead,
staffing, administrative and other day to day operational expenditures, shall
continue to be paid through the general funding of the respective governing
boards.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.28 JOINT POWERS.
   Within 180 days following voter approval of an emergency communications fee,
the governing board or Administrator may establish a joint powers agreement as
provided in Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 23. Such joint powers board or
Administrator shall be responsible for establishing, maintaining, operating,
enhancing and governing a consolidated emergency communications system.
Providing an emergency communications service shall be considered a
governmental function.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.29 AUTHORIZATION OF GOVERNING BOARD TO APPOINT OFFICIAL.
   The governing board, in the absence of an agreement to form a joint powers
board or Administrator, as provided in §
32.27(B), are authorized to appoint an official or Administrator to maintain
and govern a consolidated emergency communications system.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.30 RIGHT TO FEE NOT AFFECTED BY NON-SERVICE.
   Any governmental entity within the county that has an already established
emergency communications system using 911 call access, upon resolution duly
adopted and approved and presented to the joint powers board or, in its
absence, to the Board of County Commissioners, may ask that their existing
emergency communications system area be excluded, and such area shall be
excluded from the countywide emergency communications service, but such
exclusion shall not affect the right of the Board of County Commissioners to
levy a fee as herein provided. Whenever any area is excluded pursuant to this
section, the Board of County Commissioners shall remit to the excluded entity
100% of the fee collected in the excluded area as provided herein. Any area
excluded pursuant to this section may be subsequently included upon resolution
duly appointed and approved and presented to the joint powers board or, in its
absence, the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.31 TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
   The County Treasurer is authorized to establish a fund to be designated the
“Emergency Communications Fund” in which all fees collected pursuant to this
subchapter shall be deposited, and such funds shall be used exclusively for the
purpose of this subchapter. The monies collected and the interest earned in
this fund shall be apportioned by the County Commissioners or governing board
for expenses incurred by the emergency communications system as set forth in an
annual budget prepared by the joint powers board, or in its absence, the County
Commissioners, and incorporated into the annual county budget.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.32 PAY PHONE CONVERSION.
   Every provider of a telecommunications service or other owner of a pay
station telephone within the county must convert every pay station telephone to
permit dialing 911 or the telecommunications company operator without deposit
of a coin or other charge to the caller. Said conversion must be completed by
or before the time the emergency communications system is operational.
(Ord. 211-03, passed 7-28-2003)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $300,
or by imprisonment not to exceed three months, or both, for any person, firm or
corporation, who, during a declared local disaster emergency:
      (1)   Refuses to comply with or violates any section of this code, or the
emergency measures which may be made effective pursuant to §§
32.01 through
32.09;
      (2)   Willfully obstructs, hinders or delays any member of the County
Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or
regulation issued pursuant to §§
32.01 through
32.09 or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of §§
3
32.01 through
32.09;
      (3)   Does any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued
pursuant to §§
32.01 through
32.09, if such acts will imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this
county, or to prevent, hinder or delay the protection thereof; and
      (4)   To wear, carry or display without authority, any means of
identification specified by the County Emergency Management Organization, or
any agency of the state.
(Ord. 160-93, passed 9-7-1993)
CHAPTER 33: INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Section
   
33.01   Definitions
   
33.02   Public corporation created
   
33.03   Powers
   
33.04   Charter
   
33.05   Board of Directors
   
33.06   Liability
   
33.07   Net earnings
§ 33.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter 27.
   BOARD OF DIRECTORS. The Board of Directors of the public corporation.
   CORPORATION. The Industrial Development Corporation of Bonneville County,
Idaho.
   COUNTY. The County of Bonneville, Idaho.
   FACILITIES. Land, rights in land, buildings, structures, docks, wharves,
machinery, transmission equipment, landscaping, utilities, approaches, roadways
and parking, handling and storage areas and similar ancillary facilities.
   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT FACILITY OR FACILITIES. Manufacturing, processing,
production, assembly, warehousing, transportation, pollution control, solid
waste disposal and energy facilities.
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
§ 33.02 PUBLIC CORPORATION CREATED.
   (A)   The county does hereby create a public corporation to carry out the
purposes of Idaho Code Title 50, Chapter 27 (the “Act”), as that law may from
time to time hereinafter be amended.
   (B)   The name of the public corporation shall be “The Industrial
Development Corporation of Bonneville County, Idaho” (the “Corporation”).
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
§ 33.03 POWERS.
   (A)   The Corporation shall have all the powers and be subject to all of the
limitations and provisions contained in the Act, as that law may hereinafter
from time to time be amended, as well as the following:
      (1)   To construct and maintain one or more industrial development
facilities;
      (2)   To lease to a lessee all or any part of any industrial development
facility for such rentals and upon such terms and conditions, including options
to purchase, as its Board of Directors considers advisable and not in conflict
with the Act;
      (3)   To sell by installment, contract or otherwise and convey all or any
part of any industrial development facility for such purchase price and upon
such terms and conditions as its Board of Directors considers advisable, which
are not in conflict with the Act;
      (4)   To make secured loans for the purpose of providing temporary or
permanent financing or refinancing of all or part of the project cost of any
industrial development facility, including the refunding of any outstanding
obligations, mortgages or advances issued, made or given by any person for the
project costs, and to charge and collect interest on the loans for the loan
payments upon such terms and conditions as its Board of Directors considers
advisable which are not in conflict with the Act;
      (5)   To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of financing all or part of
the project cost of any industrial development facility and to secure the
payment of the revenue bonds as provided in the Act;
      (6)   As security for the payment of the principal of and interest on any
revenue bonds issued, and any agreements made in connection therewith, to
mortgage, pledge or otherwise encumber any or all of its industrial development
facilities or any part of parts thereof, whether then owned or thereafter
acquired, and to assign any lease or mortgage and repledge any security
conveyed to the Corporation. to secure any loan made by the Corporation and to
pledge the revenues and receipts therefrom;
      (7)   To sue and be sued, complain and defend in its corporate name;
      (8)   To make contracts and to execute all instruments necessary or
convenient for the carrying out of its business;
      (9)   To have a corporate seal and to use the same be causing it, or a
facsimile thereof, to be impressed or affixed or in any other manned
reproduced;
      (10)   Subject to the limitations of Idaho Code § 50-2706, to borrow
money, accept grants from or contract with any local, state or federal
governmental agency or with any financial public, or private corporation;
      (11)   To make and alter bylaws not inconsistent with its Charter for the
administration and regulation of the affairs of the Corporation;
      (12)   To collect fees or charges from users or prospective users of
industrial development facilities to recover actual or anticipated
administrative costs; and
      (13)   To execute financing document incidental to the powers enumerated
in this section.
   (B)   The Corporation created under this chapter may not operate any
industrial development facilities as a business other than as lessor, seller or
lender. The purchase and holding of mortgages, deeds of trust or other security
interests, and contracting for any servicing thereof, is not considered the
operation of an industrial development facility.
   (C)   The Corporation created by this chapter may not exercise any of the
powers authorized in this section or issue any revenue bonds with respect to
any industrial development facility unless the industrial development facility
is located wholly within the boundaries of the county.
   (D)   The county may not give or lend any money or property nor exercise of
eminent domain in aid of the Corporation. This provision shall not preclude the
county from dealing with the Corporation on an arms-length basis.
   (E)   The Corporation may not issue revenue obligations except upon approval
of the county and upon approval of the city within whose planning jurisdiction
the proposed industrial development facility lies.
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
§ 33.04 CHARTER.
   A Charter shall be issued to the Corporation by this Board of Commissioners,
which shall grant to the Corporation authority to act pursuant to the Act. A
copy of the initial Charter to be issued is attached to the ordinance codified
in this chapter marked Exhibit “A.” Said Charter may be amended from time-to-
time by the Board of County Commissioners and shall contain the limitations set
forth in the Act.
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
§ 33.05 BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   (A)   The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall be composed of the
members of the Board of County Commissioners, as constituted from time to time.
A majority of the members of the Board of Directors shall constitute a quorum.
   (B)   (1)   The affairs of the Corporation shall be conducted and carried
out by the Board of Directors. The Board shall elect among its own members its
President, a Vice-President, a Treasurer and a Secretary, one of whom shall be
eligible to hold two offices. The Board of Directors shall adopt rules and
regulations governing the conduct of the Corporation.
      (2)   Members of the Board of Directors shall serve with such
compensation as may be provided in the rules and regulations (bylaws) to be
adopted by the Board of Directors.
   (C)   No Director, officer, agent or employee of the Corporation shall have
directly or indirectly any financial interest in any property to be included in
or any contract for property service or materials to be furnished or used in
connection with any industrial development facilities financed through the
Corporation.
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
§ 33.06 LIABILITY.
   (A)   Every person who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a part
to, or is involved in any action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he or she or a
person of whom he or she is the legal representative is or was a director or
officer of the Corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the
Corporation as a direct or officer of another corporation, or as its
representative in a partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise,
shall be indemnified and held harmless to the fullest extent legally
permissible under the law of the state from time to time against all expenses,
liability and loss (including attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines and amounts
paid or to be paid in settlement), reasonably incurred or suffered by him or
her in connection therewith. Such rights of indemnification shall be a contract
right which may be enforced in any manner desired by such person. Such right of
indemnification shall not be exclusive of any other right which such directors,
officers or representatives may have or hereafter acquire, and without limiting
the generality of such statement, they shall be entitled to their respective
rights of indemnification under any bylaw, agreement, vote of stockholders,
provision of law or otherwise, as well as their rights under this section.
   (B)   The Board of Directors may adopt bylaws from time to time with respect
to indemnification to provide at all times the fullest indemnification
permitted by the laws of the state, and may cause the Corporation to purchase
and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was a director or
officer of the Corporation as a director or officer of another corporation, or
as its representative in a partnership, joint ventures, trust or other
enterprise, against any liability asserted against such person and incurred in
any such capacity or arising out of such status, whether or not the Corporation
would have the power to indemnify such person.
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
§ 33.07 NET EARNINGS.
   Any net earnings of the Corporation, beyond those necessary for retirement
of indebtedness incurred by it, shall inure to the county, and not for the
benefit of any other person. Alternation of the Charter of or dissolution of or
audits of the Corporation shall be as provided by the Act and by subsequent
resolutions of the county. Upon dissolution of the Corporation, title to all
property owned by the Corporation shall vest in the county.
(Ord. 194-99, passed 2-25-1999)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
   
34.01   Plant investment property tax exemption
§ 34.01 PLANT INVESTMENT PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Per Idaho Code § 63-602NN(2)(g), the minimum investment amount for
plant investment at project sites within the county is set at a minimum
threshold of $3,000,000.
   (B)   Those seeking a property tax exemption under Idaho Code § 63-602NN
must still meet the other requirements of that section in order to be granted
the property tax exemption.
(Ord. 237-19, passed - -)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Title
   
50.02   Authority
   
50.03   Purpose
   
50.04   Definitions
Sewage
   
50.15   Prohibited conditions
   
50.16   Standard of maintenance
   
50.17   Disposal of industrial sewage and waste
   
50.18   Removal and transportation of disposal of sewage, sewage sludge or
human excrement
   
50.19   Sewage disposal from boats
Refuse Control
   
50.30   Refuse containers
   
50.31   Storage of refuse
   
50.32   Collection of refuse
   
50.33   Disposal of refuse
Water Supplies
   
50.45   Public supplies
   
50.46   Private supplies
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Health and Sanitary
Ordinance of Bonneville County.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
§ 50.02 AUTHORITY.
   The County Board of Health, under and pursuant to the powers vested in it by
Idaho Code § 39-4401, and in order to carry out the work effectively and to
perform properly the duties intended and required by said statute, does hereby
make and place into effect rules and regulations deemed necessary and proper to
prevent the outbreak and spread of dangerous, contagious and infectious
disease, in the county, said rules and regulations to be known collectively as
the Sanitary Ordinance of Bonneville County.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
§ 50.03 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is based on the premises that controlling and changing
the physical environment is necessary to protect and improve the public health.
Certain types of illness may be prevalent where living conditions place
dependence on common water supplies and on others for food and drink, where
vermin abound, where disposal of body wastes endanger others and where filth in
general abounds.
   (B)   Such conditions perpetuate diseases and may set into action a series
of events that result in epidemics.
   (C)   Methods have been developed to deal competently with conditions
promoting the transmission of disease.
   (D)   It is hereby declared to be the duty of the Board of Health to deal
with the forces and processes of the environment and to influence or control
them in the interest of health, individual and community alike, to prevent the
outbreak and the spread of dangerous, contagious and infectious disease.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
§ 50.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words in
the present tense include the future and the future includes the present; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the words
SHALL and MUST are always mandatory.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Board of Health of Bonneville County.
   COLLECTOR. The county or its agent or person holding a license or contract
who is authorized or designated to collect, transport and dispose of refuse.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage derived principally from dwellings, business
buildings and institutions and may or may not contain groundwater, surface
water or stormwater.
   GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
storage, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer appointed by the Board of Health
or his or her authorized representative.
   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. Sewage in which industrial wastes predominate.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct
from domestic or sanitary sewage.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE TREATMENT. Any artificial process to which industrial waste
is subjected in order to remove or alter its objectionable constituents and
thus render it less offensive or dangerous, and approved by the State Board of
Health.
   INSPECTOR. The Health Officer or other duly authorized officer of the county
having the duty of enforcing this regulation.
   MARINE TOILET. Any toilet on or within any watercraft.
   OWNER and OCCUPANT. Every person in possession, charge or in control of any
dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital, school, hotel, motel,
boarding house, eating establishment, place of business or manufacturing plant
where refuse is created or accumulated, and such terms may be used
interchangeably.
   PERSONS. Any natural person, association, partnership, firm, corporation or
institution.
   PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY. Any individual supply serving only one residence and
includes the source and pumping equipment with appurtenances.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. Any supply which serves two or more residences or
serves any other type of establishment which provides drinking water and
includes the source, pumping equipment and appurtenances and distribution
system.
   REFUSE. Solid wastes, including, but not limited to garbage and rubbish. It
shall not include human body wastes.
   RUBBISH. Solid wastes other than garbage, dead animals, abandoned vehicles,
industrial wastes, sewage treatment residue and extremely hazardous substances.
   SANITARY ORDINANCE. The entire series of rules now and hereafter adopted by
the Board of Health, which govern the environment of the area under
jurisdiction of the Board, and specifically this chapter.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Domestic sewage with stormwater and surface water included;
sewage discharged from sanitary conveniences of dwellings, (including apartment
houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions; or the water
supply of a community after it has been used and discharged into a sewer.
   SEWAGE. The liquid or water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings and institutions, together with the sanitary sewage from industrial
establishments, and with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may
be present, but for the purpose of these regulations shall not include
industrial wastes.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT. Any artificial process to which sewage is subjected in
order to remove or alter its objectionable constituent and thus render it less
offensive or dangerous, and approved by the State Department of Health.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit, generally closed, but normally not flowing full,
for carrying sewage or other waste liquids.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
   WASTE. Unwanted solid, liquid or gaseous materials.
   WATERCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designed for navigation on water,
specifically including houseboats.
   WATERS OF THIS COUNTY. All of the waters on which watercraft shall be used
or operated.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
SEWAGE
§ 50.15 PROHIBITED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Sewage, sewage effluent or human excretes shall not be allowed to
remain open to the atmosphere, or on the surface of the ground so that it is or
is likely to be:
      (1)   A cause of flies or fly breeding or mosquito breeding or a breeding
for other vermin; and
      (2)   A source of noxious or offensive odors or conditions inimical to
public interest, dangerous or prejudicial to health or a public nuisance.
   (B)   Sewage, sewage effluent or human excreta shall not be allowed to
endanger any source or supply of drinking water, or cause damage to any public
or private property.
   (C)   Raw or untreated sewage shall not be allowed in any body of water,
watercourse or any underground water drain, any stormwater drain, channel or
other surface water drain, except if subjected to satisfactory sewage
treatment.
   (D)   No raw or untreated sewage shall be permitted to irrigate or flow onto
any ground so that edible portions of vegetable, fruit, root crops or other
edible portions or other growing food plants may come in contact with the
sewage or with such soil; or onto any ground used or intended to be used for
the pasture or enclosure of animals producing milk likely to be used for human
consumption so that the sewage or soil containing such sewage will come in
contact with such animals, except if subject to satisfactory sewage treatment.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.16 STANDARD OF MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Corrections and alterations to existing sewerage systems or sewage
treatment processes, or new sewerage systems may be required, when in the
opinion of the Health Officer, there is a violation of §
50.15.
   (B)   Privies shall be maintained in such condition so as not to be in
violation of §
50.15.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter or extend individual sewage disposal systems within the county unless
such person, firm or corporation holds a valid permit issued by the Health
Officer in the name of such person, firm or corporation for the specific
construction, alteration or extension proposed. Applications for a permit shall
be made to the Health Officer. It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to
issue a permit after satisfactory evidence of intent is presented, which shall
consist of:
      (1)   The applicant’s name and address;
      (2)   Lot and block number and/or street address of property on which
construction, alteration or extension is proposed; and
      (3)   Complete plan of proposed disposal facility, including plot plan,
construction, alteration or extension is proposed.
   (D)   The Health Officer may refuse to grant a permit for construction of
any individual sewage disposal system where approved public or community
sewerage systems are available. All individual sewage disposal systems shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with standards as stated in Bulletin #6,
“Standards for Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems,” State Department of Health.
The Health Officer shall make an inspection during the construction prior to
the stage of final earth covering to determine compliance with the plans and
standards. It shall be unlawful to cover or use the individual sewage disposal
system without written approval of the Health Officer. This division (D) shall
be applicable to all residential and commercial individual sewage disposal
installations, except that it shall not apply to rural farm installations on
tracts of five acres or more provided rural farm installations shall meet the
requirements of §
50.15.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a proposed subdivision
to submit the provisions and/or plans for the domestic water and sewerage
facilities to the Health Officer who shall review and approve the provisions
and/or plans prior to the filing of the plat with the County Recorder.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.17 DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE AND WASTE.
   (A)   Said application for a permit to construct sanitary disposal, permits
for industrial sewage and waste facilities, shall be accompanied by a sketch
indicating the approximate layout of the building and approximate dimensions of
the land ownership to be used with said building or buildings.
   (B)   All proposed industrial sewage and waste facilities shall comply with
the standards issued by the State Department of Health and with applicable
regulations hereafter approved. It is also necessary that plans and
specifications for industrial sewage and waste facilities be submitted to the
State Department of Health for approval prior to construction. Maintenance and
operation of such facilities are also subject to the approval of the State
Department of Health.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued until sanitary disposal facilities for
industrial sewage and waste have been constructed and inspected by the Health
Officer. Said sanitary disposal facilities shall not be covered with dirt or
otherwise completed or used until inspected and approved.
   (D)   (1)   The Health Officer shall inspect any industrial sewage or waste
facility heretofore constructed where he or she has reason to believe sewage
treatment or waste treatment may not conform to the requirements of this code.
      (2)   If any industrial sewage or waste disposal system heretofore
constructed or in operation shall be found to be causing contamination or
endangering any source or supply of drinking water or causing damage to any
public or private property, the Health Officer shall notify in writing the
owner or occupant of said property that said industrial sewage or waste
disposal facility is a nuisance which must be abated within 30 days from the
date of such notice by altering, modifying or rebuilding said facility to
conform to the standards of the State Department of Health, as aforesaid.
      (3)   If said owner or occupant shall neglect or refuse to comply with
said notice, the Health Officer shall invoke the penalties of Idaho Code § 39-
4414 and shall further ask the State Board of Health to act under the
provisions of Idaho Code § 39-4401 and related provisions.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.18 REMOVAL AND TRANSPORTATION OF DISPOSAL OF SEWAGE, SEWAGE SLUDGE OR
HUMAN EXCREMENT.
   (A)   Any tank wagon, tank truck, can or other container or equipment used
or intended to be used for the purpose of removal and transportation or
disposal of sewage, sewage sludges or human excrement shall conform to the
following requirements:
      (1)   The tank or container shall be watertight and so constructed as to
prevent spillage or leakage while being loaded or transported; and
      (2)   Tanks and containers shall be so constructed that every portion of
the interior and exterior can be easily cleaned and kept in a clean condition
at all times and while not in actual use.
   (B)   The material shall be disposed of in one or more of the following
ways:
      (1)   Discharge to a manhole on a public sewer;
      (2)   Discharge to a sewage treatment plant;
       (3)   Burial under two feet of earth in a location and in a manner not
conflicting with §
50.15; and
      (4)   Drying in a manner not creating a nuisance and not conflicting with
§
50.15.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.19 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FROM BOATS.
   (A)   Restrictions. No marine toilet on any water craft used in this county
shall be so constructed and operated as to discharge any sewage into said water
directly or indirectly and, further, it shall be unlawful to discharge or
deposit any garbage, refuse or other solids or other liquid waste from any
water craft, onto any waterfront property or into any waters in the county.
   (B)   Dock facilities. Every dock servicing watercraft shall have
conveniently located thereto adequate toilet facilities for men and women, and
every dock shall have covered garbage and waste facilities for the disposal of
garbage and wastes other than sewage.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
REFUSE CONTROL
§ 50.30 REFUSE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Refuse containers shall be of a type manufactured specifically for the
purpose of refuse storage and shall be made of durable watertight, rust-
resistant material having a close-fitting lid and handles to facilitate
collection and shall be rodent- and fly-proof.
   (B)   Refuse containers shall be of not less than 20 gallons, not more than
32 gallons in capacity, with the exception that standard metal refuse bins
manufactured for this purpose may be used where the volume of refuse produced
per day is greater than the refuse from an average single-family dwelling.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation or residue of liquids,
solids or a combination of such material on the bottom or sides of containers.
It is the intention of this provision that the interior of containers shall be
kept clean by thorough washing, rinsing and drainage as often as necessary.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.31 STORAGE OF REFUSE.
   (A)   Each person having refuse shall provide himself or herself with
approved refuse containers and shall place and keep all refuse therein; except
as otherwise provided in this regulation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place refuse in any street, alley or body of
water, irrigation canal, drainage canal or any public place, or upon private
property, unless such refuse is placed in an approved container; except as
otherwise provided in this regulation.
   (C)   No person shall bury, dump, collect, remove or in any other manner
dispose of refuse within the prescribed limits of this regulation, except as
hereby provided.
   (D)   No person shall throw, deposit or permit to accumulate any refuse in
any building or on any premises, improved or vacant or any lot or area, either
public or private, so that it is or is likely:
      (1)   To be a source of flies or fly breeding or mosquito breeding;
      (2)   To afford food or harborage for rodents or other vermin; or
      (3)   To be a source of noxious or offensive odors or conditions inimical
to public interest, dangerous or prejudicial to health, or an unhealthy
nuisance.
   (E)   Under no circumstance shall any material causing excessive smoke,
liberating a toxic substance on combustion, or producing a noxious odor likely
to affect the occupant of any premises, be burned except under conditions and
in equipment approved by the Health Officer.
   (F)   No person shall deny the inspector the right of ingress or egress to
any premises for the purpose of inspecting all places and containers where
refuse is created or kept.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.32 COLLECTION OF REFUSE.
   (A)   Where refuse collection service is provided by a governmental agency
or by contract to a government agency, all persons, hotels, restaurants,
institutions or community establishments within the geographical boundaries or
areas of any municipality and incorporated villages or subdivisions shall
subscribe to the refuse collection service as provided.
    (B)   Collectors shall collect refuse for disposal from each premises at
least once a week. Hotels, restaurants, institutions and commercial
establishments may be required to have more frequent collection, if determined
by the Health Officer, to be essential to protect the public health. Persons
not retaining or receiving the collection service shall be bound by the
provisions of this division (B) as it pertains to the frequency of disposal.
   (C)   All refuse containers shall be kept in a place accessible to the
collector, except that in isolated cases where reasonable access cannot be had
by the collection vehicle, the container may be kept in such places as may be
agreed upon by the owner and collector; or at such place as may be designated
by the inspector.
   (D)   Collectors shall follow the traveled portion of streets, alleys and
roadways or the regular walks for pedestrians while on private property and
shall take care in loading such refuse so that none of the material to be
collected is left upon the private property or the streets, alleys or roadways.
The collector shall return the receptacle with all contents removed and replace
the lid thereon.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in
the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying any refuse over
the streets or alleys of the county or its subdivisions unless such person is
licensed for this business. This regulation does not prohibit a person from
hauling or transporting refuse from the premises owned or occupied by said
person to one of the official disposal sites.
   (F)   All collectors shall furnish vehicles designed for the collection and
hauling of refuse. The collectors shall keep such vehicles clean, sanitary,
neatly painted and in good running order and shall wash, clean and disinfect
all such vehicles at least once a week. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a
tight metal body or, if a wood body, shall be metal-lined so as to be
watertight, and each vehicle shall at all times be provided with a suitable
cover of an approved type that may be securely fastened on all sides when
required to retain dust and prevent scattering of refuse. Any person hauling
refuse shall keep such vehicle covered with a canvas tarp, or like material, to
prevent the scattering or loss of such refuse along or upon public roads or
properties adjacent to such public roads.
   (G)   The inspector shall at least yearly inspect all vehicles designed and
used for collection or transportation of refuse and shall certify his or her
approval or disapproval as to compliance with the provisions of this
regulation. No private franchise or contract collector shall haul, collect,
transport or dispose of refuse until the refuse collection vehicle to be used
has been approved by the inspector and a license obtained from the County
Health Authority.
   (H)   The license for each vehicle for private, franchise or contract
collectors shall be issued for the calendar year, or such portion thereof as
shall remain after the issuance of the license.
   (I)   The license of a collector may be revoked or renewal denied by the
County Health Authority for violation of these regulations.
   (J)   Dead animals, hides, viscera and parts of carcasses shall be removed
to a rendering plant or other designated or authorized disposal site or buried
under two feet of compacted soil and at least 100 feet from a domestic water
source on the premises of the owner of the animal within 24 hours from the
known time of death of the animal; except that small dead animals or parts of
animal carcasses may be tightly wrapped or packaged in at least five layers of
newspaper or equivalent for disposal in an approved refuse container for
storage until collection where weekly collection is provided.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.33 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   (A)   All persons hauling or transporting refuse for disposal shall dispose
of the refuse at the disposal site or sites designated or authorized by the
County Commissioners.
    (B)   (1)   All persons hauling or transporting refuse to an authorized
disposal site shall deposit the refuse in accordance with directions of the
person in charge of the site.
      (2)   The inspector is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the
Health Officer, to make rules and regulations designating the manner of and the
hours and limits of time of depositing refuse, providing that before such rules
and regulations become effective, appropriate signs shall be placed at or upon
the premises of the disposal site giving notice of such rules and regulations
and enforceable under the penalty clause of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
50.99
WATER SUPPLIES
§ 50.45 PUBLIC SUPPLIES.
   All public water supplies shall be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained in accordance with the State Department of Health Water standards
and regulations.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
§ 50.46 PRIVATE SUPPLIES.
   (A)   Prior to the development of any new source for a private water supply,
a permit shall be obtained from the County Health Authority.
   (B)   A permit application shall be submitted to the County Health Authority
on forms provided for this purpose and shall contain a description of the
proposed source site in relation to possible sources of contamination, such as
ditches, floodwaters, sewage disposal facilities, streams, livestock pastures,
barnyards and the like. Also, if the source is to be a well the application
should list the probable size and minimum depth of the well along with a plan
design of the well head construction.
   (C)   All supplies shall be constructed to meet the minimum design standards
for private supplies as listed in the State Department of Health Bulletin No.
5, as amended.
   (D)   Upon proper notification of completion of the project, the county will
survey the water supply and will issue a certificate of approval upon
satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   Abandoned wells shall be properly sealed or capped to meet State
Department of Health requirements.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of these regulations shall,
upon conviction, be fined not to exceed $50, or be imprisoned for not to exceed
60 days, or be both fined and imprisoned, and every day that such conduct is in
violation of this section is carried on shall constitute a separate offense,
and in addition to such fine and imprisonment shall be liable for any expense
incurred by the County Board of Health in enforcing this act or in removing or
terminating any nuisance, source of filth, cause of sickness or health hazard.
   (B)   Conviction under these penalty provisions or any other health law
shall not relieve any person from any civil action and damages that may exist
for an injury resulting from any violation of the public health laws or rules
and regulations promulgated by the County Board of Health.
(Ord. passed - -1968)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
Solid Waste Disposal System
   
51.01   Title
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Findings
   
51.04   Applicability
   
51.05   Establishment of official solid waste disposal sites
   
51.06   Establishment of a Solid Waste Fund
   
51.07   Management of solid waste
   
51.08   Unauthorized salvaging at solid waste disposal sites prohibited
   
51.09   Permits for solid waste disposal system components
   
51.10   Responsibilities of commercial hauler
   
51.11   Location and hours of disposal of solid waste
   
51.12   Hauling solid waste
   
51.13   Disposal of hazardous, dangerous or unauthorized waste material
   
51.14   User fees
Tire Disposal
   
51.25   Policy
   
51.26   Definitions
   
51.27   Fees
   
51.28   Fee schedule
   
51.29   Procedure
   
51.30   Enforcement
   
51.31   Civil and criminal remedies
 
   
51.99   Penalty
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 51.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Solid Waste Management Ordinance.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Board of Commissioners of Bonneville County, Idaho.
   COUNTY. The County of Bonneville, a political subdivision of the State of
Idaho.
   DANGEROUS, HAZARDOUS UNAUTHORIZED WASTE MATERIAL. Any substance in any
combination of solid, liquid or gaseous forms which, because of its quantity,
concentration or characteristics, may cause or pose a substantial threat of
injury to human health, or to the environment, or as otherwise defined by
federal, state or local law, and including, but not limited to, hazardous
materials, automobile batteries, white goods, large metal items, tires of any
type and dead animals.
   DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Health and Welfare.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, corporation or other entity, including
municipalities, a state or federal agency, or a fraternal, educational or
religious institution located within the county.
   SEWAGE SLUDGE. A semi-liquid substance consisting of settled sewage solids
combined with water and dissolved material in varying amounts.
   SITE. Any official solid waste disposal site including any transfer station.
   SOLID WASTE. As defined by present Idaho Code § 31-4902(8), or as
subsequently amended.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. Any landfill or other facility and any land upon
which containers are placed for public disposal of solid waste, as designated
in §
51.05, whether the land is publicly owned or is provided by a contractor
pursuant to an agreement with the county.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. All lands, sites, facilities, equipment and
manpower, owned or approved by the county, necessary or used for the
collection, transportation, storage, treatment, processing, re-use, recycling
or other means necessary for the handling and disposal of solid waste in the
county. The SYSTEM shall include all solid waste disposal system components
approved by the county in existence at the time of and subsequent to the
adoption of this subchapter.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM COMPONENT. Any public or privately owned solid
waste disposal site, collection location, disposal facility, transportation
element or other functioning part of the solid waste disposal system for the
county where one or more phases of solid waste disposal is carried out by one
or more persons. A COMPONENT shall not include the solid waste receptacle
provided by a commercial solid waste hauler or generator for use by a single
business, customer or client, unless the receptacle is to be removed from the
site where it regularly rests for transportation to or emptying at another
location.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.03 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Idaho Code Title 31, Chapter 44 requires counties in the state to
provide municipal solid waste disposal as deemed appropriate by the respective
Board of County Commissioners.
   (B)   Idaho Code § 31-4406 requires the Board of County Commissioners for
each county to adopt by ordinance rules and regulations for the operation and
maintenance of solid waste disposal.
   (C)   The Board adopts this subchapter to further the purposes stated in
Idaho Code § 31-4401. Specifically, this subchapter is designed to establish a
solid waste disposal system in the county, to reduce the threat to health,
safety and welfare posed by garbage, refuse and scrap, to maintain the natural
and aesthetic setting of the land, water and air resources of the county and to
develop a coordinated and self-sufficient system to operate a unified solid
waste disposal system.
   (D)   As authorized by Idaho Code § 31-4404, the county will fund the solid
waste disposal system with ad valorem taxes, user fees, current revenues and/or
other sources of monies. The user fees are reasonably related to the benefit
conveyed to the person charged the fee, are reasonable approximations of the
cost of service and will partially support existing and future solid waste
disposal sites.
   (E)   The increased fees established under the Solid Waste User Fee
Ordinance for solid waste from outside the county is justified because county
residents are charged an ad valorem tax and user fee to partially support the
solid waste disposal system in the county while out of county residents are not
charged such an ad valorem tax. Furthermore, any additional fee for solid waste
generated outside of the county is justified because the county qualifies as a
market participant and would not be subject to the restraints of the Interstate
Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution. Any additional fee for solid
waste generated outside of the county as established by the Solid Waste User
Fee Ordinance only applies to the solid waste disposal system, not to other
landfills located in the county.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.04 APPLICABILITY.
   All solid waste generated within the county and all solid waste generated
elsewhere, but proposed or destined for disposal within the county, shall
comply with the standards and procedures set forth herein. All solid waste
shall be managed, whether during storage, collection, transfer, transport,
processing, separation, composting, treatment, re-use, recycling or disposal,
to prevent health hazards, public nuisances or pollution of the environment.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES.
   The following are established as the official solid waste disposal sites to
be used by the residents and visitors of the county:
   (A)   County Transfer Station; (Hemert Drive);
   (B)   County Landfill (Peterson Hill); and
   (C)   Other landfills or transfer stations designated by the Board.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF A SOLID WASTE FUND.
   (A)   To finance the operation of the solid waste disposal system, there is
created a Solid Waste Fund to be maintained as a separate fund within the
county budget.
   (B)   This fund shall support activities necessary for the continued
operation of the existing and future solid waste disposal system.
   (C)   The Board may establish special accounts within the Solid Waste Fund
to meet anticipated operational needs of the solid waste disposal system as it
deems necessary and proper.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.07 MANAGEMENT OF SOLID WASTE.
   The county reserves the right to authorize recycling of material in any
official solid waste disposal site or any other solid waste disposal site
approved by the county in accordance with standards and conditions set by the
Board. Dangerous, hazardous or unauthorized waste material or improperly
handled waste shall remain in the ownership of the person depositing the
material until they are disposed of in compliance with this subchapter and
other applicable federal, state and county laws, statutes, ordinances, rules
and regulations.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.08 UNAUTHORIZED SALVAGING AT SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by this subchapter, no person
shall salvage or attempt to salvage materials delivered to or deposited at an
official solid waste disposal site.
      (2)   No party shall interfere or intercede in any way with the lawful
activities of residents of the county, or solid waste disposal system users who
are delivering or depositing solid waste for disposal at an official solid
waste disposal site or with commercial haulers, or county employees who are
removing or handling materials which have been deposited at an official solid
waste disposal site.
   (B)   The county may grant a permit to qualified private contractors to sort
and remove specific material deposited at a gated site. To qualify for such a
permit, a private contractor shall agree with several conditions, including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Executing an agreement to indemnify the county from any and all
loses and damages;
      (2)   Staying 100 feet away from any operating or non-operating
equipment;
      (3)   Not interfering with any person(s) depositing solid waste;
       (4)   Salvaging only the solid waste specified in the permit;
      (5)   Not handling any hazardous, dangerous or unauthorized waste
material; and
      (6)   Immediately reporting the existence of any hazardous, dangerous or
unauthorized waste material to a county employee at an official solid waste
disposal site.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 PERMITS FOR SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM COMPONENTS.
   The county may require an operator of any solid waste disposal system
component to obtain a permit from the county. Permits may be granted for
operation of solid waste disposal system components upon compliance with the
standards set forth in this subchapter and with the applicable rules and
regulations for official solid waste disposal sited adopted by the county and
applicable state and federal agencies. Permit applications shall bear full
responsibility for showing compliance with the standards applicable to their
proposed operation of a solid waste disposal system component. Fees may be
charged for permit issuance as established by the Board.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.10 RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMERCIAL HAULER.
   Any person collecting or hauling solid waste within the county may be
required to report the location of disposal, the number of containers, their
size and frequency of pickup within or outside of the county to official solid
waste disposal sites. These reports shall be filed in a form and on a schedule
acceptable to the county. The county may establish bond requirements or similar
financial guarantees to assure performance of responsibilities established by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
§ 51.11 LOCATION AND HOURS OF DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, except at an official solid waste disposal site,
for any person to throw away, dump or discard, or allowed to be dumped or
discarded, or aid or assist in throwing away, dumping or discarding, or allow
to be deposited or discarded, any type of solid waste or litter on any public
lands, rights-of-way of any kind or private lands.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw away, dump or discard any
type of solid waste in or upon an official solid waste disposal site, at a time
other than the regular business hours and days during which such site is open
to the public.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.12 HAULING SOLID WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or to permit any vehicle used
to haul or transport solid waste to be so loaded, or to be of such condition as
to permit any of such solid waste to drop or fall upon or to drop upon any
public lands, rights-of-way of any kind or private lands all persons whether
commercial or not shall cover all solid waste. A violation of this section may
result in the imposition of criminal and civil penalties set forth in §
51.99.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.13 DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS, DANGEROUS OR UNAUTHORIZED WASTE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to
deposit or dispose of or in any way aid or assist in the deposition or disposal
of, or provide for delivery of, any dangerous, hazardous or unauthorized waste
material within the solid waste disposal system or anywhere within the county,
unless specifically authorized at an official solid waste disposal site.
Nothing in this subchapter is intended to conflict with the provisions of the
State Hazardous Waste Management Act, Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 44 or any
other state or federal law or regulation.
   (A)   Prohibited disposals. No person shall deposit or discharge any of the
following substances into or upon an official or private solid waste disposal
site or anywhere within the county:
      (1)   Hazardous or acutely hazardous waste pesticides designated by the
Department or EPA;
      (2)   Hazardous solid waste as designated by the Department or the EPA;
      (3)   Flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gasses;
      (4)   Acids;
      (5)   Radioactive materials defined as hazardous materials under federal
law and applicable regulations, including any substance required by the United
States Department of Transportation to have type A packaging or type B
packaging, as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.426, or as subsequently amended;
      (6)   Oversized tires for which the county does not have a contract or
capability to remove from a solid waste disposal site;
      (7)   Wind turbines or any associated equipment;
      (8)   Solar panels or any of their associated equipment;
      (9)   Commercial/industrial waste from commercial/industrial generators
that will prevent the safe continuous operation of the county waste storage
facilities as determined by the County Commissioners from time to time; and
      (10)   Any waste that will cause or could cause, by its deposit therein,
the county to violate any DEQ regulations as outlined by state statue.
   (B)   Controlled disposals. No person shall deposit or discharge any of the
following substances anywhere within the county, or into or upon an official
solid waste disposal site, except at designated locations within an official
solid waste disposal site:
      (1)   Appliances: washing machines, dryers, stoves, refrigerators,
freezers or other large household appliances;
      (2)   Vehicles;
      (3)   Sewage sludge;
      (4)   Tires of any type;
      (5)   Automobile batteries;
      (6)   Chemical cans (before being accepted, must be emptied, triple
rinsed and punctured);
      (7)   Paint;
      (8)   Yard waste (trees, shrubs, limbs, leaves, grass or similar
material);
      (9)   Construction or demolition waste; and
      (10)   Solid waste, other than the above listed substances.
   (C)   Special burials. The following material may be deposited into an
official solid waste disposal site only by special permission of the county.
      (1)   Asbestos; and
      (2)   Animals or any portion of animals.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.14 USER FEES.
   (A)   To partially fund the operations of the solid waste disposal system,
the Board shall establish a user fee to be assessed annually. Such user fees
shall be set by ordinance, known as the Solid Waste User Fee Ordinance.
   (B)   User fees shall be paid by all persons and by municipal and commercial
haulers of solid waste dumped or deposited, which is generated or picked up
within the county or outside the boundaries of the county as assessed.
   (C)   There shall be a separate and additional fee set by the Solid Waste
User Fee Ordinance for all persons and municipal and commercial haulers for
controlled disposals and special burials at any official solid waste disposal
site.
(Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
TIRE DISPOSAL
§ 51.25 POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the county and the county’s solid waste
system to accept tires for disposal.
   (B)   Said tires will not be disposed of in landfills but instead will be
disposed of by the county through various means as the county deems in its best
interests.
   (C)   Tires will be processed for recycling to meet the requirements of
Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 65, as amended.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994)
§ 51.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY RESIDENT OR BUSINESS. Any person or business owning or leasing
property or operating a business within the confines of the county.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A division of the county authorized by the
Board of County Commissioners to provide for the appropriate unlawful disposal
of tires.
   TIRE. Any rubberized material generally used for the purpose of conveying a
vehicle, implement, equipment and the like from one location to another
location, excepting therefrom bicycle and wheelbarrow tires.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994)
§ 51.27 FEES.
   (A)   Fee charged on purchase/non-disposal. It is the belief of the County
Commission that most effective means of providing for the cost of disposal is
to collect said cost at the time of sale of said tires. Such will provide for
those tires which may be removed out of the county and disposed of, and those
tires which may be illegally disposed of and for which liability or penalty
cannot be established. For this purpose, the aforementioned fees shall be
charged at the time any tire, whether new or used, is sold in the county. All
persons or entities selling tires shall keep accurate accounting of all tires
sold and shall provide the accounting to the county on a quarterly basis with
payment, as provided herein. Further, all tire sellers within the county shall
be subject to an audit by the county of all of their books relating to the sale
of tires for the purpose of verifying that the amounts collected are correct
and have been paid over to the county.
   (B)   Fee estimate. Further, any seller of tires not making payment to the
county in a timely fashion as provided for herein shall be assessed an
estimated charge by the solid waste disposal system which shall be assessed and
included on a tax roll of the entity or person and shall become a lien against
all property, whether personal or real property owned by the person or entity.
Further, said tire seller shall be subject to a fine of $100 per day for every
day of late payment.
   (C)   Terms and payments. There shall be no charge to county residents and
county businesses for the disposing of tires except as specifically provided
for herein. Tire sellers shall have the right to make application to the county
to create a billing system for their businesses. Anyone with an account with
the county shall make said payment on a quarterly basis with each quarter
ending on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. All fees collected
shall be paid within ten days after the close of each quarter. Tire sellers who
do not create an account with the county shall be required to make payments on
a daily basis.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994)
§ 51.28 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The Board of County Commissioners shall set on or before October 1 of
each year a fee schedule. For the calendar year 1995, said fee schedule shall
be in such amount as is provided for in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance
codified in this subchapter. Prior to October 1 each year, the Commissioners
shall be authorized by resolution to adopt a fee schedule which shall become
effective under this subchapter and shall become the appropriate fee schedule
under this subchapter for the subsequent calendar year. Said fee shall be
charged upon the sale of any tire as described in this subchapter. Schedule A
shall be the fee schedule for the period of January 1, 1995, to December 31,
1995.
   (B)   Businesses and residents of the county may dispose of tires at the
county waste transfer station at the charges as set forth herein. The proposed
fees are for tires with the rims removed, an additional fee of $5 will be
assessed per tire for automobile and light truck tires still on the rim. Large
truck, agricultural implement and earth-moving equipment tires will not be
accepted if the tires are still on the rim.
 
Agricultural implement tires     $20 per tire
Automobile and light truck tires $1.50 per tire
Earth-moving equipment tires     $50 per tire
Large truck tires                $3 per tire
 
   (C)   Tires to be disposed of will be accepted at the county waste transfer
station located at 2455 Hemmert Avenue, Idaho Falls, during normal working
hours of 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
   (D)   Tire dealers will collect said fees at the time of sale of said tires
at the time any tire, whether new or used, is sold in the county. All persons
or entities selling tires shall keep accurate accounting of all tires sold and
shall provide the accounting to the county on a quarterly basis with payment,
as provided herein. Quarterly payments shall be made within ten days of the end
of each quarter. The end of the quarters are considered to be March 31, June
30, September 30 and December 31. All tire sellers within the county shall be
subject to an audit of their books relating to the sale of tires by the county
for the purpose of verifying that the amounts are correct and have been paid
over to the county.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994)
§ 51.29 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 65 defines proper disposal procedures for
waste tires. Said legislation provides for a fine of $500 per tire if disposed
of through a landfill. The intent of the legislation is to encourage the
recycling of tires and to create an available rubber source for road
construction as directed in federal legislation. Businesses and residents of
the county may dispose of tires at the county waste transfer station without
charge. Nonresidents and businesses of the county may dispose of tires at the
county waste transfer station by making payment in the amounts set by the
County Commissioners. All persons or entities will be charged an additional
cost of $5 per tire for each tire mounted on a rim.
   (B)   Tires from bicycles and wheelbarrows and lawnmowers are exempt from
recycling requirements and may be disposed of at the county waste transfer
station at no charge for said bicycle and wheelbarrow tires.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994)
§ 51.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any private residents and businesses whether or not a resident of the county
disposing of tire(s) in a manner which does not conform to the procedures
outlined above may be denied disposal until proper procedures are followed.
Failure to follow disposal as set forth herein shall be deemed inappropriate
and unlawful disposal.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.31 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES.
   The prosecution of any civil remedy of this subchapter set forth shall not
bar the prosecution of any criminal proceeding herein provided.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   A violation of any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.14 shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $300, or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months in the county jail, or both
for each offense. Each day or each occurrence if more than one a day, that such
a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate criminal offense.
      (2)   Any violation of any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.14 may also result in the filing of a civil complaint for civil damages
imposed upon and person committing such act. The civil damages shall amount to
three times the actual damage or cost to restore the site of disposal to its
original condition, whichever is greater. Such civil action shall be filed in
the county, and any remainder of damages collected after restoration shall be
deposited in the Solid Waste Find.
      (3)   Whenever it appears to the Board that any person has engaged or is
about to engage in any act or practice constituting a violation of state law or
of §§
51.01 through
51.14, the county may bring an action to enjoin any such acts or practices and
to enforce compliance with state law or with §§
51.01 through
51.14. Any civil action for civil damages described above shall be in addition
to the criminal penalties set forth herein.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
51.25 through
51.31 shall be guilty of the greater of a $500 fine for each tire improperly
disposed of as provided by Idaho Code Title 39, Chapter 65 or shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
under the definition of misdemeanor and misdemeanor convictions in Idaho Code.
   (C)   Any person unlawfully depositing or disposing of, or in any adding or
assisting in the disposing or depositing of or providing for delivery of any
tire within the county solid waste disposal system, or anywhere within the
county in an improper manner, as provided in §§
51.25 through
51.31, shall be civilly liable for the full cost and expense of the cleanup,
control, elimination, abatement, radication, decontamination and other
remediation which is undertaken by the county or any other public agency to
properly correct damage or potential damage associated with said violation and/
or civil responsibility for the violation; criminal misdemeanor liability for
maximum of six months imprisonment and/or $300 fine; and/or civil liability for
cleanup costs.
(Ord. 167-94, passed 10-26-1994; Ord. 255-23, passed 8-16-2023)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Vehicle Licensing
   
70.01   Title
   
70.02   Purpose
   
70.03   Definitions
   
70.04   Administrative fees
   
70.05   Conflicts
Dual Roadway Use
   
70.20   Definitions
   
70.21   Roadway designation
   
70.22   Roadway closures
   
70.23   Violation
   
70.24   Civil and criminal remedies
   
70.25   Injunctive relief
Air Compression Brakes
   
70.40   Definitions
   
70.41   Brake use restrictions
 
   
70.99   Penalty
VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 70.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the Bonneville County Vehicle
License Fee Ordinance.
(Ord. 135-83, passed 11-2-1983)
§ 70.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide funds sufficient to pay the
expenses incurred by the county in its exercise of duties relating to vehicle
licensure.
(Ord. 135-83, passed 11-2-1983)
§ 70.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, all words and phrases not specifically
defined herein will be given their ordinary, commonly understood and accepted
meaning.
(Ord. 135-83, passed 11-2-1983)
§ 70.04 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   An administrative fee for vehicle licensure shall be established by
resolution of the Board of County Commissioners; provided, that the fee
collected shall: be reasonably related to, but shall not exceed, the actual
cost of the service being rendered; be collected in addition to each motor
vehicle registration tax or fee amount collected under the provisions of the
Idaho Code Title 49; and be paid to the County Treasurer and be placed in the
county current expense fund.
(Ord. 135-83, passed 11-2-1983; Ord. passed 6-20-1988; Res. passed 6-20-1988)
§ 70.05 CONFLICTS.
   Requirements specifically addressed by more than one code will be in
accordance with the most restrictive code adopted herein.
(Ord. 135-83, passed 11-2-1983)
DUAL ROADWAY USE
§ 70.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLOSURE.
      (1)   The period of time designated by the Board of County Commissioners
in which roads may be closed to public access or limited access.
      (2)   The prohibition of any person from plowing and/or using said
roadway for vehicular purposes or any other purpose designated by the Board of
County Commissioners.
   DESIGNATED ROADWAY. The roadways specifically designated by the Board of
County Commissioners for closure.
   DOG SLED. Any device or sled drawn by any animal, including dogs.
   PUBLIC ROADWAY. Any portions of any highway or road used for vehicular
travel, whether possessing pavement or not which is controlled by an authority
other than the State Transportation Department.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle under 1,000 pounds unladed gross
weight, designed primarily for travel on snow or ice over natural terrain,
which may be steered by tracks, skis or runners, and which is not otherwise
registered or licensed under the laws of the state.
   VEHICULAR. Motor vehicle and every vehicle, other than a snowmobile, which
is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electrical power or
operated from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails, except
vehicles moving slowly by human power and motorized wheelchairs, including
every device in which or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996)
§ 70.21 ROADWAY DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The Board of County Commissioners shall, prior to October 1 of each
year, by resolution, designate those roadways which shall be designated as
snowmobile trails and/or road closure areas within the county. The Board of
County Commissioners shall prior to October 1 of each year, designate the
nature and the extent of the closure during which vehicles may not operate upon
designated roadways and upon which no one shall be permitted to plow said
roadways within the county for the next one year.
   (B)   The snowmobile trails and road closure designation for the period of
October 1, 1996, through September 30, 1997, is attached to the ordinance
codified in this subchapter as Exhibit “A.”
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996)
§ 70.22 ROADWAY CLOSURES.
   (A)   Inasmuch as certain roadways within the county receive sufficient
snowfall that it is impractical for the county to maintain said roadways during
heavy snowfall periods; and inasmuch as the county has the duty to maintain
said roadways and to secure the roadway system within the county; and inasmuch
as the cost and feasibility are not within reasonable demands of the county,
necessitating the closure of certain roadways; and because of the need to
safeguard the public from operating vehicles, dog sleds and cross-country
skiing in areas which would result in injury to snowmobile trails and in areas
where public assistance and emergency care would be difficult to provide; and
because said roadways may become non-navigable because of snowfall in very
short periods of time; and because said roadways may be valuable for the use by
snowmobiles; the County Commission shall, by resolution and by posting notice
of said resolution at the Board of Commissioners office, have the right to
close both designated roadways and such roadways as designated in §
70.21 and such additional roadways as the County Commissioners shall, in their
sole discretion, deem necessary upon resolution of a majority of the Board and
upon notice being posted by notice at the County Courthouse and at the roadway
at least 24 hours prior to said roadway closure.
   (B)   (1)   Said resolution shall designate the description of the roadway
and the date and time when the road shall be closed to vehicles.
      (2)   The 24-hour notice shall be applicable regardless of the day of the
week on which said notice is posted.
      (3)   Said notice shall reference the resolution of the Board of County
Commissioners and shall designate that anyone violating the road closure may be
issued a citation for said violation.
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996)
§ 70.23 VIOLATION.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any individual to
operate a motor vehicle upon the designated roadways within the county at such
times as said roadways have been closed by the County Commission.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of any vehicle operated upon any closed road within
the county during the closure period shall be guilty of an infraction violation
as defined by Idaho Code.
      (2)   It shall further be a violation for anyone to use said closed
roadways for dog sled or cross-country skiing use.
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   The prosecution of any civil remedy in this subchapter set forth shall
not bar the prosecution of any criminal proceeding herein provided.
   (B)   Further, the prosecution of any criminal proceeding shall not bar the
prosecution of any civil remedy herein provided.
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996)
§ 70.25 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   The County Commission, by and through the Prosecuting Attorney’s office,
shall be authorized upon the determination of anyone in violation of this
subchapter to immediately apply for injunctive relief with any court of
competent jurisdiction which said injunctive relief should be granted for the
purpose of providing for the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996)
AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES
§ 70.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPRESSION BRAKE. Any braking system of a motor vehicle that modifies
engine valve operation to use engine compression to slow the motor vehicle and
shall include brakes commonly referred to as JAKE BRAKES or ENGINE BRAKES.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE. A device used primarily on trucks for the conversion
of the engine from an internal combustion to air compressor for the purpose of
braking. This term is also commonly referred to as a JACOB’S BRAKE, JAKE BRAKE,
ENGINE BRAKE or COMPRESSION BRAKE).
   ENGINE BRAKE. A hydraulically operated device that operates a power
producing diesel engine into a power absorbing retarding mechanism that
produces a noise.
(Ord. 263-24, passed 8-7-2024)
§ 70.41 BRAKE USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Use near any city (municipal corporation). No operator of any motor
vehicle, excepting emergency vehicles operated by first responders (such as
fire, ambulance and law enforcement), shall use or activate a compression
brake, engine brake or dynamic braking device within one mile of any of the
following incorporated city limits:
      (1)   City of Idaho Falls;
      (2)   City of Ammon;
      (3)   City of Ucon;
      (4)   City of Iona; and
      (5)   Any other incorporated area.
 
   (B)   Use in other designated county areas. No operator of any motor
vehicle, excepting emergency vehicles operated by first responders (such as
fire, ambulance and law enforcement), shall use or activate a compression
brake, engine brake or dynamic braking device within designated areas of the
county. Said designated areas will have two road signs designating the
beginning and ending of the dynamic braking device prohibition area, reading
respectively at least as follows.
 
ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED
NEXT          MILES
Bonneville County Ordinance 263-24
 
END OF ENGINE BRAKE PROHIBITION AREA
Bonneville County Ordinance 263-24
 
         (a)   Said designated areas shall be made by the County Commissioners.
To establish a designated area, any person may apply to the County
Commissioners setting forth a proposed designated area. A public meeting shall
be set. At the meeting, any interested party may present evidence or testimony
concerning the proposed designated area.
         (b)   The County Commissioners will then decide whether or not to
designate the area as a prohibited one. The County Public Works Director will
order corresponding MUTCD approved signs after direction given in a public
meeting and recorded in the official minutes of the County Commissioners.
(Ord. 263-24, passed 8-7-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any operator of a vehicle or dog sled or a person cross-country
skiing, violating any provision of §§
70.20 through
70.25 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided under the definition of a misdemeanor and misdemeanor
convictions in state law. The owner of any vehicle operated upon any closed
road in violation of any provision of §§
70.20 through
70.25 shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided under the definition of an infraction in state law.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Any person violating any provision of §
70.41(A) for the first time shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be
punished by imposition of a fine in the amount of $50.
         (b)   Any person violating any provision of §
70.41(A) who has previously been found guilty or pled guilty to a violation
shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by imposition of a fine
in the amount of $90.
         (c)   Any person violating any provision of §
70.41(A) who has previously been found guilty or pled guilty of at least two
prior violations of §
70.41(A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment
confinement in a county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by a
fine not to exceed $1,000, or by both (as per Idaho Code § 18-113).
         (d)   All fine amounts set forth above for infraction and misdemeanor
offenses shall be separate and apart from any court costs assessed pursuant to
Idaho Code § 31-3201A and any other provision of state law.
      (2)   (a)   Any person or entity violating the provisions of §
70.41(B) for the first time, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be
punished by imposition of a fine in the amount of $50.
         (b)   Any person or entity which violates §
70.41(B) who has previously been found guilty or pled guilty of a violation
within five years shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by
imprisonment confinement in a county jail for a period not to exceed six
months, or by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by both (as per Idaho Code § 18-
113).
(Ord. 176-96, passed 2-23-1996; Ord. 263-24, passed 8-7-2024)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Parking and storing of vehicles, trailers and the like
   
71.02   Ririe Reservoir parking regulations
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PARKING AND STORING OF VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No vehicle which is not properly and currently licensed and in
operating condition, or any stripped dismantled or junked machinery, salvage
material, debris, vehicle body or parts may be parked, stored or maintained
upon any roads, streets, sidewalks or highways in the unincorporated area of
the county, and that none of the items described above may be parked, stored or
maintained on any premises at a location between the minimum building setback
line and the road right-of-way. In a platted residential subdivision,
agricultural density subdivision and residential zones, all such items shall be
stored or maintained behind the front face of the residential building and
screened or covered as needed to protect the public view by a maintained tarp,
or by growth, fences, garages or other substantial structures allowed by the
Building and Zoning Codes of the county which will effectively provide such
screening; and that where a gate is used as a screening device it shall be kept
closed when not being used for ingress or egress. The total amount of area
devoted to the outdoor storage of the items listed above will be limited to 300
square feet in R and MH Zones, 600 square feet in RA, RP and R-F Zones. In A-
1 and G-1 Zones, no more than 1% of the lot or parcel may be used, with a
maximum limit of 10,000 square feet. In all cases contiguous single owned
parcels and lots shall be aggregated and considered to be a single parcel.
   (B)   All recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, motorcycles,
commercial vehicles and farm machinery not regularly used (moved at least once
per month) shall be stored or parked behind the building setback line and not
in front of the residential dwelling unit and behind the side yard setback line
for corner lots for the side yard facing the street, road or highway.
   (C)   No vehicle, object or equipment shall be parked, placed or maintained
except when necessary to allow movement of other vehicular traffic or pursuant
to the direction of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following designated places, to-wit:
      (1)   Upon any sidewalk or obstructing any sidewalk or upon any regularly
used or designated walkway, bridle path or bicycle path;
      (2)   On the traffic side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a highway;
      (3)   Within any portion of a public or private driveway or entrance to a
public street;
      (4)   Within an intersection or a crosswalk, within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant;
      (5)   Within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic control signal;
      (6)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (7)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or
crosswalk at an intersection;
      (8)   Beside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction in a manner
which obstructs traffic, upon any street or portion thereof which blocks or
interferes with the regular flow of vehicular traffic;
      (9)   Other than headed in the direction of traffic flow;
      (10)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon or part of a public
highway;
      (11)   At any place where traffic regulatory signs prohibit such parking;
      (12)   In any fire apparatus access road as defined in the International
Fire Code; and
      (13)   Use any street for the purpose of repairing any vehicle, except
for temporary emergency repairs.
   (D)   Parking shall only be allowed on county streets which are designed
with enough additional pavement width to allow for on street parking. No
vehicle shall be parked upon any street within the county for a period of more
than 48 consecutive hours in the same location. Any vehicle so parked or stored
may be removed by or under the direction of any peace officer and may be
impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The owner of the
impounded vehicle shall pay a reasonable towing and storage fee to the person
or company effecting the removal before such vehicle or trailer may be
released.
   (E)   Any person who parks or allows a vehicle to be parked in any parking
space designated for use by persons with disabilities and signed in conformity
with Idaho Code § 49-410 is guilty of an infraction, unless the vehicle is
momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a disabled person to enter
or leave the vehicle, or unless special license plates or a temporary card
issued for the disabled pursuant to Idaho Code § 49-410 is displayed on the
vehicle. For the purpose of this division (E), the term PERSON WITH A
DISABILITY shall have the same meaning ascribed in Idaho Code § 49-117(7)(b).
The provisions of this section shall be enforceable with respect to handicapped
parking spaces upon public property and private property open to public use.
   (F)   Only cars and pickups that are regularly used shall be parked on the
street, road or highway adjacent to any residential dwelling lot or location,
and all such vehicles so parked shall be parked with the interior wheels no
farther than 18 inches from the curb line where there is a curb and, if there
is no curb, so as not to impede any traffic lane. No vehicle with body
dimensions exceeding 263 inches in length, 82 inches in height and 80 inches in
width shall be parked on any street, road or highway. All commercial vehicles
and farm machinery shall not be parked on any street, road or highway other
than for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle in an expeditious
manner not to exceed two hours. All recreational vehicles, trailers, campers,
boats, motorcycles shall not be parked on any street, road or highway other
than for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle in an expeditious
manner not to exceed a cumulative total of 48 hours in any consecutive seven-
day time period.
(Ord. 105-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 224-12, passed 10-17-2012) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 RIRIE RESERVOIR PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLOSURE. The period of time designated by the Board of County
Commissioners in which the parking area may be closed to the general public.
      PARKING AREA. Any portion of any highway or road, parking area, restroom,
boat landing, boat dock, park area or any associated area of Blacktail and
Juniper boat landing areas at the Ririe Reservoir.
      PARKING FEE or FEE. Fees designated by the Board of County Commissioners
for the use of a parking area.
   (B)   Use fee. The Board of County Commissioners shall hereby set the
parking fee as follows:
      (1)   Winter season passes (November 1 to April 30): $5 per admitted
vehicle, per day, Monday through Friday; $10 per admitted vehicle per day on
weekends and holidays; $30 for a winter season pass which said season pass is
discounted to $20 for seniors aged 62 and older;
      (2)   Summer season passes (May 1 to October 31): $5 per admitted
vehicle, per day, Monday through Friday; $10 per admitted vehicle per day on
weekends and holidays; $80 for a summer season pass which said season pass is
discounted to $60 for seniors aged 62 and older; and
      (3)   Combined summer and winter pass (January 1 to December 31): $95 for
an annual combined summer and winter pass, which said annual pass is $70 for
seniors aged 62 and older. The county may, by resolution, from time-to-time
hereafter, designate an increase in the parking fee by resolution adopted by
the County Commissioners.
   (C)   Closure blacktail. As there exists a need to close a parking area as
to protect the parking areas from vandalism, misuse and provide periodic
maintenance and repairs, and to protect the safety and welfare of the public,
the Blacktail parking areas shall be closed daily from 10:00 p.m. until the
following morning at 6:00 a.m. The County Commissioners may, from time to time,
alter the dates of closure and/or the seasons of closure, by resolution.
   (D)   Juniper. Juniper Boat Ramp lower parking lot shall be closed from
Memorial Day to Labor Day to all vehicles which are not towing a trailer.
   (E)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this section for any individual
to refuse to pay the parking fee or to be in a parking area or to operate a
vehicle in a parking area during the periods of closure.
(Ord. 267-25, passed 4-30-2025) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of §
71.01 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined $25 for each violation. If an owner or operator parks more than
one vehicle in violation of §
71.01, each vehicle shall be deemed a separate violation. Each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The issuance of a
notice of violation shall not be the exclusive remedy for enforcing the parking
regulations of §
71.01 and all other lawful remedies are reserved, including prosecution by
filing a criminal complaint for an infraction violation.
   (B)   Any person in violation of §
71.02 or refusing to pay the required fee shall be guilty of violating §
71.02 and shall pay the fee provided for herein. Any unauthorized person in the
parking area or operating a vehicle in a parking area during any period of
closure shall be guilty of violating §
71.02 and shall pay the fee provided for herein.
(Ord. 105-76, passed 6-21-1976; Ord. 224-12, passed 10-17-2012)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Snowmobiles
   
72.01   Policy
   
72.02   Definitions
   
72.03   Prohibition
   
72.04   Enforcement
   
72.05   Civil and criminal remedies
Watercraft
   
72.20   Definitions
   
72.21   No-wake zones
   
72.22   Enforcement
 
   
72.99   Penalty
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.01 POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the county to permit and allow in
conjunction with any regulation adopted by and permitted by the State
Department of Fish and Game and as permitted by the Federal Bureau of
Reclamation, ice fishing upon Ririe Reservoir from the location of the Ririe
Reservoir Dam and one mile up lake/stream.
   (B)   Because the area around, at and surrounding the Ririe Reservoir, lying
within the county, is frequently used by those operating snowmobiles, all-
terrain vehicles (ATV) and utility-terrain vehicles (UTV), it shall be the
policy of the county to prohibit the use of snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles
(ATV) and utility-terrain vehicles (UTV) upon any portion of the Ririe
Reservoir or on public lands within one-quarter mile of the median high-water
mark of the Ririe Reservoir, except for the explicit administrative purposes of
the county, the State Department of Fish and Game, Federal Bureau of
Reclamation and for ice fishers who are using said snowmobiles, all-terrain
vehicles (ATV) and utility-terrain vehicles (UTV) for the direct access to and
from fishing sites on said Ririe Reservoir.
(Ord. 229-17, passed 2-10-2017) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV) and UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES (UTV). Include any
vehicle commonly known as a quad, quad bike, three-wheeler, four-wheeler or
quadricycle as defined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and
is a vehicle that travels on low-pressure tires, with a seat that is straddled
or used by the operator, along with handlebars for steering control.
   COUNTY. Bonneville County, Idaho, a political subdivision of the State of
Idaho.
   PERSONS. Any individual, entity, corporation, partnership, business and the
like.
   PUBLIC LAND. The Ririe Reservoir and any land owned by the public or any
entity of the public and all other land that is not owned by private persons.
   RIRIE RESERVOIR. The reservoir currently existing within the county and
commonly referred to as the Ririe Reservoir with water levels at the median
high-water mark regardless of the actual levels of the water in said Reservoir.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for travel on snow
or ice or natural terrain, which may be steered by tracks, skis or runners.
(Ord. 229-17, passed 2-10-2017)
§ 72.03 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person, whether or not a resident
of the county, to operate a snowmobile, all-terrain vehicles (ATV) or utility-
terrain vehicles (UTV) on any part of the Ririe Reservoir and/or on any public
land within one-quarter mile of the median high-water mark of the Ririe
Reservoir except for the explicit purpose of direct access to ice fishing and
direct access back off said reservoir to parting areas. This subchapter shall
not apply to employees and personnel of the county, the State Department of
Fish and Game or the Federal Bureau of Reclamation when acting in their
official duties.
(Ord. 229-17, passed 2-10-2017) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any persons, whether or not a resident of the county, operating a
snowmobile, all-terrain vehicles (ATV) or utility-terrain vehicles (UTV), in
opposition to this subchapter or any provision herein, shall be deemed
inappropriate and unlawful.
(Ord. 229-17, passed 2-10-2017) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES.
   The prosecution of any civil remedy of this subchapter shall not bar the
prosecution of any criminal proceedings herein provided, nor shall any criminal
prosecution of any violation of this subchapter bar the prosecution of any
civil remedy of this subchapter.
(Ord. 229-17, passed 2-10-2017) Penalty, see §
72.99
WATERCRAFT
§ 72.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCESSIVE WAKE. The operation of a vessel that:
      (1)   In an artificially bow-high manner, increases or enhances a wake,
including wake enhancement by use of ballast, mechanical hydrofoils, uneven
loading;
      (2)   Causes water to lap onto or over a dock, pier or other lawfully
permitted encroachment; or
      (3)   Causes water to without due caution and circumspection and in a
manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
   NO EXCESSIVE WAKE ZONE. An area were no excessive wake shall occur.
   NO-WAKE ZONE. A designated area where no wake shall occur.
   VESSEL. Includes every description of watercraft, including a seaplane on
the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water,
but does not include float houses, diver’s aids operated and designed primarily
to propel a diver below, or objects modified to be used as a means of
transportation on the water, such as inflatable air mattress, single inner
tubes and beach and water toys. For purposes of defining the term VESSEL, a
motorboat, motor-driven craft and watercraft are synonymous.
(Ord. 268-25, passed 5-7-2025)
§ 72.21 NO-WAKE ZONES.
   The following no-wake zones are hereby established pertaining to the
following public bodies of water in the county.
   (A)   Ririe (Blacktail) Reservoir. There shall be no excessive wake:
      (1)   Within 100 feet from any person or vessel in the water;
      (2)   Within 100 feet from any shoreline or other structure (including
boat docks and floating docks);
      (3)   Within 300 feet from the point where the water meets the
unsubmerged portion of the following boat ramp(s):
         (a)   Juniper boat ramp; and
         (b)   Blacktail boat ramp.
      (4)   Within 200 feet from the point where the water meets the shore of
the following recreation area(s):
         (a)   Blacktail Park;
         (b)   Benchland Park; and
         (c)   Willow Point Park.
   (B)   Palisades Reservoir. There shall be no excessive wake:
      (1)   Within 100 feet from any person or vessel in the water;
      (2)   Within 100 feet from any shoreline or other structure (including
boat docks and floating docks); and
      (3)   Within 300 feet from the point where the water meets the
unsubmerged portion of the following boat ramp(s):
         (a)   Calamity boat ramp;
         (b)   Blowout boat ramp; and
         (c)   Big Elk boat ramp.
      (4)   Within 200 feet from the point where the water meets the shore of
the following recreation area(s):
         (a)   Pine Bay boat mooring park;
         (b)   Snake River boat mooring park; and
         (c)   McCoy Creek campground.
(Ord. 268-25, passed 5-7-2025)
§ 72.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter may be enforced by any officer or deputy of the County
Sheriff’s Office, Forest Service law enforcement or Bureau of Land Management
law enforcement.
(Ord. 268-25, passed 5-7-2025)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
72.01 through
72.05 shall be guilty of the a misdemeanor and shall be subject to fine in an
amount of $300 and/or subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a maximum
of six months or as otherwise provided for by state law.
      (2)   Any unlawful or inappropriate operation of a snowmobile, all-
terrain vehicles (ATV) or utility-terrain vehicles (UTV) as provided for in §§
72.01 through
72.05, or any abating or assisting in the operation of a snowmobile in
violation of §§
72.01 through
72.05, shall constitute a violation which shall cause said person who does
violate §§
72.01 through
72.05 to be civilly liable for the full cost and expense of any and all damage
caused by said illegal operation, and/or civil responsibility for the violation
in an amount not to exceed $500 and/or such additional amount to reimburse for
any cost whether directly or indirectly incurred by any person or public
entity; criminal misdemeanor liability punishable by imprisonment in the county
jail for a maximum of six months and/or a $300 fine, and/or any other civil or
criminal liability that may exist in state law or in common law.
   (C)   (1)   Each violation of §§
72.20 through
72.22 shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Unless otherwise specified herein or by the Idaho Code, a violation
of any provision of §§
72.20 through
72.22 shall constitute an infraction or misdemeanor as follows.
         (a)   A first offense shall constitute an infraction punishable by a
fine of $50.
         (b)   A second offense shall constitute an infraction punishable by a
fine of $100.
         (c)   A third offense shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed $300 and jail time not to exceed six months.
(Ord. 229-17, passed 2-10-2017; Ord. 268-25, passed 5-7-2025)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Roads requiring helmets while operating off-highway vehicles
SCHEDULE I. ROADS REQUIRING HELMETS WHILE OPERATING OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is the intent of these undersigned commissioners to promote the
safety of individuals driving OHV vehicles on the following roads in the county
which lie in the National Forest area: South Fork Snake River Road (#206);
Table Rock Canyon Road (#217); and McCoy Creek Road (#087). These roads
historically have a greater volume of traffic and sustain drivers of OHV
vehicles at a higher rate of speed. Such conditions require greater driving
safety and training to protect other drivers on these roads. The Commissioners
therefore feel compelled to protect the health and safety of all drivers by
instituting the ordinance codified in this schedule.
   (B)   For the purpose of this schedule, OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV) means any
all-terrain vehicle, motorbike, specialty off-highway vehicle or utility type
vehicle which are further defined by Idaho Code § 67-7101.
   (C)   All drivers operating an OHV vehicle shall be required to wear a
helmet and possess their own valid drivers’ license on the following roads in
the National Forest area in the county:
      (1)   South Forth Snake River Road (#206);
      (2)   Table Rock Canyon Road (#217); and
      (3)   McCoy Creek Road (#087).
(Ord. 219-10, passed 3-5-2010)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
94.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 90: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
90.01   Use of recreation areas
   
90.02   Possession of alcohol in public parks or County Fairgrounds prohibited
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 USE OF RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLOSURE. The period of time designated by the Board of County
Commissioners in which the recreation area may be closed to the general public.
      RECREATION AREA. Any portions of any highway or road, park area,
restroom, boat landing or boat dock or any associated area at the Blacktail and
Juniper boat landing areas on the Ririe Reservoir.
      USE FEES. Fees designated by the Board of County Commissioners for the
use of the Recreation area.
   (B)   Use fee. The Board of County Commissioners shall, prior to May 1 of
each year, by resolution, designate the use fee to be charged at the
recreational areas for the upcoming next one year. The use fee for the period
of May 1, 1996, through April 30, 1997, shall be the amount of $2 per admitted
vehicle or $18 per vehicle per year.
   (C)   Closure. Inasmuch as there exists a need to close the recreational
areas to protect the recreational areas from vandalism, misuse and to provide
periodic maintenance and repairs and to protect the safety and welfare of the
public, the recreational areas shall be closed daily from 11:00 p.m. until the
following morning at 5:00 a.m. For the purpose of this section, closure shall
not include or apply to those persons using the recreational area exclusively
for fishing purposes and access or egress thereto.
   (D)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this section for any individual
to refuse to pay the use fee or to be in a recreational area or to operate a
vehicle in a recreational area during any period of closure. Any person in
violation of or refusing to pay the required use fee shall be guilty of an
infraction violation as defined by state law. Any unauthorized person in the
recreational area or operating a vehicle in the recreational area during any
period of closure shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined by state law.
(Ord. 177-96, passed 4-30-1996) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC PARKS OR COUNTY FAIRGROUNDS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any liquid or solid, patented or not, containing
alcohol, spirits or wine and susceptible of being consumed by human being, for
beverage purposes and containing more than 4% of alcohol by weight; and
includes:
         (a)   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquor,
rectified either once or oftener, whatever maybe the origin thereof, or
synthetic ethyl alcohol.
         (b)   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation mixed with drinkable water and other substances in solution,
including, among other things, brandy, rum, whiskey and gin.
         (c)   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of
natural sugar content of fruits (grapes, apples and the like) or other
agriculture products containing sugar (honey, milk and the like).
      BEER. Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water and
which beverage contains not more than 4% of alcohol by weight.
   (B)   Exercise of police power. This section shall be deemed an exercise of
the police power of the county for the protection of the public health and
safety of the citizens, and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for
the attainment of that purpose.
   (C)   Unlawful to possess alcoholic liquor or beer in any public park or the
County Fairgrounds. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or have in
his or her possession any alcoholic liquor or beer at the County Fairgrounds.
(Ord. 241-22, passed 2-9-2022) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   All person or operator of a vehicle, violating any provision of §
90.01 shall be guilty of either an infraction or a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided under either the definition
of an infraction or misdemeanor convictions in state law.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
90.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than
30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 177-96, passed 4-30-1996; Ord. 241-22, passed 2-9-2022)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
Weeds
   
91.01   Definition
   
91.02   Removal of weeds
   
91.03   Parking strips, sidewalks, curbing, vacant lots and fields
   
91.04   Citation to appear
   
91.05   Failure to appear
   
91.06   Civil remedy to abate
   
91.07   Failure to comply with notice
   
91.08   Special assessments
   
91.09   Civil and criminal remedies
   
91.10   Permit from County Weed Department required to disturb right-of-way
Graffiti
   
91.25   Findings and purpose
   
91.26   Definition
   
91.27   Defacement
   
91.28   Removal required; notice
   
91.29   County abatement option
   
91.30   Injury by graffiti
 
   
91.99   Penalty
WEEDS
§ 91.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS AND OFFENSIVE PLANTS. All plants of more than ten inches in height,
measured from the surface of the ground, growing or existing in open spaces on
any land or parcel of land within the county, whether within a subdivision or
outside a subdivision, except such plants as are grown for use, ornament or the
production of food for human or beast, or for fuel. NOXIOUS WEEDS are declared
to be offensive plants regardless of their height. NOXIOUS WEEDS shall include,
but not be limited to, all noxious weeds described as part of Idaho Code Title
22, Chapter 24, and by this reference, all provisions of the aforementioned
Code are hereby affirmed and made a part of this subchapter. A non-inclusive
list of noxious weeds are attached to the ordinance codified in this subchapter
as Exhibit “A” and by this reference are made a part of this subchapter.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994)
§ 91.02 REMOVAL OF WEEDS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or the person in control of any land or
parcel of land within the county to allow, permit or suffer weeds or offensive
plants to grow or exist on such land within the county and the existence of
such weeds or offensive plants is declared to constitute a public nuisance. The
owner or person in control of such premises shall destroy and remove such weeds
or plants.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 PARKING STRIPS, SIDEWALKS, CURBING, VACANT LOTS AND FIELDS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or the person in control of any land
within the county, whether within a subdivision or outside a subdivision, to
allow, permit or suffer weeds or offensive plants to grow or exist on or in
parking strips, sidewalks, curbing, canals or upon vacant lots and fields and
subdivisions.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 CITATION TO APPEAR.
   (A)   Whenever it is determined by any police officer that any person has
violated any provision of this subchapter, said police officer may prepare in
quadruplicate, and serve upon the owner or person in control of the land where
the violation exists, a written citation containing a notice to appear in
magistrate court, the name and address of the person charged, the offense
charged, the time and place when and where the offense charged occurred, the
time when the person charged shall appear in magistrate court and such other
pertinent information as may be necessary or advisable.
   (B)   The issuance of such citation shall not be the exclusive method for
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994)
§ 91.05 FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to appear, in
response to and as required by such citation, regardless of the disposition of
the charge upon which such citation was originally issued. Appearance in
magistrate court shall be deemed complied with by an appearance by the person
charged or by his or her attorney.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 CIVIL REMEDY TO ABATE.
   The County Weed Control Supervisor may notify the owner or person in control
of land where weeds and offensive plants exist to cut, remove and destroy the
same. The notice shall be in writing and shall describe the property where the
nuisance exists and shall specify the time limited for the weeds and plants to
be removed and destroyed. Said notice shall be served personally upon such
owner or person in control if he or she can be found; if such owner or person
in control cannot be found, then the Weed Control Supervisor shall post such
notice in a conspicuous place on the premises and mail a copy thereof to such
owner or person in control by registered mail to his or her last known address.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994)
§ 91.07 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   If the owner or person in control of such premises fails to comply with the
notice to abate the weed nuisance, the County Weed Control Supervisor may order
the work done at the expense of the county, and the same shall be charged
against and be a lien against the property until paid. Said lien shall be filed
in the same manner as is provided herein for the filing of special assessments
against the property.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994)
§ 91.08 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the imposition of any criminal fine penalty or
imprisonment, the county may, subject to the provisions of this section, remove
any weeds from any private property within the county and levy a special
assessment against such property for the reasonable costs of such removal.
   (B)   Prior to the removal of such weeds, the county shall give notice in
writing to the owner of such property, which notice shall state the street
address of the property where the weeds exist, and shall describe the nature
and general location of the weeds to be removed. Such notice shall state that
if such weeds are not removed within 15 days from the date the notice is
delivered, the county may cause the same to be removed and a special assessment
made against such property for the costs of such removal. Such notice shall be
personally served upon any occupant, if any, of the property wherein the weeds
are located, and shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
postage prepaid, to the owner of the property at the address listed upon the
real property rolls of the county. Such notice shall be deemed to be delivered
upon its physical delivery and deposit into the United States mail, as set
forth above. If the owner or occupant fails to remove the weeds within the time
specified in the notice, the county may order the removal of the weeds and
cause a notice of special assessment for the amount thereof to be mailed to the
owner of the property in the manner set forth above.
   (C)   If the amount of the assessment is not paid within 30 days after
mailing of the notice of special assessment, the same shall be declared
delinquent and may be certified to the County Assessor by the County Clerk, not
later than August 1 of each year. Upon such certification, the assessment shall
be placed upon the tax roll and shall thereafter become a lien against the
property described in the notice and shall be collected in the same manner and
subject to the same penalties as other real property taxes. All monies received
on account of such special assessment shall be held by the County Treasurer in
a special fund to be applied to the payment of the costs of such removal, and
the money shall be used for no other purpose except to reimburse the county for
all amounts expended in removing such weeds.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994)
§ 91.09 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES.
   The prosecution of any civil remedy in this subchapter set forth shall not
bar the prosecution of any criminal proceedings herein provided.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994)
§ 91.10 PERMIT FROM COUNTY WEED DEPARTMENT REQUIRED TO DISTURB RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Authorization. All persons or entities (permittee), prior to working
in the right-of-way in the county, shall obtain from the County Weed Department
a permit to disturb the ground.
   (B)   Remediation plan. As part of the permitting process, the permittee
shall choose one of the following programs to ensure the proper revegetation or
that proper invasive weed control takes place to maintain proper vegetation
after construction within the ROW.
      (1)   If there is less than 15% of the ROW disturbed, then the permittee
will be assessed a fee of $0.02 per linear foot of disturbed landscape, payable
to County Weed Department, which the County Weed Department will control
unwanted weeds within the disturbed site. This will generally be the case when
utility conduit is placed by boring, ripping, pulling cable or dragline type of
installation.
      (2)   If there is between 15% and 30% of the ROW disturbed, the permittee
will reseed the site by the use of incorporating approved grass seed into or
over the disturbed area. More information on seeding methods, seed types and
where to obtain seed can be found on the County Weed Control website. This will
generally be the case for any open trenching that is performed.
      (3)   If greater than 30% of the ROW is disturbed, the permittee shall
make sure that four inches of top soil exists, or shall import that amount of
top spoil necessary to constitute four inches of top soil, and will then reseed
the site by means of seed drilling (conventional or no-till) or hydroseeding,
or erosion control blankets of the disturbed area utilizing approved grass
seed. More information on seeding methods, seed types and where to obtain seed
can be found on the County Weed Control website or in Appendix I. This will
generally be the case when complete excavation occurs within the ROW.
      (4)   Due to the nature of this project being a curb and gutter or other
special circumstance, this project is exempt from this permitting process.
   (C)   Seeding options. In those circumstances where one of the options in
division (B) above require seeding, the permittee shall incorporate approved
grass seed into or over the disturbed area as required by the County Weed
Department but not by means of less than by dragging a harrow or similar tool
over the soil, topdressing seed with a spreader and then dragging a chain over
the site. This should be followed by a roller to ensure adequate seed to soil
contact. Additional requirements may be seed varieties which are pre-approved
and accepted by the County Weed Department must be used, including non-
irrigated pasture blend of seed should be acceptable, including, but not
limited to, a combinations up to 20 pounds, 80% to 90% germination rate,
noxious weed free combinations of three or more species approved by the county
such as Vavilov II wheatgrass, Siberian wheatgrass, Sodar wheatgrass, Crested
wheatgrass, Idaho fescue or Hard fescue.
   (D)   Violations. Failure of permittee to complete remediation shall result
in no additional permits being granted to permittee to work in rights-of-way
until the remediation has been completed or all costs to the county for
remediation have been paid.
(Ord. 234-19, passed 1-22-2019) Penalty, see §
91.99
GRAFFITI
§ 91.25 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   The county finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and
destructive to the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire
community. Unless the county acts to remove graffiti from public and private
property, the graffiti tends to remain, thereby causing other properties to
become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods become less livable, all
to the detriment of the county.
      (2)   The county also finds that graffiti leads to other, more violent
crimes and gang-related activity. The county shall be entitled to abate this
nuisance of graffiti pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 52-202 and 52-205.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is:
      (1)   To prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a
program for the removal for the removal of graffiti from public and private
property; and
      (2)   To provide additional enforcement tools to protect the public and
private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement.
(Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011)
§ 91.26 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that
is written, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved upon any
surface of public or private property by any implement, when application of the
mark was not expressly authorized in advance by the owner, occupant or
authorized representative of the owner of the property.
(Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011)
§ 91.27 DEFACEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or
human-made surface that is visible from any public street, alley or sidewalk
within the county.
(Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.28 REMOVAL REQUIRED; NOTICE.
   (A)   Graffiti removal required.
      (1)   The existence of graffiti on public or private property is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and persons owning or controlling the
property having graffiti thereon shall be subject to the removal and abatement
provisions specified in this subchapter.
      (2)   The owner or person in control of the premises on which graffiti
has been applied may promptly remove the graffiti after notice is given as
hereinafter set forth. If, after receipt of such notice, The graffiti nuisance
is not abated, the county may proceed to abate the graffiti nuisance in the
manner set forth.
   (B)   Graffiti notice to remove.
      (1)   Whenever graffiti is located on any public or private property or
any surface visible from any public rights-of-way within the county, a notice
shall be issued to the owner or person in control of the premises to abate the
nuisance and remove the graffiti or cover it with paint or other substance
masking the graffiti from public view.
      (2)   Said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected
premises, as shown on the last property tax assessment rolls of the county, and
upon any known occupant of the premises. Service of the notice may be
accomplished through personal service on the owner, occupant or person in
charge or control of the property, by United States mail, postage prepaid, or
by posting in a conspicuous place upon the premises.
      (3)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall clearly state that the
property has been determined to be in violation of this subchapter and that he
or she owner/occupant’s failure to remove within 48 hours of receipt of the
notice will cause the county declare the property to be a public nuisance; that
the owner or person served may, within 48 hours of receipt of the notice,
deliver in writing to the County Sheriff his or her objections to the removal
of the graffiti and request a hearing before the County Commissioners.
(Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011)
§ 91.29 COUNTY ABATEMENT OPTION.
   (A)   Generally. Nuisances which remain unabated after notice may be
removed, abated or destroyed by the county or its agents, after the following
steps have been taken.
      (1)   If, after delivery of the notice in accordance with this
subchapter, abatement of the nuisance has not occurred and the owner or
occupant has not requested a hearing, the county may remove, abate or destroy
the nuisance.
      (2)   If the property owner requests a hearing to show cause before the
County Commissioners, the hearing shall, if feasible be placed on the agenda on
the next regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of the County Commissioners
shall be final. If the Commissioners require abatement of the nuisance, a ten-
day period shall be given to the property owner after the Commissioner’s
decision so that the property owner shall have additional opportunity to abate
the nuisance or to pursue any legal remedies or defenses at the district court
level.
   (B)   Exceptions to removal. The removal requirements above shall not apply
if the property owner or responsible party can demonstrate that:
      (1)   The property owner or reasonable party can show that if the county
removes the graffiti, it will cause irreparable harm to his or her property;
and/or
      (2)   The property owner or responsible party can show that the alleged
graffiti is not actual graffiti.
   (C)   Right of the county to remove graffiti.
       (1)   Use of public funds. The county may use public funds to abate the
nuisance.
      (2)   Right of entry on private property. If the property owner or
occupant fails to remove the graffiti within the time specified by this
subchapter, or if the county has requested consent to remove or paint over the
graffiti and the property owner or the responsible party has refused consent
for entry for such removal purposes, the county may enter the property and
commence abatement and cost of recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal,
pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 52-202 and 52-205.
(Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011)
§ 91.30 INJURY BY GRAFFITI.
   (A)   No person shall purposely and knowingly vandalize, deface or otherwise
damage the property of another by painting, writing, drawing or otherwise
inscribing thereon in any fashion that which is commonly known as graffiti.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, GRAFFITI includes any form of
painting, written or inscription regardless of content or the nature of
materials used which is applied to any public or private surface without the
consent of the owner of the property.
(Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Idaho Code § 18-7036
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
91.01 through
91.09 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided under the definition of misdemeanor and misdemeanor
convictions in state law. Each ten days after a violation of §§
91.01 through
91.09 continues after citation is issued or notice is served as herein provided
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person or entity in violation of §
91.10, shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punished
as provided under the definition of an infraction conviction in state law.
   (D)   A violation of any provision of §§
91.25 through
91.30 shall be a misdemeanor. In addition to any punishment specified herein,
the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for any
damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator’s offense in the
amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents
or legal guardian may be ordered to make restitution.
(Ord. 163-94, passed 5-4-1994; Res. 223-11, passed 5-31-2011; Ord. 234-19,
passed 1-22-2019)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
Dog Control
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   License required
   
92.03   License fees
   
92.04   Tags to be placed on collar
   
92.05   Record of license
   
92.06   Unlawful for dogs to run at large
   
92.07   Impoundment of dogs
   
92.08   Rabies vaccination required
   
92.09   Commercial and noncommercial kennel license
   
92.10   Cruelty prohibited
   
92.11   At-risk and dangerous dogs
   
92.12   Dogs killing, worrying or wounding livestock and/or poultry
   
92.13   County authority
 
   
92.99   Penalty
DOG CONTROL
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER. Includes the Idaho Falls Animal Control Shelter and/
or premises deemed necessary for the confinement and care of dogs seized either
under this subchapter or otherwise deemed necessary for confinement and care of
the dog.
   AT LARGE. Any dog off or away from the premises of the owner, keeper or
person harboring a dog, and the dog is not under control of the owner, keeper
or person harboring the dog, or his or her agent or a member of his or her
immediate family, either by leash, cord or chain, or while confined in a
vehicle.
   AT-RISK DOG. As defined in Idaho Code § 25-2810, any dog that without
justified provocation bites a person without causing a serious injury as
defined by state law. For the purpose of this definition, JUSTIFIED PROVOCATION
is defined in Idaho Code § 25-2810(3).
   DANGEROUS DOG. As defined in Idaho Code § 25-2810, any dog that without
justified provocation has inflicted serious injury on a person; or has been
found to be “at risk” and thereafter bites or physically attacks a person
without justified provocation. For the purpose of this definition, JUSTIFIED
PROVOCATION is defined in Idaho Code § 25-2810(3).
   DOG. Either male or female canines.
   DOG KENNEL. Commercial and non-commercial, as herein provided for, and will
be considered a premises where more than two dogs of licensing age are kept or
maintained.
   DOG OF LICENSING AGE. Any dog that attained the age of four months old.
   IMPOUNDED. Having been received into custody of the Animal Control Shelter
or into the custody of an Animal Control Officer/Deputy, County Sheriff’s
Office or any authorized agent or representative thereof.
   MICROCHIP. A small radio transmitter and minute electronic device,
approximately the size of a grain of rice, that contains the dogs
identification number. This identification number will link to a database so as
to contact the owner of the dog.
   OWNER and/or KEEPER. Applies to the proprietorship of a dog and shall mean
any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
   UNLICENSED DOG. A dog for which a license has not been issued for the
current year, or to which a tag provided in for in this subchapter is not
attached to a collar on the dog.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
§ 92.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2801, the Board of County Commissioners
requires all the county resident dog owners who reside in unincorporated areas
of the county to identify their dog and pay an annual license fee for each dog
over four months of age.
      (1)   The application or receipt information for an individual dog
license may identify the dog and dog owner in the following way:
         (a)   License tag number and year of issue;
         (b)   Date the license was issued and the fee amount;
         (c)   A dog owner’s name, address and telephone number(s); and
         (d)   Identifying information relating to the dog, such as a dog’s
name, size, gender, color, markings, breed, existing microchip or tattoo and
the like.
   (B)   The annual county dog license fee is valid for the calendar year that
appears on the license, from January l to December 31 of that year.
      (1)   Resident dog owners who move into an unincorporated area of the
county must obtain an appropriate annual county individual dog or kennel
license at the time the residence is occupied, and a dog or dogs are kept on
the property and/or premises.
      (2)   A numbered dog tag for an individual licensed dog can be issued
after a license application is approved and the license fee is paid to the
County Assessor or an approved vendor.
   (C)   Use of a license tag for a dog other than the dog described in the
receipt may be deemed a failure to properly license infraction. A violation of
this division (C) is an infraction punishable as provided in Idaho Code § 18-
113A.
   (D)   All dogs over the age of four months must be vaccinated for rabies,
and a copy of the vaccination certificate must be presented with the license
application. A suitable certificate can be a copy of invoice showing the rabies
vaccination from a licensed veterinarian.
   (E)   While all dogs must be appropriately licensed, the annual individual
dog license fee may be exempted and waived for:
      (1)   Dogs that are owned by a government entity for public service in
law enforcement, search and rescue or other qualified purposes;
      (2)   Dogs that qualify as a “service animal” or “service animal in
training” as defined in the Americans With Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §
12101. A SERVICE ANIMAL is any dog that is individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a
physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability. Other
species of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or untrained, are not
considered SERVICE ANIMALS; and
      (3)   Qualify as an agricultural and/or livestock working dog. Dog owners
who have a current agricultural exemption will also have their working dog
license fees waived. The exemption will be for working dogs, i.e., cattle,
sheep and other livestock only, and not for household pets.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2802, the Board of County Commissioners
authorizes the County Assessor, government entities or private vendors to
collect the individual dog license fee from resident dog owners. Dog licenses
are valid for the calendar year, from January 1 to December 31 of the given
year. The annual individual dog license fee is as follows:
      (1)   Neutered or spayed animal: $3;
      (2)   Unaltered animal: $5; and
      (3)   Replacement tags: $1.
   (B)   (1)   In the event that a dog is impounded, there will be additional
fees of microchipping, impounding and boarding fees and vaccination fees to
include rabies prior to redemption of the dog by the owner.
      (2)   See §
92.07 for more information.
      (3)   In the event that the dog is current on vaccination, proof of
vaccination will be required prior to redemption of the dog by the owner.
   (C)   A county resident dog owner’s receipt showing a paid license fee for
an individual dog or kennel license and/or dog tag for the current calendar
year is required to demonstrate compliance with this section.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
§ 92.04 TAGS TO BE PLACED ON COLLAR.
   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2803, no dog shall be permitted to go at large
within the county without having a collar about its neck with a license tag or
disc attached to the collar bearing the number of the license issued by the
county or some municipality within the county. A violation of this section is
an infraction punishable as provided in Idaho Code § 18-113A.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 RECORD OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The County Assessor shall keep a suitable record of the dog licenses
issued under the provisions of this subchapter and shall record all the facts
required to be stated in the license.
   (B)   Duplicate records of dog licenses issued shall be properly maintained
by the Animal Control Director at the Animal Control Shelter.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
§ 92.06 UNLAWFUL FOR DOGS TO RUN AT LARGE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2805, the County Sheriff intends to
enforce laws and ordinances in unincorporated areas of the county, or in cities
that contract with the Sheriff for law enforcement services that pertain to
dogs, to include dogs that are not on the owner’s property, are not under
control or at large in the county.
   (B)   All dogs found to be running at large are declared to be a public
nuisance and it will be the duty of all sworn law enforcement and/or authorized
Animal Control deputies to capture and impound the dog(s). All dogs will be
taken to the Idaho Falls Animal Control Shelter unless other arrangements are
needed for the care of the dog. (See § 92.07 for more information.)
   (C)   (1)   To the extent a licensed dog owner’s telephone number and/or
address is available from a current dog license tag, tag application, microchip
or other means, or a deputy has reasonable cause to believe that an unlicensed
dog is kept on a premises that is believed to be at large, a deputy will make a
reasonable attempt to serve a copy of the following or similar notice upon the
dog owner, or property owner, or adult aged occupant.
 
   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2805, a County Sheriff’s deputy has reasonable cause
to believe that one or more of your dogs, and/or one or more dogs kept at this
premises, was or were at large in an area of the county. Any future complaint or
observance concerning one or more of the dogs running at large, may result in
citations that include, but may not be limited to, a “dog at large” citation.
 
      (2)   The notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Incident number with date and time;
         (b)   Dog description and area that the dog was at large;
         (c)   Dog/premises owner or occupant’s name and address; and
         (d)   Deputy and contact information.
      (3)   Delivery of said notice shall be by personal service; or left at
premises and sent by certified mail; or sent by certified mail.
   (D)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2805, after a complaint has been made, and
a notice has been served, any future complaints that any person by this person
who willfully or negligently permits any dog owned, possessed or harbored by
them to run at large; or willfully or negligently fails, neglects or refuses to
keep such dog securely confined within the limits of their premises when not
under the immediate care and control of a competent person, may be guilty of an
infraction.
   (E)   A violation of this section is an infraction punishable as provided in
Idaho Code § 18-113A.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2803, it is the responsibility of the
dog’s owner, and/or property owner, to ensure that the dog is properly
controlled and wears a collar about its neck with a current and valid dog
license tag attached. It is the duty of all sworn law enforcement and/or
authorized Animal Control deputies to capture and take up and impound said dog.
All dogs will be taken to the Idaho Falls Animal Control Shelter unless other
arrangements are needed for the care of the dog.
   (B)   Terms of the impoundment, redemption, sale or other disposal of such
dogs will be as follows.
      (1)   Unlicensed dogs. All dogs not licensed or otherwise identified
found to be running at large shall be captured, taken up and impounded at the
Idaho Falls Animal Control Shelter (or other location that may be deemed
necessary for the welfare of the dog). The dog will be retained at the Animal
Control Shelter for a minimum of three business days, excluding weekends and
holidays. At any time during said three-day period, the owner or keeper of such
dog may redeem the dog by procuring a license, as in this subchapter provided,
a microchip identification and by paying impound and boarding fees as set forth
by the Animal Control Shelter.
      (2)   Licensed dogs. All licensed or otherwise identified dogs with a tag
or microchip found running at large shall be captured, taken up and impounded
at the Idaho Falls Animal Control Shelter (or other location that may be deemed
necessary for the welfare of the dog). The dog will be retained at the Animal
Control Shelter for a minimum of five days, excluding weekends and holidays;
and after the owner is notified of the impoundment. As soon as reasonably
possible following impoundment of a properly identified dog, the Animal Shelter
Director shall keep a record of the date, time and manner of giving notice,
with respect to each impounded dog. At any time during said five-day period,
the owner or keeper of such dog may redeem the dog by procuring a license as in
this subchapter provided, a microchip identification and by paying impound and
boarding fees as set forth by the Animal Control Shelter. The five-day period
shall commence to run at 12:00 p.m. on the following date such notice is given.
      (3)   Microchipping. No dog shall be released to a person redeeming an
impounded dog from the Idaho Falls Animal Shelter unless the dog is currently
licensed and microchipped and wearing a collar and license tag.
      (4)   Unaltered dogs. An unaltered (not neutered or spayed) that has been
impounded at the Animal Control Shelter on two previous occasions during the
previous one year shall be required to be spayed or neutered prior to the owner
redeeming the animal. The accrued impound and boarding fees shall be applied
towards the cost of spay or neuter of the dog.
         (a)   The Board of County Commissioners may contract or enter into
mutual aid agreements with government or private impound facilities to enforce
laws, ordinances and impoundment of dogs.
         (b)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2804, county residents who redeem or
recover a dog from a government or private impound facility are subject to and
responsible to pay the county and/or the impound facility in U.S. currency any
and all license fees, pertinent county fine and all costs associated with an
impounded dogs release.
      (5)   Recovery. A dog owner bears sole responsibility to identify and
recover an impounded dog. The Sheriff or his or her authorized representative
will make reasonable effort to notify the owner of an impounded dog when an
owner’s identity can be reasonably be determined.
      (6)   Unclaimed dogs at Animal Control Shelter. After the time elapsed as
stated in this subchapter, excluding weekends and holidays, from the time a dog
was taken up and impounded, if the owner has not claimed the dog by personally
contacting the Animal Control Shelter personnel, the dog will be deemed
abandoned and the owner relinquishes all property rights to the dog.
         (a)   Any dog not redeemed within five days may be adopted or sold for
the best price attainable, excluding weekends and holidays from the time the
dog was taken up and impounded; if the owner, who was not identified; or was
unavailable for contact; or did not respond to any attempted contact; and after
any type of contact was made, failed to recover the dog from the impound.
         (b)   In any case, the dog may be humanely destroyed by euthanasia and
the carcass disposed of in any lawful manner. A dog may be humanely destroyed
of without waiting for five days in order to prevent a dog’s apparent continued
suffering to injury, neglect, abuse or illness.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
§ 92.08 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog in the county to not
have a current rabies vaccination. Vaccinations must begin when the animal has
reached the age of four months of age. Every owner, upon request of a Deputy or
Animal Control Officer, produce such proof of vaccination.
   (B)   (1)   If a dog has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked a person,
the owner of such dog or any person having knowledge of such incident shall
immediately notify the County Sheriff’s Office and the Health Department. The
Animal Control Shelter Director shall have authority to require the owner of
any dog which has bitten any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, or
showing signs of rabies, to subject such dog to impoundment at the regular
daily impoundment fee, or to a practicing veterinarian for quarantine enclosure
from which the dog cannot escape and is which not accessible to the public and
approved by the Animal Control Deputy/Officer; and shall be kept for a minimum
period of ten days. If the dog shall be determined to be free of rabies, the
dog shall be returned to the owner after applicable impoundment and licensing
fees are paid. If the impoundment fee is not paid, the dog can be subject to
disposal under the conditions of impoundment herein provided.
      (2)   Further, it shall be the duty of all practicing veterinarians to
report to the Health Department all cases of rabies or suspected rabies with
which they come into contact or to which their attention has been directed.
      (3)   No person shall kill or cause to be killed, any rabid dog, any dog
suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any dog biting a human, except
here in provided, nor remove same from the county without written permission
from the Health Department Officer.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL LICENSE.
   (A)   Commercial kennel license.
      (1)   State law provides that dog owners who keep their dogs in a kennel,
covering 15 licensed dogs for breeding or commercial purposes shall be entitled
to a kennel license. This subchapter provides the kennel requirements and
restrictions for all kennels housing four or more dogs and their dependent
young.
      (2)   More than one kennel license may be purchased from the County
Assessor’s Office for commercial boarding kennels that house or board more than
15 dogs that are not owned by the kennel or property owner.
      (3)   The county enforcement and zoning ordinances restrict kennel
locations as follows.
         (a)   Kennels are currently allowed in Professional Business (PB)
Zone; Limited Neighborhood Commercial (LNC) Zone; Neighborhood Shopping Center
(SC-1) Zone; Limited Commercial (C-1) Zone; Limited Business (HC-1) Zone;
General Commercial (C-2) Zone; Manufacturing (M-1 and M-1A) Zones; Industrial
and Manufacturing (I and M-1, 2 and 3 Zones); or may be allowed in Agricultural
(A-1) and Grazing (G-1) Zones after a final decision from a use hearing of the
County Planning Board.
         (b)   Residents who choose to apply for a kennel license must attach a
copy of a valid zoning permit to the approved dog kennel license application
before the Assessor’s Office can issue a kennel license.
         (c)   An annual kennel license fee covering up to 15 dogs is $75. The
kennel owner is entitled to individual license tags for up to 15 kenneled dogs.
A kenneled dog must wear a collar and attached license tags whenever the dog is
outside the confines of the kenneled property.
      (4)   Kennel owners who intermittently board more than 15 licensed dogs
that are not owned by the kennel or property owner or property manager must
attach a valid zoning permit to the kennel license application to cover all
boarded dogs.
         (a)   Annual commercial boarding kennel license fee for intermittently
boarding more than 15 licensed dogs that belong to separate owners is $75 for
each separate authorized licensed covering up to 15 boarded dogs.
         (b)   Generally, individual county dog license tags are not issued
with boarding kennel license. Boarded dogs are generally licensed by their
individual owners.
      (5)   For the purpose of this subchapter, animal hospitals or clinics
operated with an accredited veterinary practice, government approved impound
facilities or retail pet stores are not considered dog kennels. The above
mentioned facilities may be governed by separate zoning ordinances.
   (B)   Non-commercial kennel licensing.
      (1)   To promote public health and safety, the maximum number of
individual licensed dogs that can be kept or boarded on the same premises,
property or mobile carrier in the following designated zoned areas shall be:
         (a)   Two licensed dogs and their dependent young in a Residential (R-
1), R-2, R-3 Zones; Residence Park (RP) Zone; Manufactured Home or Travel
Trailer Park (MH) Zone; Recreational- Forestry (RF) Zone; Recreational-
Agricultural (RA-1) Zone;
         (b)   Three dogs and their dependent young in a Residential-
Agricultural (RA-2, 3 and 4) Zones and Agricultural (A-1) and Grazing (G-1);
and
         (c)   A dog kennel that has four or more dogs and their dependent
young, covering up to 15 dogs shall refer to commercial zoning areas.
      (2)   A dog kennel that has four or more dogs and their dependent young,
covering up to 15 dogs, may be allowed in the Agricultural (A-1) Zone or
Grazing (G-1) Zone if the County Planning and Zoning Board approves all aspects
related to the kennel after a use hearing.
      (3)   Applicants for a dog or kennel license may view a current county
zoned map by contacting the County Planning and Zoning Office in order to
determine the number of dogs and/or kennel location that are or is allowed in a
particular area.
      (4)   Residents who possess or possessed a valid county 2017 non-
commercial kennel license may purchase and maintain individual dog licenses for
the 2018 and subsequent annual license years, but only for the natural life of
each dog that resided on the designated kennel premises, whether through
breeding or not, or movement of the dogs to a different premises will require
the dog or premises owner to comply with kennel requirements defined in this or
applicable zoning ordinances.
      (5)   Pursuant to Idaho Code Title 25, Chapter 28, the Board of County
Commissioners authorizes the County Assessor, government entities or private
vendors to collect the annual individual dog license fee from resident dog
owners. Kennel license applications must be submitted to and reviewed by the
County Assessor’s Office. Collected fees will be deposited into the General
Fund except to allow an agency or entity or authorized representative by the
Board of County Commissioners as a vendor for county annual dog licenses, may
keep $1 to help offset administrative costs.
      (6)   Resident dog owners and/or, if applicable, property, premises or
land owners, must pay any and all dog or kennel related fines, infraction
penalties, impound or zoning ordinance related costs and proof of rabies
vaccination before the Assessor or authorized representative can issue an
individual or kennel dog license.
      (7)   License applications will be considered pending until a final
administrative finding or legal disposition is issued concerning an applicant’s
appeal for a license denial or revocation.
         (a)   Zoning appeals must adhere to the county zoning appeal process.
         (b)   License appeals to the Board of County Commissioners must adhere
to the State Administrative Procedure Act, Idaho Code Title 67, Chapter 52.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
§ 92.10 CRUELTY PROHIBITED.
   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-3504, the County Sheriff intends to enforce the
laws in unincorporated areas of the county or within cities that contract with
the Sheriff for law enforcement services concerning the cruelty to animals.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 AT-RISK AND DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2810, the County Sheriff intends to
enforce the laws in unincorporated areas of the county or within cities that
contract with the Sheriff for law enforcement services concerning dogs that
bite or injure a person.
   (B)   The County Sheriff intends to serve and enforce court orders that
relate to law, administrative regulation or ordinance pursuant to Idaho Code §
25-2811.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 DOGS KILLING, WORRYING OR WOUNDING LIVESTOCK AND/OR POULTRY.
   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 25-2806, the County Sheriff intends to conduct a
reasonable investigation concerning any dog that is reported to have killed,
worried or wounded any livestock or poultry.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.13 COUNTY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter is intended to enlarge or limit the
authority of the Sheriff or Prosecuting Attorney of the county and their
respective deputies from enforcing laws and ordinances anywhere in the county.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter is intended to prohibit or limit the
Sheriff or Prosecuting Attorney of the county from enforcing and/or prosecuting
any violation, under the ordinance or Idaho Code section that the Sheriff and/
or Prosecuting Attorney deem appropriate in any situation.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Idaho Code violation penalties and civil remedies are found in
individual statutes with regards to misdemeanor and felony crimes that may
include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Idaho Code § 25-2810: at-risk and dangerous dogs;
         (b)   Idaho Code § 25-3504: committing cruelty to animals; and
         (c)   Idaho Code § 25-2806: liability for livestock and poultry killed
by dogs.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, and pursuant to Idaho Code § 18-113A,
the Board of County Commissioners authorizes infraction penalties, based upon
reasonable cause, for violations of the following provisions of the Idaho Code
and/or this chapter from current:
         (a)   State statute;
         (b)   Applicable court discretion;
         (c)   State Supreme Court infraction fee schedule; and/or
         (d)   The Board of County Commissioners infraction fees.
      (3)   Each complaint, ordinance violation and/or occurrence supported by
reasonable cause may be enforced separately with regards to an infraction fine
for:
         (a)   Failure to control dog;
         (b)   Dog or dogs running at large;
         (c)   Nuisance, a dog’s noise, damage, molestation or trespass;
         (d)   Failure to properly license a dog;
         (e)   Failure to properly license a kennel;
         (f)   Exceeding maximum number of dogs in a kennel;
         (g)   Exceed maximum number of dogs in a zoned area; and
         (h)   Failure to obtain a current rabies vaccination.
      (4)   The fine will be for all other infractions pursuant to Idaho Code §
18-113A as set by State Supreme Court infraction fee schedule.
(Ord. 232-17, passed 12-15-2017)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fireworks
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Permits
   
93.03   Procedures
   
93.04   Compliance
 
   
93.99   Penalty
FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL AND WILDLIFE FIREWORKS. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   Fireworks designated or used to prevent damage to crops; and
      (2)   Fireworks designated or used to prevent unwanted occupancy of areas
by animals or birds through the employment of sound, light or both.
   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube
salutes, cherry bombs, mines, ground bombardment, grass-hoppers and other
explosive articles of similar nature;
      (2)   Blank cartridges;
      (3)   Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any
combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
      (4)   Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire
into the air;
      (5)   Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel
about the surface of the ground during discharge;
      (6)   Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
      (7)   Sparklers more than ten inches in length or one-quarter inch in
diameter or mace with other than iron wires;
      (8)   All articles for pyrotechnic display, such as serial shells,
salutes, flash shells, sky battles, parachute shells, mines, Dago bombs and
similar devices;
      (9)   All torpedoes which explode by means of friction or which contain
arsenic, and all other similar fireworks devices, including cracker balls; and
      (10)   Fire balloons of any type which have burning material of any kind
attached thereto.
   FIRE NUISANCE. Anything or any act which increases, or may cause an increase
of, the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily
recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing,
suppressing or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder, or
may become the cause of any obstruction, delay or a hindrance to the prevention
or extinguishment of fire.
   FIREWORKS.
      (1)   Includes blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or
toy guns in which explosives are used, fire balloons (balloons of a type which
have burning material of any kind attached thereto or which requires fire
underneath to propel them), firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, Roman
candles, fountains, wheels, Dago bombs, sparklers and other fireworks of like
construction and any fireworks containing any combustible or explosive
substances for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonation.
       (2)   Exempted from this definition are all toy pistols, toy cannons,
toy canes and toy guns, and similar devices such as party poppers or party
favors in which paper caps containing not more than 0.25 grain of explosive
compound per cap are used and such caps whether single, roll or tape type.
   PACKAGE. Any case, container or receptacle used for holding fireworks, which
shall be closed or sealed by tape, cordage or by any other secure means.
    PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure,
association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver,
syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS. An entertainment feature where the public is
admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of dangerous fireworks.
   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   Cone fountains with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 50 grams
each;
      (2)   Cylindrical fountains, whether base, spike or handle, with
pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 75 grams each and inside tube diameter
not exceeding three-quarters inch;
      (3)   Sparklers and dipped sticks not more than ten inches in length or
one-quarter inch in diameter, made on steel or iron wire and Suzuki and Morning
Glories with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding four grams each;
      (4)   Snakes which do not contain bichloride of mercury and pyrotechnic
composition not exceeding two grams each;
      (5)   Wheels with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 60 grains for
each driver unit or 240 grains for each complete wheel. The inside tube
diameter of driver unit shall not exceed one-half inch; and
      (6)   Whistles, without report and which do not dart or travel about the
ground during discharge, with pyrotechnic composition not exceeding six grams
and containing no picric or gallic acid.
(Ord. 134-83, passed 10-12-1983)
§ 93.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   Dangerous fireworks permit. It shall be unlawful for any person in the
county to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep or store or
permit the keeping or storing of any dangerous fireworks for any use or
purpose, except that a person holding a dangerous fireworks display permit
issued pursuant to the terms and conditions of this subchapter may use
“dangerous fireworks” for a safely supervised and conducted public display of
fireworks. Said fireworks may be stored for a period not exceeding ten days
immediately preceding the date of said public display, provided the fireworks
are to be used exclusively for public display and are stored in accordance with
Uniform Building Code requirements.
   (B)   Safe and sane fireworks sales permit. No person without having a valid
“safe and sane fireworks sales permit” issued pursuant to terms and conditions
set forth in this subchapter shall import, export, possess for the purpose of
sale, offer for sale or sell “safe and sane fireworks” for any use or purpose.
   (C)   Agricultural and wildlife fireworks. A permit shall not be required
for the sale, use and storage of agricultural and wildlife fireworks, as long
as such use is by persons actively engaged in farming or livestock raising.
Said use and storage shall take place only in areas zoned agricultural or
rural. Persons contemplating the use of agricultural and wildlife fireworks
should notify the appropriate fire district, forest fire prevention district
and/or Sheriff’s Department in advance of such use.
   (D)   Exception. This subchapter does not apply to a state fireworks
manufacturer, importer or wholesaler as to that portion of product inventories
which are designated and intended only for shipment directly out of the state.
(Ord. 134-83, passed 10-12-1983) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Dangerous fireworks display permit. Any reputable person over 21 years
of age, in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal
business or charitable purpose desiring to make a public display of dangerous
fireworks, shall first make written application to the Building Official for a
dangerous fireworks display permit. Each applicant shall pay to the Building
Official a fee of $35 per site at the time he or she files his or her
application. This fee is non-refundable and is to defray costs of
investigations required hereunder.
   (B)   Safe and sane fireworks sales permit. Any reputable person over 21
years of age, in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal,
business or charitable purpose, desiring to engage in the sale of safe and sane
fireworks within the county, shall first make written application to the
Building Official for a safe and sane fireworks sales permit. Each applicant
shall pay to the Building Official a fee of $35 at the time he or she files his
or her application, which shall not be refunded in any event. The fee is to
defray costs of investigations required hereunder.
   (C)   Form of application. Each applicant for a safe and sane fireworks
sales permit or a dangerous fireworks display permit shall file his or her
application with the Building Official. Each application shall show the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Whether or not the applicant is a private, profit-making
corporation, a private non-profit corporation, a sole proprietorship or a
partnership;
      (3)   The names and addresses of the officers, trustees and/or directors,
if any, of the applicant;
      (4)   The location where the applicant requests permission to sell safe
and sane fireworks or display dangerous fireworks together with a legal
description of the property and proof of ownership or right of use;
      (5)   Date of incorporation or date partnership was established or the
applicant’s age, if a sole proprietorship;
      (6)   The location of the applicant’s principal and permanent meeting
place or places or principal place or places of business;
      (7)   The applicant’s state sales tax permit number, except if
application is for dangerous fireworks permit;
      (8)   If the applicant is an entity other than a sole proprietorship, the
name and general description of the business activities of each parent or
subsidiary company, business or entity and a general description of the
ownership organization of each parent or subsidiary, if any;
      (9)   Such other information as the Building Official may require on a
standard form submitted by all applicants and which is reasonably necessary to
protect the public health, safety and morals; and
      (10)   Proof of issuance of a policy of public liability insurance with
coverage of at least $100,000/$1,000,000 and a policy of property damage
insurance with at least $100,000 or a certificate showing said amount of
insurance. Each policy shall contain two riders therein listing and carrying
the county as an additional assured under said policy.
   (D)   Pre-installation investigation.
      (1)   The Building Official, upon receipt of an application for either a
safe and sane fireworks sales permit or a dangerous fireworks display permit,
shall assign an application (permit) number. The Building Official shall then
promptly notify the Fire Chief of the appropriate fire district or the County
Sheriff’s Department if no fire district exists at the location proposed for
sales or display. The Building Official and the Fire Chief or their designated
representatives shall arrange a mutually convenient time to review the
application and to visit the proposed location. If the application is for a
safe and sane fireworks sales permit, the Building Official shall ascertain
that the proposed location is in an area zoned commercial.
      (2)   After meeting with the Fire Chief, the Building Official will
prepare a written report of their findings, together with a recommendation for
approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of the application. Factors
to be considered in the report include compatibility with the Uniform Building
Code and/or Uniform Fire Code, compatibility with the requirements and
standards of this subchapter and the character or repute of the applicant. This
report shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners within ten working days
of the receipt of the application. The Board of Commissioners shall then
approve, conditionally approve or deny the application.
   (E)   Installation inspection.
      (1)   Safe and sane fireworks sales permits shall not be valid unless and
until the Fire Chief or his or her designated representative have visited the
site and verified in writing to the Board of Commissioners that the
installation meets the requirements of this subchapter and the permit. This
site visit must take place after the temporary fireworks stand is in place, but
before sales commence.
      (2)   The safe and sane fireworks sales permit number must be posted on
the temporary fireworks stand in a conspicuous place. Letters shall be a
minimum of four inches in height.
    (F)   Term of permit. A safe and sane fireworks sales permit or a dangerous
fireworks display permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid only
within the calendar year in which issued. A permit shall be valid only for the
specific premises or location designated in the permit. However, subject to
reasonable conditions necessary for protection of public health, safety and
morals, an applicant may be granted permits for more than one premises or
location within the county. No permit shall be transferable or assignable.
   (G)   Time of filing application. Each application for a safe and sane
fireworks sales permit will be filed with the Clerk on or before June 15 of the
calendar year for which the permit is sought. Each application for a dangerous
fireworks display permit will be filed with the Clerk before June 1 of the
calendar year for which the permit is sought.
   (H)   Time of sale. No safe and sane fireworks shall be sold or offered for
sale except from 12:00 p.m. on June 15 to 12:00 a.m. on July 5 of each year. No
temporary fireworks stands will be erected before June 10 of the calendar year.
   (I)   Distribution of fees. Of the $35 collected, $10 shall be considered
the permit fee, as defined by Idaho Code § 39-2604, and shall be credited to
the Clerk and Recorder. The remaining $25 shall be considered a site review and
inspection fee, with $10 credited to the Building Department and $15 credited
to the appropriate Fire District Fund.
(Ord. 134-83, passed 10-12-1983)
§ 93.04 COMPLIANCE.
   It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks sales permit to
comply with all the provisions of the State Fireworks Act, being Idaho Code
Title 39, Chapter 26, and this subchapter. Violations of the Act or any of the
provisions of this subchapter by the permittee, or by any of its agents,
employees or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any
subsequent application for a permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 134-83, passed 10-12-1983) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any violation of §
93.01 through
93.04 shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 134-83, passed 10-12-1983)
CHAPTER 94: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
94.01   Title
   
94.02   Purpose and scope
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Alarm users permits required
   
94.05   Automatic dialing device; certain interconnections prohibited
   
94.06   False alarms and permit revocation
   
94.07   Confidentiality and statistics
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “The Burglary and Robbery Alarm Ordinance.”
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980)
§ 94.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the emergency services of
the county from misuse.
   (B)   This chapter governs burglary and robbery alarm systems, requires
permits, establishes fees, provides for revocation of permits, provides for
punishment of violations and establishes a system of administration.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980)
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM BUSINESS. The business by an individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased,
maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm
system in or on any building, structure or facility.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent
attention and to which police are expected to respond.
   ALARM USER. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. A device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit
by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
   BURGLARY ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry
into the area protected by the system.
   COUNTY CLERK. The individual authorized to issue permits.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal, eliciting a response by an officer when a
situation requiring a response by an officer does not in fact exist, but does
not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
business operator or alarm user.
   INTERCONNECT. To connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing
device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device
that utilized a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE. A telephone line serving the public safety
communications that is designated to receive emergency calls.
   PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS. The city/county facility used to receive
emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the
respective police departments utilizing communications.
   ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted
robbery.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of Bonneville County, Idaho Falls, Idaho, or his or her
designated representative.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980)
§ 94.04 ALARM USERS PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user’s permit for each system
from the County Clerk’s Office upon the effective date of this chapter or prior
to use of an alarm system. Users of systems using both robbery and burglary
alarm capabilities shall obtain permits. Application for a burglary or robbery
alarm user’s permit and an $8 fee shall be filed with the County Clerk’s Office
each year. Each permit shall bear the signature of the Sheriff and be for a
one-year period. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the
alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the Sheriff.
   (B)   (1)   A revoked user’s permit shall be obtained from the County
Clerk’s Office by filing an application and paying a fee as follows.
 
First revoked user’s permit in the permit year                   $40
Second revoked user’s permit in the permit year                  $100
Third and each additional revoked user’s permit in the permit yea$180
 
      (2)   The payment of any revoked user permit fee shall not extend the
term of the original permit period. Each permit shall bear the signature of the
Sheriff and shall bear the same expiration date as the revoked permit. The
permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall
be available for inspection by the Sheriff.
   (C)   If a residential alarm user is over the age of 65, and is the primary
resident of the residence, and if no business is conducted in the residence, a
user’s permit may be obtained from the County Clerk’s Office according to
division (A) above without the payment of a fee.
   (D)   A $25 charge will be charged in addition to the fee provided in
division (A) above to a user who fails to obtain a permit within 60 days after
the effective date of this chapter, or who is more than 15 days delinquent in
renewing a permit, or any new system operating without first obtaining a permit
after the effective date of this chapter.
   (E)   An alarm user required by federal, state, county or municipal statute,
regulation, rule or ordinance to install, maintain and operate an alarm system
shall be subject to this chapter; provided:
      (1)   A permit shall be designated a special alarm user’s permit;
      (2)   A special alarm user’s permit for a system which has four or more
false alarms in a permit year shall not be subject to revocation under §
94.06, but the holder of the permit shall pay a fee of $100 with the submission
of the report required by §
94.06;
      (3)   For each false alarm over four in a permit year, upon written
demand therefor by the Sheriff, the holder of a special user’s permit shall pay
a fee of $25; and
      (4)   The payment of any fee provided for in divisions (E)(2) and (E)(3)
above shall not be deemed to extend the term of the permit.
   (F)   An alarm user which is a governmental political unit shall be subject
to this chapter; but a permit shall be issued without payment of a fee and
shall not be subject to revocation, payment of additional fees or the
imposition of any penalty provided herein.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980)
§ 94.05 AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE; CERTAIN INTERCONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device
to select a primary trunk line; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to
disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to
select a primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from
the Sheriff that it is so programmed.
    (B)   Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, all existing
automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be
reprogrammed or disconnected.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device
to select any telephone line assigned to the county other than one so
authorized; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or
reprogram such device within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the
Sheriff that an automatic dialing device is so programmed.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 FALSE ALARMS AND PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any alarm system which has four or more false alarms within a permit
year shall be subject to permit revocation as provided herein.
   (B)   If the Sheriff records four or more false alarms within a permit year
for any alarm system:
      (1)   The Sheriff shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of such
fact and direct that the user submit a report to the Sheriff within ten days of
receipt of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and
eliminate the cause of the false alarms;
      (2)   If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the Sheriff shall
determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the occurrence of
false alarms; if he or she determines that the action will prevent the
occurrence of false alarms, he or she shall notify the alarm user, in writing,
that the permit will not be revoked at that time and that if one more false
alarm occurs within the permit year, the permit will be summarily revoked;
      (3)   If no report is submitted, or if the Sheriff determines that the
actions taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of false alarms,
the Sheriff shall give notice by certified mail to the user that the permit
will be revoked without further notice on the tenth day after the date of the
notice if the user does not file within that period a written request for a
hearing;
      (4)   If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of
the hearing shall be served on the user by the Sheriff by certified mail at
least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be
more than 21 nor less than ten days after the filing of the request for
hearing;
      (5)   The hearing shall be before the Board of County Commissioners and
the Sheriff; the alarm user shall have the right to present written or oral
evidence, subject to the right of cross-examination. If the Board of County
Commissioners determined that four or more false alarms have occurred in a
permit year, and that the user has not taken actions which will prevent the
occurrence of false alarms, the Board of Commissioners shall issue written
findings to that effect and an order revoking the user’s permit;
      (6)   An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system
upon being notified by certified mail of the revocation of a permit pursuant to
division (B)(3) or (B)(5) above;
      (7)   An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a revoked
user’s permit as provided in §
94.04(B). The Sheriff shall not be required to issue a revoked user’s permit,
unless he or she is satisfied that the user’s system has been properly serviced
and its deficiencies corrected. The Sheriff may impose reasonable restrictions
and conditions upon the user before issuing a revoked user’s permit, which
restrictions and conditions shall be written on the permit and shall provide
for summary revocation on the occurrence of four false alarms in the permit
year; and
      (8)   In situations permitting summary revocation under divisions (B)(2)
and (B)(7) above, revocations shall be effective on the third day following the
mailing by certified mail by the Sheriff of a notice of revocation. There shall
be no appeal of a summary revocation.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980)
§ 94.07 CONFIDENTIALITY AND STATISTICS.
   (A)   All information submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be
held in the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt
from disclosure pursuant to state statute; and any violation of confidentiality
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The Sheriff shall be charged with
the sole responsibility for the maintenance of all records of any kind
whatsoever under this chapter.
   (B)   Subject to the requirements of confidentiality, the Sheriff shall
develop and maintain statistics having the purpose of assisting alarm system
evaluation for use by members of the public.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not more
than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
(Ord. 117-80, passed 1-2-1980)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   SOLICITING AND PEDDLING
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS
      
113.   CHILD DAYCARE BUSINESSES
      
114.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: SOLICITING AND PEDDLING
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Application; bond
   
110.04   Licenses
   
110.05   Orders
   
110.06   Fees
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER.
      (1)   One who goes from place to place and/or from house to house, within
the county, carrying for sale and/or exposing to sale goods, wares and/or
merchandise which he or she carries, whether traveling by foot or other method.
PEDDLER shall include persons who sell and/or offer to sell, goods, wares and/
or merchandise on or alongside any public street, highway or alley, if such
person is not on privately owned land with the consent of the owner.
      (2)   Exempt from the above definition of PEDDLERS are persons selling
newspapers or religious tracts and persons representing charitable
organizations.
   SOLICITORS. Any person who goes from house to house, and/or from place to
place within the county, taking orders for and/ or offering to take orders for
goods, wares or merchandise, or any article for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future, or for the making, manufacturing or
repairing of any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a peddler or solicitor within
the meaning and application of this chapter without first securing a license
from the County Clerk.
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION; BOND.
   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring a license to engage as a peddler or
solicitor within the county shall make application therefor to the Clerk on
forms to be provided, stating the name and address of the applicant, the name
and address of the firm which he or she represents and the kind of goods
offered for sale or the kinds of services to be performed.
      (2)   The application shall contain a statement to the effect that if a
license is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an
endorsement by the county or by any department or officer thereof. Such
application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of $1,000 executed
by a surety company or by two responsible freeholders residing with the county,
or in lieu thereof, a cash bond or equal amount, conditioned upon the making of
final delivery of the goods ordered or services to be performed, in accordance
with the terms of such order, or failing therein, that the advance payment on
such order be refunded.
      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the action of such peddlers or solicitors
shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages
or both; payment from the bond will be made only upon final judgment against
such peddler or solicitor. Such deposit shall be retained by the county for a
period of 90 days after the expiration of the license, unless sooner released
by order of the Commissioners.
   (B)   The bond required under this section may be waived by the County Clerk
upon proof presented by the applicant that the applicant:
      (1)   Owns real property located, or personal property registered, in the
county;
      (2)   Is a resident of the county; and
      (3)   Has his or her principal place of business in the county.
   (C)   Waiver of the bond required by this section does not in and of itself
waive the requirement to pay a license fee.
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -)
§ 110.04 LICENSES.
   (A)   Licenses issued under this chapter shall bear the name and address of
the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the date issued and the date
the license expires and the number of the license. Each license shall contain a
statement that the county does not endorse the product or service in any way by
issuing the license.
   (B)   Any license under this chapter shall be non-transferable and shall be
returned to the County Clerk within three days after its date of expiration,
together with any copies thereof.
   (C)   If a person falling within the definition of either divisions (A) or
(B) above has persons working under him or her as solicitors or peddlers, that
person must apply for said license and shall provide to the County Clerk a list
of all subordinate persons. Said list shall be the responsibility of the
applicant and, and any additions or deletions to the list must be brought to
the attention of the County Clerk immediately.
   (D)   A copy of the license issued to the applicant must be given to each
subordinate, and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to collect all
copies upon the completion of a subordinate’s employment.
   (E)   The license required under this chapter shall be carried on the person
of each solicitor or peddler, and, upon request, it must be shown to all
persons solicited and to any police officer. Before any solicitation at a
residence, the solicitor must present the license for inspection by the
occupant and must also clearly identify the purpose of his or her visit.
   (F)   The license fee required under this chapter may be waived by the
County Clerk upon proof presented by the applicant that said applicant has a
state sales tax number.
   (G)   Waiver of the fee requirement by means of division (F) above does not
in and of itself waive the requirement to post a bond.
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -)
§ 110.05 ORDERS.
   All orders taken by licensed solicitors or peddlers shall be in writing, in
duplicate, stating the terms thereof, and the amount paid in advance, and shall
be signed by the peddler or solicitor showing plainly his or her name and
license number, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time of the
taking of the order.
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -)
§ 110.06 FEES.
   Peddlers or solicitors, as defined by this chapter, shall be subject to the
following license fees, payable to the county.
 
Monthly   $5
Quarterly $12.50
 
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding $300, or by both.
(Ord. 110-78, passed - -)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Licenses; denial, suspension or revocation
Liquor by the Drink
   
111.015   Definitions
   
111.016   License to sell or dispense required
   
111.017   License fee and expiration
   
111.018   Application for license
   
111.019   Investigation
   
111.020   Issuance of license
   
111.021   Form of licenses; display; license for designated address only
   
111.022   Qualifications
   
111.023   Expiration of licenses
   
111.024   Age restrictions
   
111.025   Transfer of licenses
   
111.026   Location restrictions
   
111.027   Right of entry
   
111.028   Conduct of business
   
111.029   Hours of sale
   
111.030   Consumption on premises
   
111.031   Liquor catering permit
Beer
   
111.045   Definitions
   
111.046   License to sell or dispense required
   
111.047   License fees and expiration
   
111.048   Application for license
   
111.049   Investigation
   
111.050   Issuance of license
   
111.051   Form of licenses; display; license for designated address only
   
111.052   Qualifications
   
111.053   Expiration of licenses
   
111.054   Restrictions concerning age
   
111.055   Transfer of license; transfer fee
   
111.056   Location restrictions
   
111.057   Right of entry
   
111.058   Conduct of business
   
111.059   Hours of sale
Wine
   
111.070   Definitions
   
111.071   License to sell or dispense required
   
111.072   License fees and expiration
   
111.073   Application for license
   
111.074   Investigation
   
111.075   Issuance of license
   
111.076   Form of licenses; display; license for designated address only
   
111.077   Qualifications
   
111.078   Expiration of licenses
   
111.079   Restrictions concerning age
   
111.080   Transfer of license; transfer fee
   
111.081   Location restrictions
   
111.082   Right of entry
   
111.083   Conduct of business
   
111.084   Hours of sale
   
111.085   Consumption on premises
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 LICENSES; DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The County Clerk may deny, suspend or revoke any license issued under
this chapter at any time, if the licensee does not comply with the applicable
provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the county ordinances or of
the Idaho Code. A license issued under this chapter may be denied, suspended or
revoked if any criminal history investigation reveals that the applicant or
licensee does not comply with the applicable provisions or intent of this
chapter, or other provisions of the county ordinances, or the Idaho Code.
   (B)   If a criminal history check reveals that there is a pending criminal
investigation or criminal charge that would result in the revocation or denial
of a business license or other alcohol license, or if there is a conviction or
withheld judgment entered for the charge, the Clerk shall deny the application
until such time as the applicant has been cleared of such charges. An applicant
shall then be allowed the opportunity to reapply after being cleared of said
investigation or criminal charge.
   (C)   The Clerk may revoke or suspend any license issued under this chapter
upon giving ten days’ notice to the license holder. Appeals of the Clerk’s
decision must be filed no later than 14 days after the revocation or suspension
and shall be heard by the Board of County Commissioners. Denials of licenses
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be based on noncompliance to the stated
provisions of this chapter, county ordinances or state law. Failure to appeal
shall be deemed as a final decision of the county. The ruling of the County
Commissioners shall be the final decision of the county.
   (D)   The use of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter for
any business or action for which the license was not issued shall be a
violation of this chapter, and said license shall be subject to immediate
suspension and/or revocation.
   (E)   The State Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase of a
liquor license.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
§ 111.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BARTENDER. Any person, whether agent, servant, employee or person acting in
any other capacity, who pours, mixes or prepares any liquor by the drink, wine
by the drink or beer by the drink upon any premises licensed to sell alcohol by
the drink. A BARTENDER can only operate within the county when employed by a
business that holds a license as required by state law.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the State Department of Law Enforcement.
   INTERDICTED PERSON. A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under
the laws of the state.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell liquor
by the drink at retail.
   LICENSEE. The person/business to whom a license to sell and dispense liquor
by the drink is issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
   LIQUOR. Any kind of liquor which may be sold by a state liquor store.
   PREMISES. The building, room or place in which the retail sale of wine by a
licensee is authorized under this subchapter.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.016 LICENSE TO SELL OR DISPENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall sell or dispense liquor/alcohol by the drink at retail
on any premises in the county without first obtaining all licenses as required
by law.
   (B)   The State Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase of a
liquor license.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.017 LICENSE FEE AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Each licensee shall pay in advance an annual license fee which shall
be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the County Commissioners by
resolution which may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be paid in advance and
shall expire one year from the date of issue unless another date is endorsed on
the license by the Clerk.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.018 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Each applicant for a license to sell liquor by the drink shall file
with the Clerk an application on a form designated by the Clerk, stating the
following:
      (1)   A copy of a current license issued by the State Director of Law
Enforcement pursuant to the provisions of Idaho Code Title 23, Chapter 9, as
amended;
      (2)   The names and addresses of all persons of contact and responsible
for the operation of the business. This list shall include owner of the
business as well as all managers; and
      (3)   Any other information reasonably necessary for the Clerk to
determine the applicant’s qualifications or disqualifications for a license.
   (B)   If, during the term of any license issued under this subchapter, any
change shall take place in any of the information stated in the application,
the licensee shall deliver a verified report of the change to the Clerk no
later than seven working days after the change occurs.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.019 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a transfer of a
license under this subchapter, accompanied by the necessary documents and fees,
the Clerk shall review all information in the application. If it is determined
that the contents of the application meet the requirements of this subchapter
and that the applicant is qualified to receive a license, a license shall be
issued or transferred. Otherwise, the application shall be denied and the
license or transfer fee refunded.
   (B)   All applications for a license to sell liquor by the drink or any
transfer or renewal of a license to sell liquor by the drink shall be granted
or denied within 60 days from the date the application was delivered to the
Clerk.
   (C)   If the Clerk denies an application for a license to sell liquor by the
drink or any renewal or transfer of a license to sell liquor by the drink, he
or she shall specify in writing:
      (1)   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      (2)   The reasons for denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.020 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   When the applicant for sale of liquor by the drink has produced evidence as
required by §
111.018 and paid the required license fee, the Clerk shall submit the
application to the County Commissioners within 30 days after the application is
filed. Upon approval of the Commissioners, the Clerk shall issue the license to
the applicant.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.021 FORM OF LICENSES; DISPLAY; LICENSE FOR DESIGNATED ADDRESS ONLY.
   (A)   Every license issued under this subchapter shall state the name of the
person or business entity to whom issued and the location by street and number
or other definite designation of the premises. The license shall be signed by
the licensee and shall be posted on the licensed premises in a place
conspicuous to the public. No person except the named licensee shall exercise
any of the privileges granted under the license. Licenses issued under this
subchapter apply only to premises for which they have been issued.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be pursuant to all
requirements and regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related county
ordinances as they may apply.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.022 QUALIFICATIONS.
   An applicant for a license to sell liquor by the drink shall possess all
qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the Director. Licensees shall
maintain qualifications throughout the period for which their license is
issued. Possession of licenses regularly issued by the Director and the county
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant’s qualifications and shall be a
requirement for the applicant to possess, prior to receiving a license under
this subchapter.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.023 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be paid in advance and shall
expire one year from the date of issue unless another date is endorsed on the
license by the Clerk.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.024 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   Pursuant to the laws of the Idaho Code Title 23, any amendments and
subsequent new regulations related to age shall apply to the regulations of the
county. The following sections of Idaho Code Title 23 are provided for easy
reference:
   (A)   Idaho Code § 23-312 (Persons Under 21 and Intoxicated Persons -
Inhibited Sales);
   (B)   Idaho Code § 23-943 (Persons Under Specified Ages Forbidden to Enter,
Remain In or Loiter at Certain Licensed Places);
   (C)   Idaho Code § 23-944 (Exceptions from Restriction on Entering or
Remaining); and
   (D)   Idaho Code § 23-949 (Persons Not Allowed to Purchase, Possess, Serve,
Dispense or Consume Beer, Wine or Other Alcoholic Liquor).
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.025 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   No license may be transferred to another person, unless the transferee first
obtains approval of the county upon application containing substantially the
same information required by §
111.018. If the proposed transferee is qualified for the license, the Clerk
shall approve the transfer and shall reissue the license in the name of the
transferee. The fee for each license transfer shall be determined by a schedule
of fees adopted by the County Commissioners Council by resolution which may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.026 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No license shall be issued that does not meet the requirements of Idaho Code
§ 23-913.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.027 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any duly authorized police officer shall have the right at any time to enter
and examine the premises of any licensee to ascertain compliance with the laws
of the state and the county. It shall be unlawful to refuse any police or
designated enforcement officer admittance to the premises for such purpose.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.028 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter to sell liquor by the drink
shall at all times conduct a quiet and well-lighted, orderly place of business.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.029 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-927, no liquor shall be sold, offered for
sale or given away upon any licensed premises during the following hours:
      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. on Christmas and 10:00 a.m. of the following day;
and
      (2)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense liquor for consumption
on the premises in any place not licensed under the ordinances of the county.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.030 CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.
   Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor
by the drink or wine by the drink shall not permit consumption of wine on the
licensed premises.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.031 LIQUOR CATERING PERMIT.
   (A)   An alcohol beverage catering permit is a permit issued pursuant to
Idaho Code § 23-934A which authorizes the permittee to serve and sell liquor by
the drink, beer and wine, or beer, or wine, at a party or convention. An
alcohol beverage catering permit shall be limited to authorization to sell
liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type of
license which the applicant possesses. An applicant is not required to hold a
liquor, beer or wine permit within the county to apply for a catering permit,
but must hold a valid permit within the state. Applications for such permit
shall be submitted to the county who shall verify the type of license held by
the applicant.
   (B)   After determination of qualification of the applicant, the Clerk shall
issue a catering permit following the requirements of any applications required
by the county which shall contain at a minimum, but not limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and the number of his or her
state liquor license;
      (2)   The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not
to exceed five consecutive days;
      (3)   The names and addresses of the organizations, groups or persons
sponsoring the event; and
      (4)   The address at which the liquor is to be served, and if a public
building, the rooms in which the liquor is to be served.
   (B)   The application shall be verified by the applicant and filed with the
Clerk. A filing fee which shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by
the County Commissioners by resolution which may be amended from time to time
shall be paid at the time the application is approved. The fee shall be for
each day the permit is to be effective and shall be non-refundable irrespective
of whether the party or convention is held. Catering permits issued under this
section are issued pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-934A.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
BEER
§ 111.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEER. Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water and which
contains not more than 6% alcohol by weight.
   BEER BY THE DRINK. A license to sell beer by the individual glass or open
bottle at a retail for consumption on the premises.
   DISTRIBUTOR. A person who is employed by or is an agent of a retailer to
sell, serve or dispense beer.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell beer
at retail.
   LICENSEE. A qualified person to whom a license for the retail sale of beer
is issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
   PREMISES. The building, room or place in which the retail sale of beer by a
licensee is authorized under this subchapter.
   RETAILER. A person to whom a beer license has been issued.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.046 LICENSE TO SELL OR DISPENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no person shall
sell or dispense beer at a retail establishment within the county without first
obtaining a license from the county as required by this subchapter.
      (2)   Any person, whether agent, servant, employee or person acting in
any other capacity, who dispenses beer by the drink upon any premises licensed
to sell beer by the drink, in which said establishment also holds a liquor by
the drink permit, pursuant to this subchapter, must be licensed.
      (3)   A copy of all employees licensed as a bartender shall be kept and
maintained in an orderly fashion. All bartender’s licenses, names of persons
acting as bartenders and hours worked shall be available upon request of any
police or enforcement officer representing the county. It shall be the
responsibility of the business to confirm and maintain required documentation
for all persons acting as bartenders within the business. Failure to maintain
such documentation shall constitute a violation of this subchapter by the
business. Further, the county shall have the authority to revoke the business
license and any county license issued authorizing the sale of liquor, beer or
wine by the drink until compliance is established.
      (4)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be pursuant to all
requirements and regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related county
ordinances, as they may apply.
   (B)   The State Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase of a
beer license.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.047 LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   License fees for the retail sale of beer in the county shall be
determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the County Commission by resolution
which may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be paid in advance and
shall expire one year from the date of issue unless another date is endorsed on
the license by the Clerk.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.048 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Each applicant for a license for the retail sale of beer shall file with the
county an application on a form designated by the Clerk, stating the following:
   (A)   The name and residential address of the applicant;
   (B)   The street address of the premises where beer is to be sold;
   (C)   The name of the owner of the premises for which the license is sought;
   (D)   The applicant, if an individual, is at least 21 years old;
   (E)   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony or any crime
involving moral turpitude;
   (F)   The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by
the state allowing the retail sale of beer;
   (G)   The applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of this
subchapter, and any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations subsequently
promulgated by the state or the county regarding the retail sale of beer within
the county; and
   (H)   Any other information the Clerk requires to determine that the
applicant possesses the qualifications and has none of the disqualifications
for a license, as provided in this subchapter and in Idaho Code §§ 23-1010 and
23-1016, as amended.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.049 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a transfer of a
license under this subchapter, accompanied by the necessary license or transfer
fee, the Clerk shall investigate all information stated in the application. If
it is determined that the contents of the application are true, that the
applicant is qualified to receive a license, that the premises are suitable for
carrying on the intended business and that the requirements of this subchapter
have been met, a license shall be issued or transferred. Otherwise, the
application shall be denied and the license or transfer fee refunded.
   (B)   All applications for a retail beer license or any transfer or renewal
of a retail beer license shall be granted or denied within 60 days from the
date the application was delivered to the Clerk.
   (C)   If the Clerk denies an application for a retail beer license or any
renewal or transfer of a retail beer license, he or she shall specify in
writing:
      (1)   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      (2)   The reasons for denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal.
   (D)   Appeals of any denial of a license, transfer or renewal of a license
shall be pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-1016(4).
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.050 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   When the applicant for a beer license has produced evidence as required by §
111.048 and paid the required license fee, the Clerk shall submit the
application to the County Commissioners within 30 days after the application is
filed. Upon approval of the Commissioners, the Clerk shall issue the license to
the applicant.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.051 FORM OF LICENSES; DISPLAY; LICENSE FOR DESIGNATED ADDRESS ONLY.
   (A)   Every license issued under this subchapter shall state the name of the
person or business entity to whom issued and the location by street and number
or other definite designation of the premises. The license shall be signed by
the licensee and shall be posted on the licensed premises in a place
conspicuous to the public. A license for the retail sale of beer shall be
granted only for the place designated in the application. The place of business
shall not be changed or moved without the consent of the Commissioners.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be pursuant to all
requirements and regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related county
ordinances, as they may apply.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.052 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   An applicant for a beer license shall possess all qualifications
necessary to obtain a license from the Director. Licensees shall maintain
qualifications throughout the period for which their license is issued.
   (B)   Possession of licenses regularly issued by the Director and the county
shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant’s qualifications and shall be a
requirement for the applicant to possess, prior to receiving a license under
this subchapter.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.053 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be paid in advance and shall
expire one year from the date of issue unless another date is endorsed on the
license by the Clerk.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.054 RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING AGE.
   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-1013, any person who is 21 years of age or older
may sell, serve, possess or dispense beer in the course of his or her
employment, otherwise it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or
dispense beer to or by any person under 21 years of age, proof of which, shall
be a validly issued state, district, territorial, possession, provincial,
national or other equivalent government driver’s license, identification card
or military identification card bearing a photograph and date of birth, or a
valid passport.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.055 TRANSFER OF LICENSE; TRANSFER FEE.
   No license may be transferred to another person, unless the transferee first
obtains approval of the county upon application containing substantially the
same information required by §
111.048. If the proposed transferee is qualified for the license, the Clerk
shall approve the transfer and shall reissue the license in the name of the
transferee. The fee for each license transfer shall be determined by a schedule
of fees adopted by the County Commissioners by resolution which may be amended
from time to time.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.056 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No license shall be issued that does not meet the requirements of Idaho Code
§ 23-1011B.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.057 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any police officer shall have the right at any time to enter and examine the
premises of any licensee or of any place where beer is sold at retail to
ascertain the alcoholic content of any beer kept for sale on the premises or to
ascertain compliance with the laws of the state and the county. It shall be
unlawful to refuse any police officer admittance to the premises for such
purposes.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.058 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter to sell beer at retail shall at
all times conduct a quiet and well-lighted, orderly place of business.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.059 HOURS OF SALE.
   Pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-1012, it shall be unlawful for any person in any
place licensed to sell beer by the drink or beer for consumption on the
premises, whether for pleasure or profit, to sell or dispense beer for
consumption on the premises or to permit the consumption of beer on the
premises between the following hours:
   (A)   1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day; and
   (B)   1:00 a.m. on Christmas and 6:00 a.m. of the day following such day.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
WINE
§ 111.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BARTENDER. Any person, whether agent, servant, employee or person acting in
any other capacity, who pours, mixes or prepares any liquor by the drink, wine
by the drink or beer by the drink upon any premises licensed to sell alcohol by
the drink. A BARTENDER can only operate within the county when employed by a
business that holds a license as required in this subchapter or other county
ordinances.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the State Department of Law Enforcement.
   DISTRIBUTOR. A person who is employed by or is an agent of a retailer to
sell, serve or dispense.
   LICENSE. A license issued by the Clerk authorizing a licensee to sell wine
at retail.
   LICENSEE. A qualified person to whom a license for the retail sale of wine
is issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
   PREMISES. The building, room or place in which the retail sale of wine by a
licensee is authorized under this subchapter.
   RETAILER. A person to whom a retail wine license or wine by the drink
license has been issued.
   RETAIL WINE LICENSE. A license issued by the Director authorizing a person
to sell wine at retail for consumption off the licensed premises. The term also
means a license issued by the county authorizing a person to sell wine at
retail for consumption off the licensed premised only.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 14% alcohol by volume
obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits or other
agricultural products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are
added.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.071 LICENSE TO SELL OR DISPENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, no person shall
sell wine at retail for consumption off the premises or by the individual glass
or open bottle for consumption on the premises within the county, without first
obtaining a license under this subchapter. A person who holds a valid current
wine-by the-drink license issued by the county may sell on the licensed
premises wine at retail for consumption off the premises without obtaining a
retail wine license from the county.
      (2)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be pursuant to all
requirements and regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related ordinances
of the county.
   (B)   The State Liquor Dispensary shall be exempt from the purchase a wine
license.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.072 LICENSE FEES AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   License fees for the retail sale of wine in the county shall be paid
in advance as determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the County
Commissioners by resolution which may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be paid in advance and
shall expire one year from the date of issue unless another date is endorsed on
the license by the Clerk.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.073 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Each applicant for a license for the retail sale of wine shall file with the
Clerk an application on a form designated by the Clerk, stating the following:
   (A)   The name and residential address of the applicant;
   (B)   The street address of the premises where wine is to be sold;
   (C)   The name of the owner of the premises for which the license is sought;
   (D)   The applicant, if an individual, is at least 21 years old;
   (E)   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony or any crime
involving moral turpitude;
   (F)   The application shall include a copy of a current license issued by
the state allowing the retail sale of wine;
   (G)   The applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of this
subchapter, and any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations subsequently
promulgated by the state or the county; and
   (H)   Any other information the Clerk requires to determine that the
applicant possesses the qualifications and has none of the disqualifications
for a license, as provided in this subchapter and in Idaho Code Title 23, as
amended.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.074 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or for a transfer of a
license under this subchapter, accompanied by the necessary license or transfer
fee, the Clerk shall investigate all information stated in the application and,
if it is determined that the contents of the application are true, that the
applicant is qualified to receive a license, that the premises are suitable for
carrying on the intended business and that the requirements of this subchapter
have been met, a license shall be issued or transferred. Otherwise, the
application shall be denied and the license or transfer fee refunded.
   (B)   All applications for a retail wine license or any transfer or renewal
of a retail wine license shall be granted or denied within 60 days from the
date the application was delivered to the Clerk.
   (C)   If the Clerk denies an application for a retail wine license, wine by
the drink or any renewal or transfer of a retail wine license, the Clerk shall
specify in writing:
      (1)   The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the
application;
      (2)   The reasons for denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, the applicant could take to obtain the
license, transfer or renewal.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.075 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   When the applicant for a retail wine license or wine by the drink license
has produced evidence as required by §
111.073 and paid the required license fee, the Clerk shall submit the
application to the County Commissioners within 30 days after the application is
filed. Upon approval of the Commissioners, the Clerk shall issue the license to
the applicant.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.076 FORM OF LICENSES; DISPLAY; LICENSE FOR DESIGNATED ADDRESS ONLY.
   (A)   (1)   Every license issued under this subchapter shall state the name
of the person or business entity to whom issued and the location by street and
number or other definite designation of the premises.
      (2)   The license shall be signed by the licensee and shall be posted on
the licensed premises in a place conspicuous to the public.
      (3)   A license for the retail sale of beer shall be granted only for the
place designated in the application.
      (4)   The place of business shall not be changed or moved without the
consent the Commission.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be pursuant to all
requirements and regulations of the Idaho Code Title 23 and related county
ordinances as they may apply.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.077 QUALIFICATIONS.
   An applicant for a retail wine license or wine by the drink license shall
possess all qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the Director.
Licensees shall maintain qualifications throughout the period for which their
license is issued. Possession of licenses regularly issued by the Director and
the county shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant’s qualifications and
shall be a requirement for the applicant to possess, prior to receiving a
license under this subchapter.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.078 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   All licenses issued under this subchapter shall be paid in advance and shall
expire one year from the date of issue unless another date is endorsed on the
license by the Clerk.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.079 RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING AGE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the laws of Idaho Code Title 23, any amendments and
subsequent new regulations related to age shall apply to the regulations of the
county.
   (B)   The following Idaho Code Title 23, chapters and sections are provided
for easy reference:
      (1)   Idaho Code § 23-312 (Persons Under 21 and Intoxicated Persons -
Inhibited Sales);
      (2)   Idaho Code § 23-943 (Persons Under Specified Ages Forbidden to
Enter, Remain In or Loiter at Certain Licensed Places);
      (3)   Idaho Code § 23-944 (Exceptions from Restriction on Entering or
Remaining); and
      (4)   Idaho Code § 23-949 (Persons Not Allowed to Purchase, Possess,
Serve, Dispense or Consume Beer, Wine or Other Alcoholic Liquor).
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.080 TRANSFER OF LICENSE; TRANSFER FEE.
   (A)   The procedure for the transfer of a retail wine license or a wine by
the drink license shall be the same as provided in Idaho Code § 23-1317, as
amended, upon application to the Clerk.
   (B)   The fee for transfer of a retail wine license or wine by the drink
license shall be determined by a schedule of fees adopted by the County
Commissioners by resolution which may be amended from time to time.
   (C)   The license of the transferring licensee shall be surrendered to the
Clerk before such transfer may be made.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.081 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   Any license issued must meet the zoning requirements pursuant to Idaho Code
§ 23-1307A.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.082 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Any police officer shall have the right at any time to enter and
examine the premises of any licensee or of any place where wine is sold at
retail to ascertain the alcoholic content of any wine kept for sale on the
premises or to ascertain compliance with the laws of the state and the county.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to refuse any police officer admittance to the
premises for such purposes.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.083 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter to sell wine shall at all times
conduct a quiet and well-lighted, orderly place of business.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
§ 111.084 HOURS OF SALE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any place licensed to sell wine
by the drink or wine for consumption on the premises, whether for pleasure or
for profit, to sell or dispense wine for consumption on the premises or to
permit the consumption of wine on the premises during the following hours:
      (1)   1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day; and
      (2)   1:00 a.m. on Christmas and 6:00 a.m. of the day following such day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense wine for consumption
on the premises, in any place not licensed as an eating place under the zoning
requirements of the county.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.085 CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES.
   Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor
by the drink or wine by the drink shall not permit consumption of wine on the
licensed premises.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of §
111.001 shall be deemed subject to infraction or misdemeanor as specifically
provided for in this chapter and shall be subject to penalties prescribed for
such violations of state law. In addition to the foregoing penalties, the
county may seek an order of injunction from the county court prohibiting the
business of engaging in business within the county. Said business shall be
liable for any court costs and all attorney costs incurred by the county in
relation thereto.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
111.015 through
111.031 shall be deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-947 and shall
be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho Code § 18-
113.
   (C)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
111.045 through
111.059 shall be deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-1020 and
shall be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho Code §
18-113 and any ordinances of the county.
   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
111.070 through
111.085 shall be deemed a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code § 23-947 and shall
be subject to penalties prescribed for such violations under Idaho Code § 18-
113 and as allowed by said Idaho Code or any ordinance of the county.
(Ord. 236-19, passed 2-12-2019)
CHAPTER 112: AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
Ambulance Service Providers
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   Application for ambulance license
   
112.04   Ambulance license liability insurance
   
112.05   Ambulance equipment
   
112.06   Driver’s, attendant’s and attendant-driver’s license
   
112.07   Operational standards
   
112.08   Duties of the Board of County Commissioners
   
112.09   License, fees and duration of license
   
112.10   Suspension and revocation of license
   
112.11   Compliance
Non-Emergency Ambulance Service Providers
   
112.25   Definitions
   
112.26   License required
   
112.27   Application for non-emergency ambulance license
   
112.28   Non-emergency ambulance license liability insurance
   
112.29   Non-emergency ambulance equipment
   
112.30   Driver’s, attendant’s and attendant-driver’s license
   
112.31   Operational standards
   
112.32   Duties of the Board of County Commissioners
   
112.33   License, fees and duration of license
   
112.34   Suspension and revocation of license
   
112.35   Compliance
 
   
112.99   Penalty
AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle that is
specifically designed or constructed, and equipped, and is intended to be used
for, and is maintained or operated, for the transportation of wounded, injured
or sick patients, which otherwise comply with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   AMBULANCE OPERATOR or AMBULANCE BUSINESS. Anyone engaging in the business of
transporting ill, sick or injured persons, for hire, or who, by advertising,
representation or otherwise, holds himself or herself out as engaging in such
business.
   APPOINTED COMMITTEE. A committee appointed annually by the Board of County
Commissioners and consisting of at least the following members:
      (1)   A licensed physician who is a resident of the county;
      (2)   A representative of an agency performing emergency services. This
representative shall be: The Chief of the Fire or Police Department in the
largest city in the county, or the Chief of the largest rural district Fire
Department in the county, or the County Sheriff; and
      (3)   A citizen who is a resident of the county. This citizen shall
possess current certification in first aid, at least through the advanced level
of the American Red Cross or the equivalent.
   ATTENDANT. A trained and/or qualified individual responsible for the
operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients, whether or not the
attendant also serves as a driver.
   ATTENDANT-DRIVER. An individual who is qualified as an attendant and a
driver.
   DRIVER. An individual who drives an ambulance.
   PATIENT. An individual who is sick, injured or wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or group of individuals acting together for a common purpose or organization of
any kind, including any governmental agency other than the United States.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or
otherwise, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be
engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients within the
county, unless he or she holds a current license for an ambulance issued
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for an ambulance to be operated, and no person
shall drive, attend or permit it to be operated, within the county, unless the
ambulance shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of a person
who is holding a current, valid license as a driver, attendant and/or
attendant- driver.
   (C)   Provided, however, that no license shall be required for an ambulance,
or the driver, attendant or attendant-driver of an ambulance which:
      (1)   Is operated by the state, the county or other government agency;
      (2)   Is operated from a location or headquarters outside of, and
transports patients within who are picked up beyond the limits of the county;
      (3)   Is operated from a location or headquarters outside the limits of
the county and either:
         (a)   Picks up patients beyond the limits of the county to be
transported to locations within the county and picks up patients within the
county to be transported to locations beyond the limits of the county; or
         (b)   In the case of an emergency where no county based ambulance is
available, picks up patients within the county to be transported to locations
within the county.
    (D)   Provided, however, that no such outside ambulance shall be used to
pick up patients within the county for transportation to locations within the
county, unless the driver, attendant and attendant-driver and the ambulance
operator hold current, valid licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter,
except as provided in division (C)(3) above.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION FOR AMBULANCE LICENSE.
   Application for ambulance licenses shall be made upon forms prepared or
prescribed by the Board of Commissioners and shall contain:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the ambulance;
   (B)   The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant
does business and proposes to do business;
   (C)   The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and
care of patients;
   (D)   A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of
manufacture, motor and chassis numbers, current state license number, the
length of time the ambulance has been in use; patient compartment dimensions of
the ambulance, cot and stretcher capacity, list of equipment carried in the
ambulance and design and color scheme of each ambulance;
   (E)   The location and description of the place or places from which it is
intended to operate; and
   (F)   Such other information as the Board of Commissioners shall deem
reasonably necessary.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.04 AMBULANCE LICENSE LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   An ambulance operator shall at all times indemnify and save harmless
the county from and for any and all losses, claims, actions or judgments for
damages or injury to persons or property and losses and expenses caused or
incurred by the ambulance operator and its drivers, attendants and attendant-
drivers. No ambulance license shall be issued under this subchapter, nor shall
the license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated within
the county unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state for each
and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the applicant or licensee,
providing the following minimum limits of liability insurance, in which the
county shall be named as a named insured:
      (1)   For property damage to any one person: $100,000;
      (2)   For property damage in any one occurrence: $200,000;
      (3)   For personal injury to any one person: $250,000; and
      (4)   For personal injuries in any one occurrence: $500,000.
   (B)   The limits of insurance provided above shall not be deemed the
limitation of the applicant’s or licensee’s covenant to indemnify and save and
hold harmless the county, and if the county becomes liable for an amount in
excess of the insurance limits herein provided, the applicant or licensee
covenants and/or any of its agents upon whom duties may be imposed by this
subchapter, agrees to indemnify and save and hold harmless the county from any
and all such losses, claims actions, judgments or expenses for damages or
injury to persons or property.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.05 AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The required first aid-patient handling equipment regularly carried in
each ambulance shall be:
      (1)   Elder valve type resuscitator (portable);
      (2)   One bag-type resuscitator;
      (3)   One manual operated aspiration device (portable, minimum of ten-
inch Hg vacuum);
      (4)   One oxygen tank (size D, minimum) with regulator, liter gauge and
mask;
      (5)   One oxygen tank (size D, minimum) spare;
      (6)   One orthopedic stretcher (Robinson, Greene, Ferno-Washington or
equivalent);
      (7)   One extrication back splint or half-backboard;
      (8)   One hare traction splint;
      (9)   Two adult-size arm splints (one of inflatable type);
      (10)   Two adult-size leg splints (one of inflatable type);
      (11)   Two child-size leg splints;
      (12)   Four sandbags (five pounds each);
      (13)   Two emesis basins;
      (14)   One urinal;
      (15)   One bed pan;
      (16)   One “obstetric” kit;
      (17)   Two plastic or rubber cot or stretcher covers;
      (18)   Two autoclaved and wrapped sheets;
      (19)   One blanket for each cot or stretcher;
      (20)   Four changes of sheets, pillow cases and towels;
      (21)   Three pry bars;
      (22)   One hacksaw;
      (23)   One bolt cutter;
      (24)   One metal cutting rescue saw, recommended (K-12 type);
      (25)   One portable hydraulic kit, recommended (Portapower type);
      (26)   An attendant’s bag(s) which shall contain the following:
         (a)   One bandage shears;
         (b)   Two flashlights (one regular and one pencil type);
         (c)   Two adult-size airways;
         (d)   One child-size airway;
         (e)   One infant-size airway;
         (f)   Ten rolls of four-inch autoclaved dressings (Kirlex or
equivalent);
         (g)   Two rolls of one-inch adhesive tape;
         (h)   Two rolls of two-inch adhesive tape;
         (i)   Six tongue depressors (including two padded types);
         (j)   One oxygen face cone, infant-size;
         (k)   Six elastic bandages in assorted widths (Ace type);
         (l)   Three 18-inch pieces of surgical rubber tubing;
         (m)   Ten four-inch by four-inch pressure dressings;
         (n)   One nose, ear and throat syringe;
         (o)   One infant-size bulb syringe;
         (p)   One container (unbreakable), minimum of quart size, of
physiological saline (for irrigation of wounds, eye wash and poison dilution
purposes);
         (q)   Four packages of universal antidote;
         (r)   One curved hemostat;
         (t)   One curved forceps;
         (u)   Two straight hemostats; and
         (v)   Two straight forceps.
   (B)   Each ambulance shall be mobile radio equipped with the radio(s)
operating on a frequency or frequencies authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission. Direct mobile radio communication shall be possible
between each ambulance and:
         (1)   The ambulance dispatcher;
         (2)   The State Police;
         (3)   The County Sheriff’s Office; and
         (4)   The Idaho Falls Police.
   (C)   The appointed committee, prior to the issuance of an ambulance
license, or the renewal thereof, shall inspect each ambulance to determine the
adequacy of equipment carried in each ambulance along with equipment required
by the State Motor Vehicle Code (siren, red lights and the like) and shall
determine that each ambulance is in safe and sound mechanical and operating
condition, including compliance with state vehicle inspection laws. In
determining the adequacy of first aid patient handling equipment, the appointed
committee shall take into consideration, in addition to the list of equipment
specified by this subchapter, the list of minimal equipment currently published
by the American College of Surgeons or its authorized Committee on Trauma. In
addition to the inspections required prior to issuance of an ambulance license,
or the renewal thereof, the appointed committee is authorized to conduct
inspections at other reasonable times.
   (D)   A report of all inspections by the appointed committee must be
promptly submitted to the Board of County Commissioners following each
inspection.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.06 DRIVER’S, ATTENDANT’S AND ATTENDANT-DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   Applications.
      (1)   Application for driver’s, attendant’s and attendant-driver’s
licenses hereunder shall be made upon forms prepared or prescribed by the Board
of Commissioners. No person shall drive or serve as a driver, attendant or
attendant-driver with an ambulance licensed hereunder without first procuring
the applicable license from the county.
      (2)   Each license application shall contain at least the following:
         (a)   The applicant’s full name, current residence and length of time
he or she has resided in the county;
         (b)   The applicant’s age, marital status and other physical
attributes;
         (c)   Whether he or she has ever been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor and, if so, when and for what cause;
         (d)   The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation
and care of patients, whether he or she has previously been licensed as a
driver, chauffeur, attendant or attendant-driver and, if so, when, where and
whether his or her license has ever been revoked or suspended in any
jurisdiction and for what cause;
         (e)   Affidavits of good character from two reputable citizens;
         (f)   Fingerprints and photograph to be taken by the County Sheriff’s
Department; and
         (g)   Such other information as the Board of Commissioners shall deem
reasonably necessary to make a determination of compliance with this
subchapter.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners shall, within a reasonable time after
receiving an application as provided for herein, cause such investigation as he
or she deems necessary to be made of the applicant for a driver’s, attendant’s
or attendant-driver’s license.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners shall issue a license to a driver,
attendant or atten4ant-driver hereunder, valid for a period of one year, unless
earlier suspended, revoked or terminated, when it finds that:
         (a)   The applicant is not addicted to the use-of intoxicating liquors
or narcotics;
         (b)   The applicant is able to speak, read and write the English
language;
         (c)   The applicant has been found by a duly licensed physician, upon
examination attested to on a form provided by the Board of Commissioners, to be
of sound physique, possessing good eyesight (at least correctable to 20-30
vision in the worst eye and also having good peripheral vision, depth
perception and acceptable dark adaptation recovery for night driving) and free
of physical defects or disease which might impair the ability to drive or
attend an ambulance; and
         (d)   The applicant for a driver, attendant or attendant-driver
license has:
 
            1.   A currently valid certificate evidencing successful completion
of American Red Cross first aid training at least through the advanced level;
            2.   Certification of successful completion of a course on rescue-
extrication taught by the Idaho Falls Fire Department; and
            3.   Certification of successful completion of a course on
cardiopulmonary resuscitation taught by an instructor specified by the
appointed committee.
         (e)   The applicant for a driver or attendant-driver license has, in
addition to the above requirements, successfully completed courses on defensive
driving and emergency vehicle driving taught by instructors specified by the
appointed committee, and also holds a currently valid driver’s license from the
state.
      (3)   A license of a driver, attendant or attendant-driver issued
hereunder shall not be assignable or transferable.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.
   No ambulance license shall be issued, renewed or continued in force unless
the ambulance operator shall:
   (A)   Have a minimum of three acceptable ambulance units based in the
county. One ambulance unit must be no more than five years old, another unit no
more than ten years old and the third unit no more than 15 years old;
   (B)   Equip each ambulance to conform with the minimal standards,
requirements and regulations provided for herein;
   (C)   Maintain each ambulance in mechanically safe, sound and sanitary
condition at all times;
    (D)   Have a minimum of five licensed drivers, and five licensed
attendants, or ten licensed attendant-drivers or an acceptable combination
thereof, on the ambulance service staff at all times;
   (E)   Have at least two ambulance crews available for prompt response at all
times. Each such crew shall consist of two appropriately licensed personnel;
and
   (F)   Maintain records, on forms specified by the Board of Commissioners, as
follows:
      (1)   Monthly call report;
      (2)   Detailed individual call report;
      (3)   Annual ambulance service report;
      (4)   Daily equipment checkoff list;
      (5)   Vehicle maintenance log;
      (6)   Patient collection/non-collection report; and
      (7)   Other records and reports as may be required.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.08 DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners shall, within a reasonable time after
receiving an application for an ambulance license as provided for herein, cause
such investigation as it deems necessary to be made of the applicant and his or
her proposed operation.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners shall issue a license hereunder for a
specified ambulance to be valid for a period of one year, unless earlier
suspended, revoked or terminated, when it found that:
      (1)   The appointed committee has caused the ambulance licensed hereunder
to be inspected and found such ambulance vehicle so licensed to be in proper
condition as prescribed by the applicable provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   The appointed committee has certified that the ambulance equipment
meets the minimal requirements prescribed by this subchapter and by which to
comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations relating to health,
sanitation and safety;
      (3)   The applicant is a reasonable and proper person to conduct and
operate an ambulance business;
      (4)   A sufficient number of duly licensed drivers, attendants and/or
attendant-drivers are employed in such capacities by the ambulance operator;
and
      (5)   All the requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable
laws and ordinances have been met.
   (C)   Prior to the issuance of any ambulance license hereunder, the Board of
Commissioners shall cause to be inspected the vehicles, equipment and premises
designated in each application hereunder to determine compliance with the
standards prescribed by this subchapter, and no license shall be issued by the
County Clerk unless the appointed committee of the county has certified
compliance with the requirements and standards of this subchapter.
   (D)   Subsequent to the issuance of any ambulance license hereunder, the
Board of Commissioners shall cause to be inspected each licensed ambulance or
vehicle and its equipment and premises whenever they deem such inspection to be
necessary. The inspection authorized by this division (D) shall be in addition
to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for
ambulance or other motor vehicles under the law or ordinance of the state or
the county.
   (E)   The Board of Commissioners shall determine the need for additional
ambulance operators and shall issue additional licenses only if the existing
ambulance operators fail to meet the needs and requirements of the county.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.09 LICENSE, FEES AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All licenses authorized to be issued hereunder shall bear the date of
issue and shall expire on the anniversary date next following the date of
issue, unless sooner suspended, terminated or revoked. The following fees shall
be charged by the County Clerk, which fees shall accompany the appropriate
application:
      (1)   Ambulance license, for each vehicle: $10; and
      (2)   Driver’s, attendant’s and attendant-driver’s licenses: $1.
   (B)   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may
be renewed at the expiration thereof by filing a proper application, paying the
fee required for such license and provided that the applicant is then qualified
to receive a license, each applicant being required to conform with all the
requirements as upon original licensing.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
§ 112.10 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Any licensee who shall: neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter, or with the conditions under which any license
shall be issued; or who shall violate any of the provisions of any ordinance of
this county; or who shall violate any provisions of the laws of the state,
shall be subject to have his or her license suspended or revoked.
      (2)   The County Clerk, upon order by the Board of Commissioners, shall
give notice of the suspension or revocation to the holder of any license issued
hereunder, which notice shall set forth specifically the facts supporting the
charges or grounds for which the license was suspended or revoked, and such
notice shall be served on the holder of such license.
      (3)   The notice of suspension or revocation shall designate the time and
place that a hearing will be held before the Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   If the Commissioners find that the basis of either the suspension
or revocation is substantiated, the license shall be suspended or revoked.
      (5)   If such license is suspended, the license and all evidence thereof
shall be surrendered by the holder of such license and shall be held by the
County Clerk until the end of the period of suspension; and in the event the
license is revoked, the holder shall be ineligible to obtain another license
until granted by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Upon notice of suspension or revocation of an ambulance license
hereunder, operations shall cease with such ambulance; upon notice of
suspension or revocation of a driver’s, attendant’s or attendant-driver’s
license, such driver, attendant or attendant-driver shall cease to drive or
attend an ambulance, and no person shall employ or permit such individual to
drive or attend an ambulance.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.11 COMPLIANCE.
   In addition to the provisions of this subchapter, all licenses hereunder
shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations now in force
or hereafter enacted governing the operation of motor vehicles upon highways,
streets, alleys and other public ways.
(Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS
§ 112.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPOINTED COMMITTEE. A committee appointed annually by the Board of County
Commissioners and consisting of at least the following members:
       (1)   A licensed physician who is a resident of the county;
      (2)   A representative of an agency performing emergency services. This
representative shall be the Chief of the Fire or Police Department in the
largest city in the county, or the Chief of the largest rural district Fire
Department in the county or the County Sheriff; and
      (3)   A citizen who is a resident of the county. This citizen shall
possess current certification in first aid, at least through the advanced level
of the American Red Cross or the equivalent.
   ATTENDANT. A trained and/or qualified individual responsible for the
operation of a non-emergency ambulance and the cure of the patients, whether or
not the attendant also serves as a driver.
   ATTENDANT-DRIVER. An individual who is qualified as an attendant and a
driver.
   DRIVER. An individual who drives a non-emergency ambulance.
   NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE. Any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle that
is designed or constructed, and equipped, and is intended to be used for and is
maintained or operated, for the transportation of non-emergency injured or sick
patients, operating within the boundaries of basic life support unit not
normally involved in first run transportation in an emergency situation, which
otherwise comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
   NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE OPERATOR OR BUSINESS. Anyone engaging in the
business of transporting ill, sick or injured persons, for hire, or who, by
advertising, representation or otherwise, holds himself or herself out as
engaging in such business.
   PATIENT. An individual who is sick, injured or wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or group of individuals acting together for a common purpose or organization of
any kind, including any governmental agency other than the United States.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.26 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or
otherwise, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be
engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients within the
county, unless he or she holds a current license for a non-emergency ambulance
issued pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a non-emergency ambulance to be operated,
within the county, unless the non-emergency ambulance shall be under the
immediate supervision and direction of a person who is holding a current, valid
license as a driver, attendant or attendant-driver.
   (C)   (1)   Provided, however, that no license shall be required for a non-
emergency ambulance, or the driver, attendant or attendant-driver of a non-
emergency ambulance which:
         (a)   Is operated by the state, the county or governmental agency;
         (b)   Is operated from a location or headquarters outside of, and
transports patients within who are picked up beyond the limits of the county;
         (c)   Is operated from a location or headquarters outside the limits
of the county and either:
            1.   Picks up patients beyond the limits of the county, to be
transported to locations within the county; or
            2.   Picks up patients within the county to be transported to
locations beyond the limits of the county.
      (2)   However, no such outside ambulance shall be used to pick up
patients within the county for transportation to locations within the county,
unless the driver, attendant and attendant-driver and the ambulance operator
hold current, valid licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.27 APPLICATION FOR NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE LICENSE.
   Application for non-emergency ambulance licenses shall be made upon forms
prepared or prescribed by the Board of Commissioners and shall contain:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the non-
emergency ambulance;
   (B)   The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant
does business and proposes to do business;
   (C)   The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and
care of patients;
   (D)   A description of each non-emergency ambulance, including the make,
model, year of manufacture, motor and chassis number, current state license
number, the length of time the non-emergency ambulance has been in use, patient
compartment dimensions of the non-emergency ambulance, cot and stretcher
capacity, list of equipment carried in the non-emergency ambulance, design and
color scheme of each non-emergency ambulance;
   (E)   The location and description of the place or places from which it is
intended to operate; and
   (F)   Such other information as the Board of Commissioners shall deem
necessary.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.28 NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE LICENSE LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   A non-emergency ambulance operator shall at all times indemnify and
save harmless the county from and for any and all losses, claims, actions or
judgments for damages or injury to persons or property and losses and expenses
caused or incurred by the non-emergency ambulance operator and its drivers,
attendants and attendant-drivers. No non-emergency ambulance license shall be
issued under this subchapter, nor shall license be valid after license after
insurance, nor shall any non-emergency ambulance be operated within the county
unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage issued by
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state for each and every
ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the applicant of licensee, providing
the following minimum limits of liability insurance, in which the county shall
be named as a named insured:
      (1)   For property damage to any one person: $100,000;
      (2)   For property damage in any one occurrence: $200,000;
      (3)   For personal injury to any one person: $250,000; and
      (4)   For personal injuries in any one occurrence: $500,000.
   (B)   The limits of insurance provided above shall not be deemed the
limitation of the applicant’s or licensee’s covenant to indemnify and save and
hold harmless the county, and if the county becomes liable for an amount in
excess of the insurance limits herein provided, the applicant or licensee
covenants and or any of. its agents upon whom duties may be imposed by this
subchapter, agrees to indemnify and save and hold harmless the county from any
and all such losses, claims actions, judgments or expenses for damages or
injury to person or property.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.29 NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The required equipment regularly carried in each non-emergency
ambulance shall be those required under Idaho Code § 56-1016, and EMS 2-3300
ambulance standards as promulgated by the State Board of Health and Welfare.
   (B)   The appointed committee, prior to the issuance of a non-emergency
ambulance license, or the renewal thereof, shall inspect each ambulance to
determine the adequacy of equipment carried in each non-emergency ambulance
along with equipment required by the State Motor Vehicle Code (siren, red
lights and the like) and that each non-emergency ambulance is in safe and sound
mechanical and operating condition, including compliance with State Vehicle
Inspection Laws. In determining the adequacy of first aid-patient handling
equipment, the appointed committee shall take into consideration, in addition
to the list of equipment specified by this subchapter, the list of minimal
equipment currently published by the American College of Surgeons or its
authorized Committee on Trauma. In addition to the inspections required prior
to insurance of a non-emergency ambulance license, or the renewal thereof, the
appointed committee is authorized to conduct inspections at other reasonable
times. A report of all inspections by the appointed committee must be property
submitted to the Board of County Commissioners following each inspection.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.30 DRIVER’S, ATTENDANT’S AND ATTENDANT-DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   Application. Application for driver’s, attendant’s and attendant-
driver’s licenses hereunder shall be made upon forms prepared or prescribed by
the Board of Commissioners. No person shall drive or serve as a driver,
attendant or attendant-driver with a non-emergency ambulance licensed hereunder
without first procuring the applicable license from the county. Each license
application shall contain at least the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s full name, current residence and length of time he
or she has resided in the county;
      (2)   The applicant’s age, marital statutes and other physical
attributes;
      (3)   Whether he or she has ever been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor and, if so, when and for what cause;
      (4)   The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation and
care of patients, whether he or she has previously been licensed as a driver,
chauffeur, attendant or attendant-driver and, if so, when, where and whether
his or her license has ever been revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction and
for what cause;
      (5)   Affidavits of good character from two reputable citizens:
      (6)   Fingerprints and photograph to be taken by the County Sheriff’s
Department; and
      (7)   Such other information as the Board of Commissioners shall deem
necessary to make a determination of compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners shall, within a reasonable time after
receiving an application as provided for herein, cause such investigation as he
or she deems necessary to be made of the applicant for a driver’s attendant’s
or attendant-driver’s license.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners shall issue a license to a driver,
attendant or attendant-driver hereunder, valid for a period of one year, unless
earlier suspended, revoked or terminated, when he or she finds that:
         (a)   The applicant is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors
or narcotics;
         (b)   The applicant is able to speak, read and write the English
language;
 
         (c)   The applicant has been found by a duly licensed physician, upon
examination attested to on a form provided by the Board of Commissioners, to be
of sound physique, possessing good eyesight (at least correctable to 20-30
vision in the worst eye and also having good peripheral vision, depth
perception and acceptable dark adaptation recovery for night driving) and free
of physical defects or disease which might impair the ability to drive or
attend an ambulance; and
         (d)   The applicant for a driver, attendant or attendant-driver
license has:
            1.   A currently valid certificate evidencing successful completion
of American Red Cross first aid training at least through the advanced level;
            2.   Certification of successful completion of a course on rescue-
extrication taught by the Idaho Falls Fire Department; and
            3.   Certification of successful completion of a course on
cardiopulmonary resuscitation taught by an instructor specified by the
appointed committee.
         (e)   The applicant for a driver, or attendant-driver license has, in
addition to the above requirements, successfully completed courses on defensive
driving and emergency vehicle driving taught by instructors specified by the
appointed committee and also holds a currently valid driver’s license from the
state.
         (f)   A license of a driver, attendant or attendant-driver issued
hereunder shall not be assignable or transferable.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.31 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.
   No non-emergency ambulance license shall be issued, renewed or continued in
force unless the ambulance operator shall:
   (A)   Equip each ambulance to conform with the minimal standards,
requirements and regulations provided for herein;
   (B)   Maintain each ambulance in mechanically safe, sound condition and
sanitary condition at all times;
   (C)   Have a minimum of one licensed driver, and one licensed attendant, or
two licensed attendant-drivers or an acceptable combination thereof, on the
non-emergency ambulance service staff at all times;
   (D)   Have at least one ambulance crew available for prompt response at all
times. Each such crew shall consist of two appropriately licensed personnel;
and
 
   (E)   Maintain records, on forms specified by the Board of Commissioners, as
follows:
      (1)   Monthly call report;
      (2)   Detailed individual call report;
      (3)   Annual non-emergency ambulance service report;
      (4)   Daily equipment checkoff list;
      (5)   Vehicle maintenance log;
      (6)   Patient collection/non-collection report; and
      (7)   Other records and reports as may be required.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.32 DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners shall, within a reasonable time after
receiving an application for non-emergency ambulance licenses provided for
herein, cause such investigation as he or she deems necessary to be made of the
applicant and his or her proposed operation.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners shall issue a license hereunder for a
specified non-emergency ambulance to be valid for a period of one year, unless
earlier suspended, revoked or terminated, when they found that:
      (1)   The appointed committee has caused the non-emergency ambulance
licensed hereunder to be inspected and found such non-emergency ambulance
vehicle so licensed to be in proper condition as prescribed by the applicable
provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   The appointed committee has certified that the non-emergency
ambulance equipment meets the minimal requirements prescribed by this
subchapter and by which to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulation relating to health, sanitation and safety;
      (3)   The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct and
operate a non-emergency ambulance business;
      (4)   A sufficient number of duly licensed drivers, attendants and/or
attendant-drivers are employed in such capacities by the non-emergency
ambulance operator; and
      (5)   All the requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable
laws and ordinances have been met.
    (C)   Prior to the issuance of any non-emergency ambulance license
hereunder, the Board of Commissioners shall cause to be inspected the vehicles,
equipment and premises designated in each application hereunder to determine
compliance with the standards by this subchapter, and no license shall be
issued by the County Clerk unless the appointed committee of the county has
certified compliance with the requirements and standards of this subchapter.
   (D)   Subsequent to the issuance of any non-emergency ambulance license
hereunder, the Board of Commissioners shall cause to be inspected each licensed
non-emergency ambulance or vehicle and its equipment and premises whenever they
deem such inspection to be necessary. The inspection authorized by this
division (D) shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicles under
the law or ordinance of the state or the county.
   (E)   The Board of Commissioners shall determine the need for additional
non-emergency ambulance operators and shall issue additional licenses only if
the existing non-emergency ambulance operators fail to meet the needs and
requirements of the county.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.33 LICENSE, FEES AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All licenses authorized to be issued hereunder shall bear the date of
issue and shall expire on the anniversary date next following the date of
issue, unless sooner suspended, terminated or revoked.
   (B)   The following fees shall be charged by the County Clerk, which fees
shall accompany the appropriate application:
      (1)   Non-emergency ambulance license for each vehicle: $25. Said license
shall be prominently displayed in the vehicle; and
      (2)   Driver’s, attendant’s and attendant-driver’s licenses: $5. Said
license shall be on the person.
   (C)   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may
be renewed at the expiration thereof by filing a property application, paying
the fee required for such license and provided that the applicant is the
qualified to receive a license, each applicant being required to conform with
all the requirements as upon original licensing.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.34 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any licensees who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter, with the conditions under which any license
shall be issued; who shall violate any of the provisions of any ordinance of
this county; or who shall violate any provisions of the laws of the state shall
be subject to have his or her license suspended or revoked.
   (B)   The County Clerk, upon order by the Board of Commissioners, shall give
notice of the suspension or revocation to the holder of any license issued
hereunder, which notice shall set forth specifically the facts supporting the
charges or grounds for which the license was suspended or revoked, and such
notice shall be served on the holder of such license. The notice of suspension
or revocation shall designate the time and place that a hearing will be held
before the Board of Commissioners. If the Commissioners find that the basis of
either the suspension or revocation is substantiated, the license shall be
suspended or revoked. If such license is suspended, the license and all
evidence thereof shall be surrendered by the holder of such license and shall
be held by the County Clerk until the end of the period of suspension; and in
the event the license is revoked, the holder shall be ineligible to obtain
another license until granted by the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   Upon suspension or revocation of a non-emergency ambulance license
hereunder, operations shall cease with such non-emergency ambulance; upon
suspension or revocation of a driver’s, attendant’s or attendant-driver’s
license, such driver, attendant or attendant-driver shall cease to drive or
attend a non-emergency ambulance, and no person shall employ or permit such
individual to drive or attend a non-911 emergency ambulance.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.35 COMPLIANCE.
   In addition to the provisions of this subchapter, all licensees hereunder
shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations now in force
or hereafter enacted governing the operation of motor vehicles upon highways,
streets, alleys and other public ways.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
112.01 through
112.11 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $300
or imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
112.25 through
112.35 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $300
or imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 130-83, passed - -; Ord. passed 7-9-1970)
CHAPTER 113: CHILD DAYCARE BUSINESSES
Section
   
113.01   Title
   
113.02   Authority
   
113.03   Purposes
   
113.04   Application
   
113.05   Definitions
   
113.06   Policy
   
113.07   Procedure
   
113.08   Registry and fees
   
113.09   Eligibility for license
   
113.10   Appeals
   
113.11   Disclaimer
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Bonneville County Child Daycare
Licensing Ordinance, hereafter referred to as the “Daycare Licensing
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.02 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   These regulations are authorized by Article 12, § 2 of the State
Constitution.
   (B)   The County Commissioners will be the authority for the purposes of
administering this chapter, and any grievance will be heard by duly constituted
Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.03 PURPOSES.
   The purpose of this chapter is to aid parents and guardians securing the
safety of those children from criminal elements in the county.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.04 APPLICATION.
   These regulations shall apply to persons caring for children, for pay,
within the parameters of the county on a daycare basis.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Board of County Commissioners.
   CHILD. A person less than 18 years of age.
   DAYCARE. Care provided for any part of a 24-hour day for children not
related by blood or marriage to the person or persons providing that care for
pay.
   DAYCARE CENTER PROVIDER. A person using any home or premises to provide
daycare or occasional care to 12 or more children for pay.
    DAYCARE HOME PROVIDER. A person using any home or premises for the care of
one to five children, who is paid to care for the said children.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person hired to work for a provider of any daycare service.
   GROUP CARE HOME PROVIDER. Person using any home or premises to provide
daycare or occasional care for six to 12 children for pay.
    INVESTIGATION. Background record checks, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Local criminal;
      (2)   Local noncriminal;
      (3)   C.I.B. (Criminal Identification Bureau) statewide;
      (4)   FBI criminal history;
      (5)   City, county and state checks for former addresses, within the last
ten years;
      (6)   N.C.I.C. (National Crime Information Center);
      (7)   Fingerprint check through the FBI and Criminal Identification
Bureau; and
      (8)   Employment history for the last ten years.
   SHERIFF. The duly elected Sheriff of Bonneville County.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.06 POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   It is hereby declared by the county that all persons entering
into the business of child care shall in the interest of the safety of these
children and, for public information, obtain a license from the county.
      (2)   Prior to obtaining a license, a background investigation by the
County Sheriff or his or her duly appointed deputy or representative will be
conducted. Based upon clearance of said Sheriff or deputy, by affidavit
substantiating this investigation, and approval by the Board of County
Commissioners, a license will be issued by the office of the County Clerk.
      (3)   This policy requires for the safety of the children and the
information of parents hiring such person as caretakers for their children or
legal dependents, that this county require the licensing of such persons and
that it be mandatory to have such a background check and license in order to
undertake child daycare services. Said license shall be renewed each year and
be effective for a one-year period from the date of issuance.
   (B)   Provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
apply to:
      (1)   The occasional care of a child or children by neighbors, relatives
or friends not ordinarily engaged in child care for pay;
      (2)   A daycare home providing daycare for children of only one family in
addition to the provider’s own children;
      (3)   A private school operated for educational purposes for children
over five years of age; or
      (4)   Summer day camps, programs, religious schools and activities
operating less than 12 weeks during a calendar year.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.07 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of County Commissioners have set the following
procedures for licensure of any daycare home provider, group care home
provider, daycare center provider, employees of said providers and facilities,
or other persons directly associated with or living within the facility or home
of the age of 12 years or older when said children are being cared for in the
home or facility.
      (2)   Applicants shall meet these procedures as hereinafter stated.
         (a)   An application shall be obtained from the County Clerk’s Office,
filled out completely, under oath and submitted to the Sheriff detailing
history of non-traffic criminal charges, mental illness or incarceration and a
list of past residences for ten years.
         (b)   A false statement or omission of a material fact on an
application shall be grounds for denial of the license; or, if not discovered
until the license has been issued, a false statement shall be violation of the
provisions of this chapter and grounds for revocation of the license.
         (c)   Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the
Sheriff, deputy or duly authorized representative shall complete an
investigation of the background of each applicant or other persons subject to
the background check under this chapter.
         (d)   The investigation shall consist of the following checks:
            1.   Local criminal;
            2.   Mental Health, Civil, Child Protective services;
            3.   C.I.B. (Criminal Identification Bureau) statewide;
            4.   FBI criminal history;
            5.   State checks for former addresses within the last ten years;
            6.   National crime information center;
            7.   Fingerprint check through the FBI and Criminal Identification
Bureau; and
            8.   Employment history for ten years.
         (e)   Applicants to be approved for licensure shall submit to
fingerprinting by the County Sheriff’s Office.
         (f)   Upon submitting a report of findings by the County Sheriff’s
Office to the Board, upon approval of the application by the Board and payment
of the established licensure fee, applicant shall receive their license from
the office of the County Clerk.
   (B)   In addition to providers and employees, a background check shall be
completed on all persons 12 years of age or older who are living in the center
or home, and who have contact with the children. These names will be listed by
the applicant on the form and submitted by the applicant for an investigation.
Investigations shall be the same for providers checked in a manner consistent
with policy adopted by the Board, including a youth rehabilitation report, but
said juveniles shall not require fingerprinting. There will be a fee charged
for these investigations.
   (C)   A finding shall be issued in writing by the Board detailing the reason
(s) for the denial, suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.08 REGISTRY AND FEES.
   (A)   Licensing authority. The Board shall authorize the Sheriff to
establish and maintain a registry of homes and centers in the county, and to
answer inquiries received regarding any individuals or facilities in the
business of daycare services.
   (B)   Fee categories.
      (1)   Fees shall be established annually by resolution of the Board based
upon investigation costs and other pertinent factors.
      (2)   The following fee categories are hereby established and application
for a license or a renewal of a license.
 
Adult resident of home facility investigation fee            $10
Daycare provider/employee license and investigation fee      $25
Juvenile resident of home/facility (12-18) investigation fee $5
 
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.09 ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   Any daycare home provider, group care home provider, daycare center provider
or employee who applies for a license in the manner and form prescribed by the
Board and is found upon investigation by the Sheriff to be in conformity with
the procedures established by the Board under the authority conferred herein
shall be licensed for a period of one year. Renewal of a license shall be for
the period of one year from the date of issuance.
   (A)   An application for a daycare home provider, a group home care
provider, a daycare center provider or employee of these services for renewal
under this chapter may be denied by the Board if the Board finds:
      (1)   Visitation by a parent has not been permitted or impeded in any
manner;
      (2)   The provider is employing a person who has not, or the provider
themselves have not applied for licensure as provided in this chapter or who
has:
         (a)   Been guilty of any neglect, physical injury or physical or
sexual abuse or exploitation of any child;
         (b)   Been found guilty of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or violence to a person;
         (c)   Had his or her parental rights substantially affected by a child
protection or child termination action under Idaho Code §§ 16-1601 et seq.;
         (d)   Knowingly supplied false information to the Board; and
         (e)   Been committed pursuant to Idaho Code Title 66, Chapter 3 or
similar provisions in another jurisdiction. However if: such individual is no
longer under any form of treatment in relation to such commitment; and such
individual has been examined at his or her own expense by at least two
professionals licensed to evaluate the mental health of individuals, at least
one of whom shall be a psychiatrist, and it is certified by both licensed
professionals that the individual is no longer mentally ill and presents no
threat or danger to any child.
      (3)   The background checks of individuals described in §
113.07 discloses violations;
      (4)   The license was issued based on materially false information;
      (5)   The Board may deny a license if it has reasonable cause to believe
the individual applying for a license is mentally ill, as defined in Idaho Code
§ 66-317;
      (6)   For the purpose of this section, a withheld judgment shall be noted
on investigative report;
      (7)   The Board shall also have the authority to deny a license to any
person as a provider if the Board finds there to be substantial reason to
believe that the person has:
         (a)   Been the subject of a child protection or child termination
court action;
         (b)   Been voluntarily or involuntarily committed to an institution
for the mentally ill; or
         (c)   Been convicted of a misdemeanor under the uniform or similar
provision in another jurisdiction.
      (8)   A decision to deny a license under this section shall be made after
a thorough investigation has been made by the Board and the preponderance of
evidence gives reasonable cause to believe that the allegations were
substantially true.
   (B)   The Board shall have the power to suspend or revoke any license if any
provider or employee is found upon preponderance of evidence:
      (1)   To have knowingly and willfully supplied false information to the
Board in gaining a license;
      (2)   To have been subsequently convicted of any of the crimes listed in
this section;
      (3)   To have been subsequently convicted of any violation of the
provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   To have been the subject of an investigation regarding any of the
Board determines that the preponderance of evidence gives reasonable cause to
believe that the allegations were substantially true; or
      (5)   To have been committed under Idaho Code Title 66, Chapter 3.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.10 APPEALS.
   An adverse ruling by the Board may be appealed within ten days by filing
with the Board a notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the appeal. A
hearing shall be held within a reasonable time period of the filing of the
notice of appeal.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.11 DISCLAIMER.
   Licensure by the county is not guarantee or warranty to the persons
suitability as a daycare provider. Only to establish a background check for
criminal identification, if it exists. Licensure indicates only that a
background check of the enumerated areas have been performed with the findings
on file for public perusal in order for parents to make an informed decision
regarding child care.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or persons who operate a daycare home, group care home or
daycare center within this county, without first obtaining a license as
provided in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the
penalties provided in Idaho Code § 18-303.
   (B)   Each succeeding day is to be construed as a separate violation for the
purpose of this section, to-wit: Idaho Code § 18-305.
(Ord. 139-85, passed 11-4-1985)
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
114.01   Purpose and intent
   
114.02   Definitions
   
114.03   Establishment and classification of businesses
   
114.04   Measurement of distance
   
114.05   Exceptions to permit for sexually-oriented businesses
   
114.06   Regulations governing existing sexually-oriented businesses
   
114.07   Injunction
   
114.08   Sexually-oriented business permit; purpose and intent
   
114.09   Permit required
   
114.10   Investigation and application
   
114.11   Issuance of permit
   
114.12   Annual permit fee
   
114.13   Inspection
   
114.14   Expiration of permit
   
114.15   Suspension of permit
   
114.16   Revocation of permit
   
114.17   Judicial review
   
114.18   Transfer of permit
   
114.19   Sexually-oriented business employee license
   
114.20   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos in video booths
   
114.21   Prohibitions regarding minors
   
114.22   Additional prohibitions and requirements
   
114.23   Hours of operation
   
114.24   Public nudity prohibited
   
114.25   Prohibition of live adult entertainment
   
114.26   Operation of a sexually-oriented business without a valid permit
   
114.27   Exemptions
   
114.28   Immunity from prosecution
   
114.29   Application
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate sexually-oriented businesses
which sell, display or distribute indecent materials, or which sponsor, exhibit
or engage in conduct, which is indecent, but which is not obscene such as to be
prohibited by state law. It is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to
regulate sexually-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the county and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of
sexually-oriented businesses within the county, thereby reducing or eliminating
the adverse secondary effects from such sexually-oriented businesses. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials, but to impose content
neutral regulations which address the adverse secondary effects sexually-
oriented businesses may have on adjoining properties and the immediate
neighborhood.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, computers or other
similar image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each,
are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, CD-
ROMs, slides, computer-generated images or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
      (1)   A commercial establishment which as a regular or substantial course
of conduct has in stock or offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
any material in digital format (including, but not limited to, compact disc
(CD) or digital video disc (DVD)), slides or other visual representations which
are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others, or which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
         (c)   For the purpose of this definition, the phrase REGULAR AND
SUBSTANTIAL COURSE OF CONDUCT shall be construed with reference to all relevant
factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
            1.   The business devotes more than 10% of its retail inventory
(not measured by the number of items but rather by the cost to the business
owner of the inventory) to merchandise distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
            2.   The business devotes more than 10% of the retail floor area to
merchandise that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon
specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas;
            3.   The retail value of merchandise that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities and specified
anatomical areas exceeds 10% of the total retail value of inventory offered in
each of the following categories: books; magazines; video tapes or any material
in digital format (including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital
video disc (DVD)) for sale or rental; novelties and devices; and on-premises
viewing of images, films and/or videos; and
            4.   Gross revenue derived from merchandise in any category set
forth in division (1)(c)3. above exceeds 10% of the total gross revenue for the
category.
      (2)   There is a rebuttable presumption that a business constitutes an
adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store where the business:
         (a)   Offers or advertises merchandise that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as set forth in (1)(c)3. above; and
         (b)   Fails to make revenue and inventory related business records
available to the county upon reasonable advance notice.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant bottle club, juice bar or
similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, any material in digital
format (including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital video disc
(DVD)), slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
      (1)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, DVDs, CD-ROMs or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises
the availability of this sexually-oriented type of material by means of a sign
visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten
hours; or
      (3)   For any form of consideration, allows a tenant or occupant to sub-
rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A premises where, for any form of
consideration, has, at any one time, 10% or more of its stock, rented or owned,
which shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital images, slides or
similar reproductions, and in which at least 10% of the total presentation time
is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure
of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   BIKINI BAR. A business, as defined in Idaho Code Title 23, licensed to serve
beer, wine, alcohol or spirituous liquor for consumption on the premises and
which features live performers or servers wearing bikinis or swimsuits covering
specified anatomical areas.
   COUCH OR STRADDLE DANCE. An employee of the establishment intentionally
touching or coming within ten feet of any patron while engaged in the display
or exposure of any specified anatomical area or any specified sexual activity.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
   ESCORT. A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for or dance with another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-
oriented business, to any of the sexually-oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually-oriented businesses defined in
this chapter to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually-oriented business.
   LIVE ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any exhibition, dance or performance for
consideration by a person who appears nude or semi-nude, or a performance which
is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities, including the performance of a straddle or couch dance.
   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs
as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or where any
person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto,
exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. The definition of SEXUALLY-
ORIENTED BUSINESSES shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed
hospital, nor by any employee of a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed
physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, massage therapist, nor by a
nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semi-
professional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic
program.
   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY. 
      (1)   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR. Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or
person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises that requires a license and/or
permit and that is classified as a sexually-oriented business.
   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, leased or held by the United States,
the state, the county, the city and special district, school district or any
other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which
building is used for governmental purposes.
   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas or
similar public land which is under the control, operation or management of any
public entity authorities.
   PUBLIC PLACE. All outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and
all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public,
including, but not limited to, places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants,
clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to
specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether
or not an admission is charged. The term does not include private rooms used
primarily for residential purposes, hotel rooms or other private places used
for human habitation or bona fide dressing rooms or restrooms.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building,
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
   REGULAR or SUBSTANTIAL. At least 10%.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district established by Chapter 156, which is
characterized by residential uses.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. A single-family dwelling, duplex, townhouse, multiple-
family or mobile park or subdivision and campground or other use characterized
by its devotion to human habitation, excluding hotels, motels, boarding
establishments or similar commercial establishments.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility, including, but not
limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial establishment, that
as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration,
a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the
purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude. The definition of SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES shall not include an
establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved
and recognized sexual therapy.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency or nude model studio, or any premises where employees engage in
specified sexual activity or display specified anatomical areas.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following whether actual or
simulated:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACT. Any sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse,
rape or crimes connected with another sexually-oriented business, including,
but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering or tax violations.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following, whether actual or
simulated:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts for any purpose other than for medical
or therapeutic purposes by a licensed medical practitioner;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral
copulation, sodomy, masturbation, masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented
torture, beating or the infliction of pain, or erotic or lewd touching or other
contact with an animal by a human, or erotic dancing or rhythmic movements with
a device, instrument, object or pole;
      (3)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; and
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 10%, as the floor areas exist
on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of Bonneville County (Chapter 156 of
this code), as presently constituted or as may be amended hereafter.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.03 ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The establishment and operation of a sexually-oriented business shall
be permitted only in the I&M-2 and I&M-3 Zones, except bikini bars will only be
allowed in C-2 Zones, and shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in
this chapter. In particular, the issuance of a license shall not be construed
to allow any person or establishment to engage in conduct otherwise expressly
prohibited under §§
114.24 and
114.25.
   (B)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of a sexually-
oriented business within 1,000 feet of another such business or within 2,500
feet of any religious institution, school, boys’ club, girls’ club or similar
existing youth organization, or public park or public building, or within 2,500
feet of any property zoned for residential use or within 1,000 feet of any
property used for residential purposes.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.04 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.
   As regarding §
114.03(B), distance between any two sexually-oriented business shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the
closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any
sexually-oriented business shall also be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest point of the
property line of the premises where the sexually-oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest point of the property line of the premises of a
religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary school, boys’
club, girls’ club or similar existing youth organization, or public park or
public building or any properties zoned for residential use or used for
residential purposes.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.05 EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT FOR SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person appearing in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   (C)   In a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and where, in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll as least seven days in advance of the class; and where no more than one
nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.06 REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Any sexually-oriented business in operation on the effective date of
the ordinance adopting this chapter, whose operation at a location is
prohibited by this chapter, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use. Subject
to the provisions of
Chapter 156, such nonconforming use may be continued at such location
notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. Existing uses that were already
in violation of any other federal, state or local law are illegal and are not
legitimized by this section.
   (B)   A sexually-oriented business lawfully operating as conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of a sexually-oriented business permit and/or license, of a church,
public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, public building,
residential district or residential lot within 2,500 feet of the sexually-
oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit
and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or
license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been
revoked.
   (C)   (1)   Any establishment subject to the provision of this section shall
apply for the permit provided for by §
114.10 within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Any establishment existing prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall comply with the regulations pertaining to §§
114.20 and
114.22 within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, and all other
applicable permit regulations within 30 days of the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.07 INJUNCTION.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business
without having a valid permit due to locational restrictions is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.08 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT; PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of
the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
deleterious effects of sexually-oriented businesses with the county.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.09 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No sexually-oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually-oriented business permit issued by the county for the particular
type of business. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business without
said permit.
   (B)   The County Planning and Zoning Administrator or designee is
responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling
permits for proposed or existing sexually- oriented business if they do not
comply with all applicable laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended
or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter in the county and
the county’s comprehensive plan.
   (C)   The County Sheriff shall be responsible for enforcing all other
provisions of this chapter. The County Sheriff shall, upon request from the
County Planning and Zoning Administrator provide information on whether an
applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time period
set forth.
   (D)   The County Planning and Zoning Administrator and the County Sheriff
Division shall be jointly responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or
non-permitted sexually-oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in
compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   An application for a permit must be made to the County Zoning Office.
   (F)   The application shall contain the following information and shall be
accompanied by the following documents:
      (1)   The legal names, aliases, business and residence addresses, phone
numbers, photograph, driver license, Social Security number, state and federal
tax identification numbers, date and place of birth, height, weight, hair and
eye color of the individual owner, partnership owners or corporate owner and
stockholders along with proof of age (over 18);
       (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must:
         (a)   State the sexually-oriented business’s fictitious name; and
         (b)   Submit documents evidencing compliance with Idaho Code §§ 30-21-
801 et seq.
      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to §
114.09 has, within the five-year period, as specified in §
114.11, immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a
specified criminal act and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the
date of conviction and the place of conviction;
      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to this division (F) has had a previous permit for a sexually-oriented
business from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including
the name, location and dates of the sexually-oriented business;
      (5)   The single classification of permit for which the applicant is
filing;
      (6)   The location of the proposed sexually-oriented business, including
a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if
any;
      (7)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professional prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;
      (8)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a state registered land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses
regulated by this chapter within 2,500 feet of the property to be certified;
the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school
or public park or recreation area, any residentially zones area or residential
property within 2,500 feet of the property to be certified. For the purpose of
this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in
existence at the time an application is submitted;
      (9)   (a)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented
business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant; and
         (b)   If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually-oriented
business or as the entity, which wishes to operate such a business, each
individual having a 10% or greater interest in the corporation must sign the
application for a permit as applicant.
      (10)   If a person wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs or other
video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the application
requirements stated in this chapter.
   (G)   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing
duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in
the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the
application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days
from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the
county shall be grounds for suspension of a permit.
   (H)   In the event that the county determines or learns at any time that the
applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually-
oriented business, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact
and allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. The time
period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in
which the applicant is expressly allowed an opportunity to properly complete
the application.
   (I)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
all federal, state or county health, fire and building codes and laws.
   (J)   The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable application
fee of $100 at the time of filing an application under this chapter.
   (K)   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise
by the County Planning and Zoning Administrator or designee, the County
Sheriff’s Office and all other county agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the county of their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.
   (L)   The applicant shall be required to provide the county with the names
of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to §
114.19. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted
or renewed.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.10 INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed and upon payment of the
non-refundable application fees, the county shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually-oriented
business in accordance with law and as set forth in this chapter. Said
investigation shall be completed with 60 days of receipt of a proper
application.
   (B)   The county shall disapprove an application if it finds that the
proposed sexually-oriented business will be in violation of any provision of
any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the county.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.11 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Generally. The county shall grant or deny an application for a permit
within 60 days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the
sixtieth day, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable
extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the
business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the county notifies
the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that
denial.
   (B)   Grant of application for permit.
      (1)   The county shall grant the application unless one or more of the
criteria set forth in division (C) below is present.
      (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of
the sexually-oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the
sexually-oriented business whether permitted or not may be subject to
prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States
Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991).
The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to
the sexually-oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
   (C)   Denial of application for permit.
      (1)   The County Commissioners shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons:
         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
         (b)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue on his or her
payment to a city or the county of any taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed
against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually-
oriented business;
         (c)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the county to operate a sexually-oriented business within the
preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually-oriented business has been revoked by another governmental or
regulatory agency within the preceding 12 months;
         (d)   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
section or permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form;
         (e)   The premises to be used for the sexually-oriented business have
not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes
by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said
compliance;
         (f)   The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not
been paid;
         (g)   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is
not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually-oriented
business in this chapter;
         (h)   The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance or court order;
         (i)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter, which has been
suspended or revoked; and/or
         (j)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for
which less than two years for one misdemeanor offense; five years for two
misdemeanor offenses; five years for a felony offense have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against
children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually-oriented
business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material
harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the
applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of the above described specified
criminal acts may qualify for a sexually-oriented business permit only when the
time period required in this division (C)(1)(j) has elapsed.
      (2)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a
period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous application for a
permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the
circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different
decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be
denied.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.12 ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.
   The annual fee for a sexually-oriented business permit is $100. Such fee
shall accompany the application filed under §
114.09(F).
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.13 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the County
and the State Health Department to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually-oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, or his or her agent or employee, if he or she
refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is
occupied or open for business.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.14 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
114.11 (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient) of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made before the expiration date.
Failure to timely file will result in expiration of permit and will require the
business to reapply as if for a new business and be subject to denial if found
to be noncompliant with any standard.
   (B)   When the county denies renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not
be issued a permit under this chapter unless, subsequent to denial, the county
finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been
corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date denial became final.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.15 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The county shall suspend a permit for a period of 30 days if he or she
determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee, has:
      (1)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working in
the sexually-oriented business premises;
      (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually-oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
      (3)   Knowingly permitted gambling by a person on the sexually-oriented
business premises;
      (4)   Operated the sexually-oriented business in violation of this
chapter a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or
regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on
an investigation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation within a
seven-day period, the county shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall
notify the permittee of the suspension;
      (5)   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to §
114.18;
      (6)   Operated the sexually-oriented business in violation of the hours
of operation §
114.23; or
      (7)   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as
required in §
114.19.
   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the
statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.16 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The county shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in §
114.15 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The county shall revoke a permit upon determining that:
      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s
opportunity for obtaining a permit;
      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or allowed prostitution on
the premises; or operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of
time when the permittee’s permit was suspended;
      (3)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted premises,
constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained,
and the person or persons were employees of the sexually-oriented business at
the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit;
      (4)   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually-oriented business;
      (5)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      (6)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually-oriented
business under a single roof except as provided herein.
   (C)   When the county revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for
one year and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business
permit for one year from the date revocation became effective.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.17 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
review of such administrative action pursuant to and within the time frames
established by the State Administrative Procedure Act, being Idaho Code Title
67, Chapter 52.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.18 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually-oriented business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another person
unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the county which provides
that he or she is now the permittee, which amendment may be obtained only if he
or she has completed and properly filed an application with the county setting
forth the information called for under §
114.11 in the application; and
      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee set by this
chapter.
   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the county has notified the
permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be
brought against the permittee.
   (D)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another location.
   (E)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked upon the date such transfer is made.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.19 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Each individual to be employed in a sexually-oriented business,
as defined in §
114.02, shall be required to obtain a sexually-oriented business employee
license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of $100. Said fee is to cover
reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process.
      (2)   Employees of a bikini bar are excluded from having license.
   (B)   (1)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually-oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit the following information: all
personal information, as required in §
114.09(F).
      (2)   The application process shall be completed within 60 days from the
date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the county
shall issue a license unless the report finds that one or more of the following
findings is true:
         (a)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the Sheriff’s Department or
other department of the county;
         (b)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
         (c)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act, as
defined in §
114.02;
         (d)   The sexually-oriented business employee license is to be used
for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter; and
         (e)   The applicant has had a sexually-oriented business employee
license revoked by the county or any other governmental or regulatory agency
within two years of the date of the current application.
   (C)   (1)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal by the county upon the written application of the applicant and
a finding by the county that the applicant has not been convicted of any
specified criminal act, as defined in §
114.02 or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period
which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.
      (2)   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee of
$25.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.20 EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS.
   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business, other than an adult motel, and regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued to said business under this chapter, and who exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
video cassette, DVDs, CD-ROMs or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements.
      (1)   Upon application for a sexually-oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed 32 square feet of floor area, with no dimension greater than eight feet.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required;
however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated
street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimension of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The
county may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s
station may be made without the prior approval of the county.
      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to
ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of
the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in
this division (A)(5) must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s
station.
      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that
the view area specified in division (A)(5) above remains unobstructed by an
doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or person at all
times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to this division (A).
      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time. No holes, commonly known as “glory holes,” shall be allowed in the walls
or partitions, which separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room
or restroom.
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as measured at
the floor level.
      (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
      (10)   An adult motion picture show or adult arcade shall limit the
maximum number of image- producing devices to the maximum occupancy load
permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image
producing device is located.
      (11)   The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video
booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions.
Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be
evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls.
   (B)   A person having a duty under division (A) above commits a misdemeanor
if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and knowingly or with
reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers or allows:
   (A)   Signs prohibiting minors upon premises shall be visibly posted on all
entrances and exits;
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business premises;
   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services at the
business premises; and
   (D)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business premises
as an employee.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.22 ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by an applicable
state statute or local ordinance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or performances at such
sexually-oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the
premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or
location of such sexually-oriented business.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee to allow any portion of the
interior premises of a sexually-oriented business to be visible from outside
the licensed premises.
   (D)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually-
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of two foot-candles of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually-
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operator(s) of a
sexually-oriented business from complying with the requirements of Chapter 156,
as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted ordinances
or regulations.
   (F)   The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted with
the conditional use application for review by the Commission. Advertisements,
displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as
to be visible to the public from the exterior of the building. No advertising
signs, billboards, displays, advertisements or other promotional materials
depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or
displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection
with specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be shown
or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the
building.
   (G)   Lobby and entrance areas should be designed so as to minimize
obstruction of sidewalks during operating hours and shall be oriented and
consistent with other commercial activities in the area.
   (H)   All areas of a sexually-oriented business shall be illuminated at a
minimum of 20 foot-candles, normally maintained and evenly distributed at
ground level. Adult theaters and cabarets shall only be required to be
illuminated at a minimum of five foot-candles. During performances, adult
theaters and cabarets may reduce the lighting to be no less than 1.25 foot-
candles.
   (I)   No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such businesses
that can be discerned by the public outside the building.
   (J)   The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit
materials must be disposed of in a manner, which prevents minors from having
access to the material.
   (K)   On-site security must be present during all hours of operation. One
security staff is required for each 20 required parking spaces or fraction
thereof. The hours of operation shall be visibly posted on all entrances and
exits.
   (L)   Every sexually-oriented business shall be surrounded by a perimeter
buffer of at least 50 feet in width with plantings, fence or other physical
divider along the outside of the perimeter sufficient to impede the view of the
interior of the premises in which the business is located.
    (M)   No performers or employees shall have physical contact with any
patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer or
employee.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.23 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and allows such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee
to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale,
provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m. of any day.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as
an employee of a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, said employee
engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a
sale, provides a service or solicits a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. on any day.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.24 PUBLIC NUDITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater,
Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 S. Ct. 2456, 115 L. Ed.2d 504 (1991) and Erie v. Pap’s
A.M, 120 S. Ct. 1382, 146 L. Ed.2d 265, upheld the rights of cities to prohibit
public nudity at any sexually-oriented businesses, regardless of whether or not
a permit has been issued to said businesses, including businesses where no
alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed at the premises. The county
expressly finds that the secondary effects associated with live adult
entertainment and public nudity adversely impact and threaten to impact the
public health, safety and welfare by providing an atmosphere conducive to
violence, sexual harassment, public intoxication, prostitution, the spread of
sexually transmitted disease and other deleterious effects. Accordingly,
consistent with such decisions, the county intends by this chapter to prohibit
public nudity within the county.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
      (1)   Engage in sexual intercourse;
      (2)   Appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
      (3)   Fondle his or her genitals or the genitals of another person; or
      (4)   Engage in specified sexual activities.
    (C)   No person who owns, operates or otherwise controls a sexually-
oriented business shall permit, allow, hire, sponsor or employ any other person
for the purpose of appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity at any public
building, public park or recreation area of public place.
   (D)   The prohibitions set forth in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above shall
not apply to:
      (1)   Any child under ten years of age;
      (2)   Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breast feeding
an infant under two years of age;
      (3)   Any person while performing any excretory function within a public
restroom;
      (4)   Any person changing his or her clothing in a dressing room, the
sole purpose of which is to provide personal privacy for such purposes; or
      (5)   Any person while receiving medical or therapeutic treatment from
any physician, paramedic, nurse or other medical practitioner licensed by the
state.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.25 PROHIBITION OF LIVE ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   No person shall perform, cause or allow the performance of live adult
entertainment in any public place within the county or at any private place or
location whether or not an admission is charged.
   (B)   No employee of a sexually-oriented business shall engage in any
specified sexual activity or display or expose any specified anatomical area
while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.26 OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.
   (A)   In addition to the criminal provisions in other sections of this
chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to
sexually-oriented businesses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and said person knows or should know that:
      (1)   The business does not have a sexually-oriented business permit
under this chapter for any applicable classification;
      (2)   The business has a permit, which is under suspension;
      (3)   The business has a permit, which has been revoked; and/or
      (4)   The business has a permit, which has expired.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.27 EXEMPTIONS.
   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually-oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is
permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the
employee’s bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee’s bona fide use
of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.28 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.
   The county officers, agents and employees, charged with enforcement of state
and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal,
for reasonable, good faith trespass upon property owned or controlled by a
sexually-oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred
by this chapter.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.29 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, nothing in this
chapter shall apply to the sale, loan, distribution, dissemination,
presentation or exhibition of material or live conduct which is obscene, as
defined under Idaho Code Title 41, Chapter 18, unless such chapter or any
provision thereof, is determined to be unconstitutional or unenforceable for
any reason.
   (B)   This chapter shall be interpreted to be consistent in all respects
with the provisions of Idaho Code § 18-4113 and shall be applicable only to the
extent it regulates the sale, loan, distribution, dissemination presentation or
exhibition of material or live conduct that is not otherwise obscene, as
defined by Idaho Code § 18-4101, provided, however, if any provision of such
chapter of the Idaho Code is determined to be unconstitutional or unenforceable
for any reason, then this chapter shall be fully enforceable notwithstanding
such determination.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the State
Criminal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or
violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, such person upon
conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $300 and or 30 days imprisonment. Each
violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered
as a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the county from
taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other
lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action
for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. Attorneys’ fees and
costs may be assessed by the court against the sexually-oriented business.
   (C)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be
cumulative and independently available to the county and the county shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full
extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 207-02, passed 1-14-2002)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
      
131.   MINORS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Communication with inmates
   
130.02   Willful damage or injury of antenna system property prohibited
   
130.03   Firearms and dangerous weapons
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 COMMUNICATION WITH INMATES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have any communication, whether
verbal, written or otherwise with any inmate of the county jail, not serving in
the capacity of a trustee, except at regularly scheduled jail visiting periods
or at other times with the express prior permission of the County Sheriff or a
Deputy Sheriff.
(Ord. passed 4-13-1971) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 WILLFUL DAMAGE OR INJURY OF ANTENNA SYSTEM PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner thereof, willfully destroy, damage
or in any way injure any television community antenna system, also known as a
CATV system, and as cable television system, or its poles, cables, wires,
fixtures, antennas, amplifiers or other apparatus, equipment or appliances;
      (2)   Willfully obstruct, impede or impair the service of any such
system, or any of its lines, or the transmission of television signals
thereover;
      (3)   Without such consent, attach any device or equipment to such
system, or any line, antenna, pole, cable, wire, fixture, amplifier or other
apparatus, instrument, equipment or appliance thereof;
      (4)   Tap or connect, directly or indirectly, by wire or any other means
whatsoever, to or with any cable television system line so as to hear, or see,
or be in a position to hear or see, for any use or purpose whatsoever, any
signal going over said cable television system line, or to make said tapping or
connection for the purpose of receiving or enabling any other person to
receive, any service over said line or lines;
      (5)   Use or attempt to use, in any manner, or for any purpose, any
information so obtained, or communicate the same in any way or for any purpose,
or attempt to so communicate the same; and
      (6)   Aid, agree with, employ or conspire with any person to do or cause
to be done any of the acts hereinbefore set forth.
   (B)   All prosecutions of this section, proof that any of the acts herein
forbidden were done on or about the premises owned or occupied by the defendant
charged with the commission of such offense, or that the defendant unlawfully
received the benefit of the transmission of television signals from any
television community antenna system or cable television system on account of
the commission of such acts, shall be prima facie evidence of the guilt of the
defendant.
(Ord. passed 9-1-1972) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the possession of
a firearm, other dangerous weapon, explosive or incendiary device in any public
building, owned or operated by the county wherein any elected official, court
of the state or any judicial officer is housed or has, offices, and making such
possession a misdemeanor violation, except in those circumstances where the
individual carrying or possessing the firearm, other dangerous weapon,
explosive or incendiary device is a law enforcement official of the state or a
political subdivision thereof, a district court marshal, or an individual
possessing a valid permit to carry a concealed weapon.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, all words and phrases
used shall be given their ordinary, commonly understood and accepted meaning.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to law enforcement officials
of the state, or a political subdivision thereof, to marshals of the Seventh
Judicial District, or to an individual who possesses a valid permit to carry a
concealed weapon, issued by the County Sheriff.
   (D)   Weapon possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his
or her possession a firearm, other dangerous weapon, explosive or incendiary
device, whether loaded or unloaded, while said person is within any public
building, owned and operated by the county wherein any elected official, court
of the state or any judicial officer is housed or has offices.
(Ord. 150-89, passed 8-31-1989) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of §
130.01 shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine and/or sentence of
$300 and six months in the county jail.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
130.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in
a sum not exceeding $200, and each day that such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
130.03 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. passed 4-13-1971; Ord. passed 9-1-1972; Ord. 150-89, passed 8-31-1989)
CHAPTER 131: MINORS
Section
   
131.01   Purpose
   
131.02   Definitions
   
131.03   Minor curfew
   
131.04   Runaways
   
131.05   Parental violation of curfew hours
   
131.06   Violation of curfew hours by business establishments
   
131.07   Jurisdiction
   
131.08   Authority to stop and detain
   
131.09   Encouraging delinquency
   
131.10   Defenses
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are: to regulate and prohibit runaways; to
regulate and prohibit minors from remaining in public places during curfew
hours; to protect minors from each other and other adult perpetrators of
crimes; to reduce nocturnal juvenile crime and juvenile delinquency; to promote
family responsibility and parental control over minors; and to protect and
promote the public health, peace, safety, welfare and tranquility of the
inhabitants of the county. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS. The hours between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., every day of the
week. Emergency and unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action to prevent, control or minimize serious
bodily injury, death or significant loss of property.
   EMANCIPATED. Any person either 18 years or age or older or, if under the age
of 18, any person who is married or has been married; or any person who is in
active military service; or any person who is both self-supporting and neither
resides with, nor is subject to, parental control.
   EMPLOYMENT ACTIVITY. The performance of any responsibilities of duties
expressly or impliedly required as a condition of employment of a minor.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor;
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
order of a court; or
      (3)   A person to whom a parent or guardian has delegated any of his or
her powers with respect to a minor pursuant to Idaho Code § 15-5-104.
   LEGAL CUSTODIAN. Any person, other than a parent or guardian, having the
legal care, custody or control of a minor.
   MINOR. Any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes members
or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation
which owns or operates an establishment.
   PARENT. Any person who is a natural parent, adopted parent or step-parent,
whether the mother, father, step-mother, step-father or both, being referred to
in the singular as PARENT.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access, including,
but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks and the common areas
of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation
facilities, shopping malls, public parking lots and commercial businesses.
   REMAIN. To linger or stay or to fail to leave premises when requested to do
so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of an
establishment.
   RUNAWAY. Any minor who is absent from his or her residence without consent
of his or her custodial parent, guardian or legal custodian and has been absent
for such a period of time as to create a well-founded belief on the part of the
custodial parent, guardian or legal custodian that said minor’s health, safety
or well-being is at risk or may reasonably be at risk.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997)
§ 131.03 MINOR CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor to be, or remain, in or upon any street,
alley, public ground, public place or any place open to the public, place of
amusement or entertainment, vacant lot or other unsupervised place,
playgrounds, parks, highways, road, public streets or exposed to public use,
during curfew hour (between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. every day of
the week). It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or legal custodian to
allow a minor to be, or remain in or upon any street, alley, public ground,
public place or any place open to the public, place of amusement or
entertainment, vacant lot or other unsupervised place, playgrounds, parks,
highways, road, public streets or exposed to public use within the county
during the curfew hours (between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. each day
of the week.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 RUNAWAYS.
   (A)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for any minor residing or located
within the county to be or to remain a runaway.
   (B)   Assist and encourage runaways. It shall be unlawful for any person to
assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to runaway. A violation of this
section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
131.99.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.05 PARENTAL VIOLATION OF CURFEW HOURS.
   Any parent, guardian or legal custodian of a minor who knowingly permits, or
by culpable indifference allows any minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or
play in or upon any street, alley, public ground, public place or any place
open to the public, place of amusement or entertainment, vacant lot or other
unsupervised place, playgrounds, parks, highways, road, public streets or
exposed to public use, during curfew hours (between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. every day of the week) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor provided,
however, that the provisions of this chapter do not apply when a minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or legal custodian. Each violation
of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.06 VIOLATION OF CURFEW HOURS BY BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Any owner or operator of or any employee or other person in control of an
establishment is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly or willingly
allows a minor to be upon the premises of the establishment during the curfew
hours.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.07 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The violation of this chapter by a minor shall bring such minor within
the purview of the State Juvenile Correction Act.
   (B)   The violation of this chapter by a person not a minor shall subject
such person to the jurisdiction of the district courts of the state.
   (C)   Any peace officer shall have authority to make a juvenile referral for
any violation of this chapter by a minor and to issue a uniform summons and
citation to any other person who commits a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.08 AUTHORITY TO STOP AND DETAIN.
   (A)   (1)   Any law enforcement officer shall have the authority to stop and
temporarily detain a minor, or one who appears to be a minor, as herein
defined, during the hours of curfew to obtain the minor’s name, address, age
and parent’s, guardian’s or legal custodian’s name, whenever said officer has
reasonable suspicion that the minor and/or his or her parent, guardian or legal
custodian are in violation of the curfew provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Upon determining that the minor and/or his or her parent, guardian
or legal custodian are in violation of the curfew provisions herein, the
officer shall direct or deliver such minor to the residence of his or her
parents, guardian or legal custodian; in addition, the officer may issue
warnings, juvenile referrals and citations as provided under this chapter.
Warnings issued shall clearly state the possible penalties which may be imposed
for subsequent violations.
   (B)   Any peace officer shall have authority as provided in Idaho Code § 20-
516 to take into custody any runaway or other status offender.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.09 ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY.
   Any person who by any act or neglect encourages, aids or causes a minor to
come within the purview of the State Juvenile Correction Act shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in §
131.99.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.10 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under the curfew provisions of this
chapter if the offending minor does prove and establish any of the following,
the burden of proof for establishing the defense being upon the minor:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian or legal custodian;
      (2)   On an errand at the express direction of the minor’s parent,
guardian or legal custodian without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in employment activity or going to an employment activity
or returning to the minor’s place of residence, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   Within the yard or upon the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence
or abutting the residence of another adult with whom the parent, guardian or
legal custodian of such minor has expressly placed temporary custody of the
minor;
      (7)   Attending an officially-sponsored school, religious or other
recreational, cultural or educational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by a public entity or a religious, charitable, civil or other similar
organization organized by adults, or going to or returning home from such
activities, without any detour or stop;
       (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution or rights protected by Article I, § 9 of the Constitution of the
state; or
      (9)   Is married or has had the disabilities of minority removed in the
manner provided by law.
   (B)   It is a defense to the prosecution of this chapter that the owner,
operator or employee of an establishment asks the minor to leave the premises
and promptly notifies the law enforcement officials that a minor is present on
the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by means provided for under the State Juvenile Correction Act.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor and is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed
$300 and/or six months in the county jail.
(Ord. 174-95, passed 10-31-1995; Ord. 189-97, passed 12-16-1997)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   MOBILE HOMES
      
152.   SIGN CODE
      
153.   RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
155.   AIRPORT ZONING
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   Codes adopted
   
150.02   Safety assessments of buildings and structures
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   The approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes, as
adopted by the state or the State Building Code Board, are adopted as the
Official Building Codes of the county:
      (1)   2018 Edition International Building Code, including all rules
promulgated by the Board to provide equivalency with the provisions of the
American with Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines and the Federal Fair
Housing Act accessibility guidelines;
      (2)   2018 Edition International Residential Code, parts I-VI and IX;
      (3)   2018 Edition International Energy Conservation Code;
      (4)   2018 Edition International Fuel Gas Code;
      (5)   2018 Edition International Mechanical Code;
      (6)   2018 Edition International Fire Code including amendments by State
Fire Marshal and including Appendices B, C, D, E and F;
      (7)   2018 Edition International Existing Building Code; and
      (8)   2018 Edition International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
   (B)   All amendments made by the state or the State Building Code Board and
the State Fire Marshal’s office are included.
   (C)   Agricultural buildings are exempt from the Building Codes adopted
herein, but shall remain subject to placement requirements established by
zoning regulations. Qualification as an agricultural building will be
determined upon adherence to the definition of agricultural building in § 202
of the IBC and the property on which the building is sited has been determined
by the County Assessor to be land actively devoted to agriculture, per Idaho
Code § 63-604.
(Ord. 239-21, passed 6-23-2021)
§ 150.02 SAFETY ASSESSMENTS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section authorizes posting of standard placards to show
the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or
human-made disaster. This section further authorizes the County Department of
Planning and Zoning and designated representatives to post the appropriate
placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a
safety assessment. Once posted, these placards establish authorized occupancy
of buildings and structures until the posting agency authorizes removal of
placards.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PLACARDS. The official posting instrument to be used to designate the
condition for continued occupancy. The following are texts of the official
PLACARDS to be used to designated the condition for continued occupancy of
buildings or structures.
         (a)   Inspected: lawful occupancy permitted. This placard will be
posted on any building or structure in which no apparent structural hazard has
been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the
building or structure, only that none is apparent.
         (b)   Restricted use. This placard will be posted on each building or
structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of
restriction to continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will
note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and
concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.
         (c)   Unsafe: do not enter or occupy. This placard will be posted on
each building or structure damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat
to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be
entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the posting
authority. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings
at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition
order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the
type of damage encountered.
      SAFETY ASSESSMENT. A visual, nondestructive examination of a building or
structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy
following a natural or human-made disaster.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this section are applicable, following each
natural or human-made disaster, to all buildings and structures of all
occupancies within the county, and within cities in the county who have signed
letters of promulgation signifying their acceptance and participation in the
county’s emergency management operations plan.
      (2)   The number of the ordinance codified in this section, the name of
the department conducting the inspection, its address and phone number and the
inspector’s identification number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.
      (3)   Once a placard has been attached to a building or structure, it is
not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized
representative of the posting authority or upon written notification from the
posting authority.
(Ord. 172-95, passed 8-21-1995)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of any provisions of §
150.02 shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $300, or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months in the county jail, or both
for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate criminal offense.
(Ord. 172-95, passed 8-21-1995)
CHAPTER 151: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
151.01   Definition
   
151.02   Ownership and location
   
151.03   Dealer responsibility
   
151.04   Building permit
   
151.05   Assessment sticker
   
151.06   Moving of mobile home
   
151.07   Lien
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE HOME. A trailer that:
      (1)   Is designed to be transported upon the highways on its own wheels
or other trailers or detachable wheels;
      (2)   Is capable of being used for human habitation, business, commercial
or office purposes; and
      (3)   Is over 40 feet in length, eight feet or more in width and five
feet five inches or more in height from floor to ceiling.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.02 OWNERSHIP AND LOCATION.
   The owner or contract buyer of any mobile home to be located in the county
for a continuous period of 30 days or more in any calendar year shall declare
ownership and location of such mobile home to the County Assessor at any time
during the calendar year in which said mobile is delivered to a location in the
county.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.03 DEALER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Any dealer, upon the sale of a mobile home and delivery of said mobile home
to a location in the county shall declare the same to the County Assessor upon
delivery of said mobile home to a location in the county and said dealer shall
also state the owner, address, length, width, make and year.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.04 BUILDING PERMIT.
   The owner or contract buyer of a mobile home which becomes located in the
county after the enactment of this chapter, for a continuous period of 30 days
or more in any calendar year, shall request the County Planning and Zoning to
issue said mobile home a building permit, of which one copy of that form will
be given to the County Assessor for placement on the tax rolls of the county.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.05 ASSESSMENT STICKER.
   The County Assessor, after having assessed a mobile home located in the
county, shall affix an emblem or sticker, which emblem or sticker shall be
printed and furnished at county cost, on said mobile home, and said emblem or
sticker shall be affixed so that it shall be visible from the public roadway,
or as specified by the owner, and said emblem or sticker shall designate said
mobile home as having been assessed for that year.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.06 MOVING OF MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   Any owner or occupant of a mobile home, or any person or entity
desiring to move said mobile home from a location in the county shall license
the same with the County Assessor, or purchase a trip permit from the port of
entry, Department of Transportation, and pay all current years property taxes
levied against said mobile home before moving the same from the county.
   (B)   Any dealer, person or other entity moving a mobile home from the
county shall determine that the current year taxes have been paid, proof being
stamped receipt from the County Treasurer’s office showing such taxes paid in
full, before moving said mobile home from the county.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.07 LIEN.
   If the owner of any mobile home or any other person required by this chapter
shall fail to make the proper requests to the county as required by this
chapter, the County Assessor shall list and assess such mobile home according
to his or her best judgment and information, and such assessment shall
automatically become a lien upon such mobile home and remain such lien until
the taxes thereon are paid.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any owner, contract buyer, dealer or other person or entity who fails to
comply as required by this chapter, or otherwise violates any term of this
chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
punishment by a fine of not more than $300, or by imprisonment not to exceed
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, the county may
enforce the provisions of this chapter by any appropriate civil action,
including, but not limited to, injunction, in which event the county shall be
entitled to all costs and expenses, including attorneys’ fees in the
prosecution of such action.
(Ord. 138-85, passed 9-30-1985)
CHAPTER 152: SIGN CODE
Section
   
152.01   Title
   
152.02   Purpose
   
152.03   Enforcement and administration
   
152.04   Sign permits
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Pasting and tacking prohibited
   
152.07   Noise sign prohibited
   
152.08   Animated and flashing signs prohibited
   
152.09   Nonconforming signs
   
152.10   Variances
   
152.11   Signs over streets prohibited
   
152.12   Signs not to cover windows, doors or similar openings
   
152.13   Blanketing
   
152.14   Signs on public property
   
152.15   Maintenance of signs
   
152.16   Removal of signs
   
152.17   Signs to comply with zoning regulations
   
152.18   Removal of nonconforming signs
   
152.19   Compliance with safety regulations
   
152.20   Erection of signs over public streets or sidewalks
   
152.21   Construction project or land development sign
   
152.22   Sign regulations in zoning districts
   
152.23   Sports field fencing
   
152.24   Electric signs
   
152.25   Height of signs
   
152.26   Electronic message center signs and changeable copy panels
   
152.27   Design
   
152.28   Construction
   
152.29   Projection and clearance
   
152.30   Billboard signs
   
152.31   Signs, zones permitted and controls
   
152.32   Exemptions
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Sign Code for Bonneville County, Idaho.”
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.02 PURPOSE.
   The County Commissioners hereby find and declare it is necessary to provide
sign regulations in furtherance of regulating the construction, erection,
maintenance, electrification, illumination, type, size, number and location of
signs for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, property and welfare of
the public; improving the neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance of the
county; providing for the safe erection and maintenance of signs; eliminating
signs that demand, rather than invite, public attention; and providing for sign
needs of special areas, facilities, centers and districts.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.03 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION.
   The Planning and Zoning Department shall be responsible for the enforcement
and administration of this chapter. The Planning and Zoning Department shall
inspect each sign which requires a permit under this chapter and shall require
the proper maintenance of said signs which are subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Upon reasonable notice to a property owner and upon presentation
of proper credentials, an agent of the Planning and Zoning Department may enter
at reasonable times those premises, buildings and structures reasonably
necessary to perform those duties of this chapter.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.04 SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Sign permit required. Subject to the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   No sign shall be erected, re-erected, constructed, altered or
maintained, except as provided by this chapter and a permit for the same has
been issued by the Planning and Zoning Department;
      (2)   A separate permit shall be required for each person or entity
erecting a sign or signs;
      (3)   A separate permit shall be required for each separate sign on a
single supporting structure; and
      (4)   All sign permit requests shall be applied for through the county
online portal and include a complete set of drawings and specifications.
   (B)   Sign permit fees. Before any sign permit will be issued, the permit
and inspection fees shall be paid in full based on bid price and the normal
building permit fee schedule.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLANKETING. The partial or complete shutting off of the face of one sign by
another sign.
   BUILDING MURAL. An exterior sign attached to and covering all, or
substantially all, of the vertical wall surface of a commercial or industrial
building or other structure displaying photographic or graphic images, with or
without text, relating to the building or structure, or a permitted use or
occupant of the property on which the sign is located.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN. The distance from the base of the sign at grade to the
highest attached component of the sign.
   MAINTAIN. To service, repair, alter, remodel, re-letter, redecorate or
repaint a sign. It does not include the removal of signs by a licensed wrecking
contractor, structural alterations, cosmetic or style changes or enlargements
of face changes.
   PERSON. A person, association, partnership or corporation, trust or any
other entity recognized at law.
   SIGN. Unless otherwise further specifically defined or qualified herein, a
SIGN shall be a presentation or representation or words, letters, figures,
designs, pictures or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative
to a person, a business, an article of merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation or a request for aid. A SIGN shall further include the structure
or framework or any natural object on which any sign is erected or is intended
to be erected or exhibited or which is being used or is intended to be used for
sign purposes.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign depicting action, motion, light or color changes
through electrical or mechanical means. Includes the use of sequential
switching on and off of graphically arranged fluorescent lamps, cathode tubes,
LEDs or incandescent bulbs so as to provide the illusion of movement.
   SIGN, BILLBOARD. An off-premises sign supported by one or more upright
columns or braces in or upon the ground having either a solid background used
for pasting of a sign, a display device capable of presenting three separate
images sequentially by rotating triangular devices, or a programmable display
that has the capability, through light emitting diodes (LED) technology, to
present text or symbolic imagery.
   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign which uses strobe lights, rotary beacons, zip lights,
flashing lights or signs illuminated in such a way they appear to flash.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign, which is supported by one or more columns,
uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
   SIGN, NON-COMBUSTIBLE. A sign, which is constructed entirely of non-
combustible material.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign which directs attention to a use, products,
commodity or service not related to the premises on which it is located.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign promoting any service, product or business
located, sold or available on the premises upon which the sign is located.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign attached to a building or structure and extending
perpendicularly from said building or structure.
   SIGN, REVOLVING. A sign which may be interior illuminated, which has
vertical or horizontal rotation of any of its parts by mechanical means which
does not exceed ten rpm.
   SIGN, STRUCTURE. Any structure, which supports any sign as defined in this
chapter.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.06 PASTING AND TACKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Unless advertising products sold on premises, no sign shall be pasted
or glued directly on any exterior wall or roof or affixed directly on any
exterior wall or roof by means of any similar adhesive substance.
   (B)   No paper or cloth sign shall be tacked directly on any exterior wall
or roof.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.07 NOISE SIGN PROHIBITED.
   Unless otherwise permitted or provided by other prevailing governing
authority, it shall be unlawful to use in connection with any sign or to use
for advertising purposes any radio, phonograph, whistle, bell or any other
sound or noise making or transmitting device or instrument for the purpose of
commercial advertising.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 ANIMATED AND FLASHING SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   Unless otherwise permitted or provided by other prevailing governing
authority, it shall be unlawful to construct or use an animated or flashing
sign within the county.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.09 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Signs in existence on the date of enactment of this chapter which do not
conform to the provisions of this chapter, but which were constructed, erected,
affixed or maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be
regarded as nonconforming signs which may be continued from the effective date
of this chapter, but shall not be structurally altered, relocated or replaced
without immediately being brought into compliance with all the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.10 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person may seek a variance to provisions of this chapter by
following the procedures outlined in
Chapter 156.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a variance for signs
regulated by this chapter if it finds that the proposed sign does not pose a
risk to those purposes set forth in §
152.02; or is historically significant to the community.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.11 SIGNS OVER STREETS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign over any street or alley,
except as herein expressly provided.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.12 SIGNS NOT TO COVER WINDOWS, DOORS OR SIMILAR OPENINGS.
   No sign shall cover a window, doorway or other opening providing light or
ventilation or exit facilities which are required by the county-adopted edition
of the International Building Code which are deemed to be necessary to give
access to the building, or to afford fire protection in the event of a fire;
provided, however, that flat signs, wall signs, cloth signs and projecting
signs may cover transoms.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.13 BLANKETING.
   To prevent blanketing, no wall sign shall be erected to project over public
property. Projection shall be measured from the facing of the structure to
which the sign is attached and shall be parallel thereto. No outdoor
advertising sign shall be placed in such a manner such as to obscure an
existing sign.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.14 SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten or attach, paint or place, any
sign, handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind or sort, whether
political or otherwise, or to cause the same to be done in or upon the
curbstone, lamp post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, hydrant,
bridge or tree, or in or upon any portion of any sidewalk or street. Unless
otherwise permitted, it shall be unlawful to paste, place, paint or attach any
sign defined in this chapter on any building, street or property of the county.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.15 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   (A)   Every sign shall be maintained in complete operating condition and in
good safety and repair. No broken, bent, cracked, decayed, dented, leaning,
splintered, ripped, torn, twisted or signs in danger of falling shall be
allowed. The landscaped area in which any sign is placed shall be kept free
from weeds, garbage and debris.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, MAINTENANCE includes the repair of
facades where signs have been removed, the painting, cleaning and repairing of
the sign. MAINTENANCE does not include structural alterations, cosmetic or
style changes or enlargements of face changes. The Planning and Zoning
Department and its agents shall not be liable for the negligence or failure of
the owner, or the person responsible for maintaining any sign, to keep such
sign in good condition.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.16 REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
   (A)   Any person occupying a building or portion of a building, who owns or
maintains a sign in connection therewith, shall, upon vacating the premises, or
discontinuing the business advertised, cause the sign to be removed with the
exception of the structure, framework or natural object unless the same is
deemed to be unsafe.
   (B)   Any person who owns and maintains a sign which is maintained for the
benefit of another person who occupies a building or part of a building whereon
the sign is located shall cause the sign to be removed if the person for whom
the sign is maintained vacates the premises with the exception of the
structure, framework or natural object unless the same is deemed to be unsafe.
Failure of the owner of the sign or of the person responsible for maintaining
same to remove the sign within 30 days after written notice from the Planning
and Zoning Department shall be considered as a violation of this chapter and
shall subject the owner of the sign and the owner of the property to the
penalties herein.
   (C)   If a sign is advantageous to pending sale or lease of premises,
written permission may be granted, to post notice of the same with a blank
background to lease said sign on premises for a period not to exceed 90 days.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.17 SIGNS TO COMPLY WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.
   All signs shall be erected and maintained in full compliance with this
chapter and
Chapter 156.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.18 REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Any sign posted, erected or constructed after the enactment of this
chapter that is not in conformance with the provision of this chapter and/or
which was erected or installed without a permit, shall be removed within 30
days upon the sending of written notification by the Planning and Zoning
Department.
   (B)   The provisions of §
152.09 shall apply to such nonconforming signs.
   (C)   Any existing sign posted, erected or constructed after the enactment
of this chapter that is conforming to the provisions of this chapter relative
to size and location, but nonconforming to structural requirements shall be
removed or replaced within one year upon written notice from the Planning and
Zoning Department. However, if they are deemed to be a hazard or more than 50%
damaged, they shall be removed or repaired in accordance with the structural
requirements of this chapter within 30 days after receiving notice from the
Planning and Zoning Department.
   (D)   Any sign determined to be abandoned shall be removed within 30 days of
notification by the Planning and Zoning Department, the property owner and/or
owner of the business advertisement and or owner of the sign.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.19 COMPLIANCE WITH SAFETY REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person erecting any sign or other advertising
structure to fail to comply strictly with the requirements of this chapter and
any and all regulations pertaining to safety.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.20 ERECTION OF SIGNS OVER PUBLIC STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Whenever any sign or other advertising structure shall be erected in
whole or in part on or over any public street or sidewalk, the person or
persons performing the work shall, before proceeding to erect the same, take
all precautions necessary to ensure the safety of persons and property on such
street or sidewalk.
   (B)   Before hoisting any material above the surface of any street or
sidewalk or placing any material upon the traveled portion of any street or
sidewalk, the persons or person performing such work shall exclude the
traveling public from the portion of such street or sidewalk in which such work
is to be done by means of suitable barriers, protected walkways and/or other
adequate warning devices.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Department may require the owner or sign
contractor to provide a guard or guards to exclude all persons not concerned in
the performance of the work from the portion of the street or sidewalk in which
the work is to proceed.
   (D)   When hoisting any sign or advertising structure above the surface of
any street or sidewalk, the same shall be accomplished by hoisting devices with
proper design and adequate capacity to accomplish the work in accordance with
established engineering practices, all of which hoisting equipment shall be
kept and maintained in good and workable condition.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.21 CONSTRUCTION PROJECT OR LAND DEVELOPMENT SIGN.
   One sign identifying the contractor and purpose of development of no greater
than 100 square feet and 15 feet in height shall be permitted in commercial
zones, and no greater than 32 square feet and 15 feet in height in residential
zones, may be erected on sites which a construction project is under
development. Such sign may be erected no earlier than 60 days prior to the
beginning of the construction project and removed within 30 days after such
constructions is completed.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.22 SIGN REGULATIONS IN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Signs in Agriculture (A-1) Zones. Advertising signs for the sale of
goods or services produced on the premises shall be limited to two signs of not
more than 32 square feet per sign.
   (B)   Signs in Residential Agricultural Zones (RA-1,2,3,4). Signs allowed to
be placed in Residential Agricultural Zones are as follows:
      (1)   Identification signs for the identification of buildings not to
exceed 12 square feet when attached to the building. Any lighting of said signs
shall be diffused or screened;
      (2)   Group daycare signs as permitted in compliance with the provisions
of a home occupation; and
      (3)   Signs for offices for professional persons and home occupations,
provided signs are limited to one non-flashing sign not larger in area than one
and one-half square feet; if lighted, it shall be indirect.
   (C)   Signs in Residence Zones (R-P, R-1, R-1.5, R-2, R-3). Signs allowed to
be placed in residence zones are as follows:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding eight square feet to inform the public as to
the sale of property and name plates attached to dwellings not exceeding one
and one-half square feet which are designed and maintained to harmonize with
the residential character of the zone;
      (2)   Group daycare signs as permitted in compliance with the provisions
of a home occupation; and
      (3)   Signs for offices for professional persons and home occupations,
provided signs are limited to one non-flashing sign not larger in area that one
and one-half square feet; if lighted, it shall be indirect lighting.
   (D)   Signs in Manufactured Home (MH) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed in
Manufactured Home Zones are as follows:
      (1)   Signs not exceeding eight square feet to inform the public as to
the sale of property and name plates attached to dwellings not exceeding one
and one-half square feet which are designed and maintained to harmonize with
the residential character of the zone;
      (2)   Group daycare signs as permitted in compliance with the provisions
of a home occupation; and
      (3)   Signs for offices for professional persons and home occupations,
provided signs are limited to one non-flashing sign not larger in area that one
and one-half square feet; if lighted, it shall be indirect lighting.
   (E)   Signs in Limited Neighborhood Commercial (LNC) Zones. Signs allowed to
be placed in Limited Neighborhood Commercial Zones are as follows: two wall
mounted signs not exceeding 32 square feet each.
   (F)   Signs in Neighborhood Shopping Center (SC-1) Zones. Signs allowed to
be placed in Neighborhood Shopping Center Zones are as follows:
      (1)   Non-flashing signs advertising services, merchandise or products
offered for sale in the building on which the sign is located, provided that
such signs are attached to and do not protrude more than four feet beyond the
wall of the building to which the sign is attached; and
      (2)   Signs identifying the buildings and signs advertising products sold
on the premises.
   (G)   Signs in Limited Commercial (C-1) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed in
Limited Commercial Zones are as follows: signs identifying the buildings; and
signs advertising products sold on the premises, including billboard signs.
   (H)   Signs in Limited Business (HC-1) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed in
Limited Commercial Zones are as follows: any use permitted in the SC-1 Zone
(division (F) above); and any use permitted in the C-1 Zone (division (G)
above).
   (I)   Signs in General Commercial (C-2) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed in
General Commercial Zones are as follows: any use permitted in the C-1 Zone
(division (G) above).
   (J)   Signs in Professional Business Office (P-B) Zones. Signs allowed to be
placed in Professional Business Office Zones are as follows: non-flashing pole
signs identifying the business not to exceed 100 feet in size or exceed 15 feet
in height. Wall signs are limited to 10% of the area of the buildings front
surface area.
   (K)   Signs in Manufacturing (M-1, M-1A) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed
in Manufacturing Zones are as follows: identifying signs attached to buildings.
   (L)   Signs in Industrial and Manufacturing (I&M-1, I&M-2, I&M-3) Zones.
Signs allowed to be placed in Industrial and Manufacturing Zones are as
follows: all signs, given they meet the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   Signs in Recreational Forestry (R-F) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed
in Recreational Forestry Zones are as follows: signs advertising services,
articles or products which are offered for sale on the premises on which the
sign is located.
   (N)   Signs in Grazing (G-1) Zones. Signs allowed to be placed in Grazing
Zones are as follows: any sign permitted in an A-1 Zone (division (A) above)
and outdoor advertising signs.
   (O)   Signs in Planned Unit Developments (PUD). Signs allowed to be placed
in PUDs as follows: all signs which are allowed in the zone which the PUD
overlays.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.23 SPORTS FIELD FENCING.
   Signs placed on sports field fencing may be allowed, provided the sign does
not exceed the height of the fence and shall be permissible only on the field
side of the fence facing the playing field.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.24 ELECTRIC SIGNS.
   All signs which utilize or are illuminated by electricity shall comply with
the most current state- adopted edition of the National Electrical Code and
county-adopted edition of the International Fire Code. An electric sign must
have the installer’s name, address, date of installation and the listing label
affixed to the sign in such a manner that it can be easily read from the ground
using only the naked eye.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.25 HEIGHT OF SIGNS.
   No sign shall exceed the height limitations established for each zone as set
forth in the table found in §
152.31.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.26 ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGNS AND CHANGEABLE COPY PANELS.
   Electronic message center signs and changeable copy signs shall be permitted
within an on-premises freestanding pole or wall sign in commercial and
industrial zones in which they are allowed. In such cases, the following
provisions apply.
   (A)   The sign copy area of an electronic message center sign and changeable
copy sign shall be counted in the permissible wall or freestanding pole sign
copy area. The face area of such sign shall not exceed 75% of the applicable
total allowable sign or 250 square feet, whichever is less, except that signs
which are part of a master planned development sign and within 660 feet of I-15
or U.S. Hwy 20 right-of-way shall not exceed 75% of the total allowable sign
area.
   (B)   The design and construction of electronic message centers shall be
integrated into the architecture of the on-site buildings using similar
construction materials and colors as used in the building(s).
   (C)   The displays on copy areas of electronic message center signs shall be
limited to static displays or messages that appear or disappear from the
display through dissolve, fade or instantaneous modes but which may otherwise
not have movement, appearance or optical illusion of movement.
   (D)   Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of six
seconds.
   (E)   Each message transition must be accomplished within 0.5 seconds.
   (F)   (1)   Each electronic message center shall be equipped with a
photocell dimmer to automatically dim with changes in ambient light.
      (2)   When requesting a permit for an electronic message center, the
applicant shall submit documentation certifying the sign is equipped with a
photocell dimmer which shall be used at all times the sign is in operation.
   (G)    The night-time illumination of electronic message centers shall
conform to the following criteria. The difference between off and solid-message
measurements of an electronic message center shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles
at night, applicable one-half hour after sunset. The illuminance of an
electronic message center shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to
measure foot-candles accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be
measured with the sign turned off, and again with the sign displaying a white
image, for a full color-capable sign or a solid message for a single-color
sign. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the
electronic message center at the distance determined by the total square
footage of the sign as set forth in the following table.
Area of Sign in Sq. Measurement     Area of Sign in Sq. Measurement Distance
Ft.                 Distance in Ft. Ft.                 in Ft.
Area of Sign in Sq. Measurement     Area of Sign in Sq. Measurement Distance
Ft.                 Distance in Ft. Ft.                 in Ft.
10                  32              90                  95
15                  39              95                  97
20                  45              100                 100
25                  50              110                 105
30                  55              120                 110
35                  59              130                 114
40                  63              140                 118
45                  67              150                 122
50                  71              160                 126
55                  74              170                 130
60                  77              180                 134
65                  81              190                 138
70                  84              200                 141
75                  87              220                 148
80                  89              240                 155
85                  92              250                 158
Notes to Table:
For signs with an area in sq. ft. other than those specifically listed in
the table the measurement distance may be calculated with the following
formula: measurement distance = area of sign sq. ft. x 100
 
   (H)   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall provide written
certification from the sign manufacturer that the night-time illuminance has
been factory pre-set not to exceed the allowed foot-candles and is protected
from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method as
deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Director. The applicant shall
submit a written statement as part of their application to the Planning and
Zoning Department stating he, she or it has read and agrees to the standards
set forth in this section.
   (I)   One electronic message center sign or changeable copy sign shall be
allowed per sign structure.
   (J)   Electronic message signs shall be permitted as school signs when
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as a conditional use permit and
according to the following standards.
      (1)   The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. local time.
      (2)   The sign shall be placed on the wall of the school unless the sign
is to be located adjacent to an arterial street.
      (3)   The sign complies with the standards in §
152.26.
      (4)   The size of the sign copy area shall not exceed 24 square feet and
shall count towards the total permissible sign copy area.
      (5)   The sign shall be designed to have a maximum viewing range of 300
feet.
      (6)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may modify the above standards
where necessary to minimize adverse effects on adjoining residential uses or
where necessary to assure visibility to students and parents on and immediately
adjacent to the school entrance or parking areas.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.27 DESIGN.
   (A)   Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist
wind and seismic forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall
be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For
signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the
structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to
overstress any of the elements thereof. The overturning moment produced from
lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting
moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper
anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight
of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load
resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly
compacted.
   (B)   Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist
wind forces as specified in the county-adopted edition of the International
Building Code.
   (C)   Design and construction with plastic material shall be in accordance
with the county-adopted edition of the International Building Code.
   (D)   The display panel face of light-transmitting signs shall be made of
approved plastics as specified in the International Building Code.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.28 CONSTRUCTION.
   The supports for all sign structures shall be placed in or upon private
property and shall be built, constructed and erected in conformance with the
most current county-adopted edition of the International Building Code. An
inspection of forms and footings shall be called for before any concrete is
poured whenever this manner of construction is applicable. The sign contractor
must call for an inspection when a sign has been installed.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.29 PROJECTION AND CLEARANCE.
   All signs and sign structures covered by this chapter:
   (A)   Shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements of this
chapter;
   (B)   Shall not be located not less than six feet horizontally or 12 feet
vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of
750 volts. For the purpose of this section, the term OVERHEAD CONDUCTORS means
any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground
except such conductors, which are enclosed in rigid conduit or other material
covering of equal strength;
   (C)   Shall not be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface
or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape,
exit or standpipe;
   (D)   In all commercial zones, wall mounted signs within five feet of an
opening in an exterior wall shall be constructed of non-combustible material or
must current county-adopted edition of the International Building Code approved
plastics, when mounted against a non-combustible wall; and
   (E)   Shall not project into any public alley. Projection into a private
alley or drive shall not be allowed below a height of 14 feet above grade.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.30 BILLBOARD SIGNS.
   (A)   No billboard sign may be installed within the following locations:
      (1)   Within a 750-foot radius from any other billboard sign;
      (2)   Within 750 feet of the nearest boundary of the Snake River or the
Riverwalk;
      (3)   Within 750 feet from properties or districts listed on the National
Register of Historic Places; or
      (4)   Within 500 feet from any residential zone.
   (B)   Stacking or side-by-side billboards are not allowed.
   (C)   Billboards shall only be used for off-premises signs.
   (D)   LED and Tri-vision billboards must adhere to the following
regulations.
      (1)   Billboards shall not include any illumination or image which moves
continuously, appears to be in motion or has any moving or animated parts, or
video displays, or broadcasts. No such sign shall include any illumination
which is flashing or moving.
      (2)   The message or image must remain static for a minimum of eight
seconds.
      (3)   An automated change of message or image must be accomplished within
two seconds or less and contain a default design that will freeze the sign face
in one position should a malfunction occur.
      (4)   Each electronic message center shall be equipped with a photocell
dimmer to automatically dim with changes in ambient light. When requesting a
permit for an electronic message center, the applicant shall submit
documentation certifying the sign is equipped with a photocell dimmer, and the
dimmer shall be used at all times the sign is in operation.
      (5)   The night-time illumination of LED billboards shall conform to the
criteria in this section. The difference between off and solid-message
measurements of an LED billboard shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles at night,
applicable one-half hour after sunset. The illuminance of an LED billboard
shall be measures with an illuminance meter set to measure foot-candles
accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with the sign
off, and again with the sign displaying a white image for a full color-capable
sign or a solid message for a single-color sign. All measurements shall be
taken perpendicular to the face of the LED billboard at the distance determined
by the total square footage of the sign as set forth in the following  table.
Area of Sign in Sq. Ft. Measurement Distance in Ft.
Area of Sign in Sq. Ft. Measurement Distance in Ft.
200                     141
220                     148
240                     155
260                     161
280                     167
300                     173
480                     219
672                     259
Notes to Table:
For signs with an area in sq. ft. other than those specifically listed in the
table the measurement distance may be calculated with the following formula:
measurement distance= area of sign sq. ft. x 100
 
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.31 SIGNS, ZONES PERMITTED AND CONTROLS.
   The following table is hereby made a part of this section by reference. It
is unlawful for any person to erect or otherwise install a sign having a size
or height greater than allowed in the following table. It is unlawful for any
person to erect or otherwise install a sign located on the site or in a zone in
violation of the controls specified in this table.
 
Sign Types and Zones in Which  Maximum Size of                 Site
Definitions    Sign Is         Sign Area       Maximum Height  Restrictions
               Permitted
Animated sign  Not allowed in                                 
               any zone
                                                               750 feet from
                                                               nearest
                                                               billboard,
                               HC-1: 300 sq.                   nearest boundary
                               ft.                             of Idaho Falls
               HC-1, C-2, I&M- C-2, I&M-1,                     Greenbelt, or
Billboard      1, I&M-2 and    I&M-2, I&M-3:   45' from grade  from properties/
               I&M-3 Zones.    480 sq. ft.     to top of sign. districts listed
                               Within 100' of                  on National
                               I-15: 680 sq.                   Register of
                               ft.                             Historic Places.
                                                               No stacking or
                                                               side-by-side
                                                               billboards.
                               Not to exceed   Not to exceed
                               area of         height of       Murals shall be
               Any zone with   building        building or     maintained in
               an approved     elevation on    structure on    good condition
Building mural commercial or   which it is     which it is     or they must be
               industrial use  placed.         placed. Height  removed within
               building.       Excluding the   shall only go   60 days of
                               area above the  to the square   notice of
                               square of the   of the          noncompliance.
                               building.       building.
Flashing sign  Not allowed in                                 
               any zone.
 
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.32 EXEMPTIONS.
   Signs exempt from county permit requirements are:
   (A)   Directional or information signs that are no larger than three square
feet per face, which help direct on-premises land uses or activities, and do
not display an advertising message (for example: public convenience signs
identifying restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features or
facilities, parking directions and the like);
   (B)   Memorial signs or tablets displaying names of buildings and dates of
erection when cut into the surface or facade of the building;
   (C)   Signs required by law or that serve the public interest, such as
traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, warning of temporary
emergencies, construction zones, presence of underground cable, utility signs
and similar signs installed on public property and are owned and maintained by
county, state or federal agencies or a public utility company;
   (D)   Temporary signs or banners that bear no product advertising and
announce community or civic events. Such signs or banners shall be removed
within seven calendar days following the event;
   (E)   Signs that identify the architects, engineers, contractors, lenders,
government agencies or programs (i.e., FHA, HUD, FMHA, low cost housing, Senior
Citizen Center and the like) and other individuals or firms involved with the
construction. This shall not include any advertisement of any product, or signs
announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which
the building is intended, or use of the project. The signs shall be confined to
the site of the construction and shall be removed within 14 calendar day after
the beginning of the intended use of the project;
   (F)   Homeowner locator signs are allowed if each sign is no more than one
square foot per face and the mounting device is located out of public road
right-of-way. Such signs shall be kept in good repair;
   (G)   Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of real property shall be
confined to the property to which they apply. Such signs may be up to a total
area of 32 square feet per face in size. The number of signs shall be limited
to one sign per parcel, up to and including 40 acres, or not more than one sign
per frontage. Directional signs may be placed at intersections to direct
interested parties to real estate that is for sale, for rent or lease. Only one
directional sign per agency will be allowed. The directional sign shall not be
more than 16 square feet. Such sign may indicate the name of the real estate
agency or their logo. Signs must be kept in good repair. All such signs shall
be removed within 14 calendar days after the sale, rental or lease. All signs
are to be placed on private property. Said signs are allowed only when a change
in direction is required to lead customers to the property. Subdivision
directional signs may only be erected after county approval of the final plat
for the subdivision and must be removed after the last lot within the approved
final plat is sold by the developer;
   (H)   Signs announcing candidates seeking public office and other data
pertinent thereto, up to an area of 32 square feet for each premises. Such
signs shall be confined to private property and removed within 14 calendar days
after the election for which they were intended;
   (I)   Window signs in a window display of merchandise when incorporated in
that display;
   (J)   Holiday signs, religious signs, no soliciting signs, welcome home
signs and no trespassing signs; and
   (K)   Temporary signs which are intended to be festive, holiday or invite
gathering are permitted provided such are not located within the road right-of-
way and comply in all other respects for permitted signs.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who is found guilty of violation of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction. A violation of this chapter shall constitute civil violation,
punishable in the amount of $100. A second violation of this chapter shall
constitute a civil violation, punishable in the amount of $200. A third
violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil violation, in the amount of
$300. A fourth violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil violation,
punishable in the amount of $400. A fifth violation of this chapter and each
subsequent violation shall constitute a civil violation, punishable in the
amount of $500. Each calendar day in which the property shall be in violation
of this chapter and shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In the
event said fees are unpaid, a lien may be recorded against the subject
property. In addition to all other remedies, the county shall further have a
right to injunctive relief.
(Ord. 254-23, passed 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 153: RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Supervision and responsibility for inspection enforcement
   
153.04   Right-of-way permit required
   
153.05   Request for permit to work in county road right-of-way
   
153.06   Review of applications for right-of-way permit criteria
   
153.07   Liability insurance; bodily injury; property damage
   
153.08   Permit deposit/bond
   
153.09   Form of permit
   
153.10   General conditions
   
153.11   Schedule of permit fees
   
153.12   Revocation of right-of-way permit
   
153.13   Relocation and protection of existing utilities and structures
   
153.14   Abandonment of structures
   
153.15   Urgent work
   
153.16   Emergency action
   
153.17   Preservation of monuments and property markers
   
153.18   Mail, newspaper delivery boxes
   
153.19   Encroachment on right-of-way
   
153.20   Access for inspection and testing
   
153.21   Public utility placement
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate construction and/or maintenance
within the public right-of-way by the issuance of right-of-way permits to
ensure that utility construction work and/or other underground or above-ground
construction work undertaken pursuant to such permit is consistent with the
applicant’s right-of-way permit from the County Public Works Department, the
applicable comprehensive plan and the current County Public Works Department
standard specifications and drawings.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSIONERS. The Bonneville County Board of County Commissioners.
   COUNTY. The County of Bonneville, Idaho.
   DEPARTMENT. The County Public Works Department.
   DRAINAGE SWALE. The area between the edge of pavement and property line that
lies within the public right-of-way providing roadside drainage. SWALES provide
stormwater treatment by allowing retention of runoff water to infiltrate into
the ground. The infiltration process cleans the runoff water and provides a
natural recharge to the groundwater. Frequent problems with SWALES include
being filled in by residential homeowners, developers, contractors and/or
landscapers with concrete, asphalt, dirt, gravel, rocks, trees or other debris.
   DRIVEWAY. The area providing access to private property from a public or
private street, which is no greater than 30 feet wide for residential dwellings
and no greater than 40 feet wide for commercial properties and as otherwise
outlined in §
156.058.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any gate, fence, buildings, debris, mailbox or any material
used to fill in drainage swale, landscaping material over 18 inches in height
and the like.
   INSPECTION. An inspection by a representative of the County Public Works
Department.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The entity/individual, or his or her designated
representative, who is requesting or issued a right-of-way permit by County
Public Works Department.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area used as a public traveled roadway that is controlled
by the county, whether by deed or prescriptive easement.
   UTILITY. Any power, telephone, sewer, water, cable television or any other
under or above-ground private or public service.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.03 SUPERVISION AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSPECTION ENFORCEMENT.
   The Department is charged with the responsibility of supervision, inspection
and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.04 RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   All construction, maintenance or other type of work performed in the
county’s right-of-way shall require a right-of-way permit. The permit is to be
issued by the Department after review and approval by Department staff.
   (B)   All criteria used for design, location, depth and the like of proposed
work shall adhere to the current version of the Department’s standard
specifications and drawings. The following activities shall require a right-of-
way permit:
      (1)   Utility construction work, including the construction and/or
maintenance of all facilities associated with water, sewer, irrigation, storm
drainage, gas and petroleum products, electricity, communications, cable
television and other such public or private entities performing construction
and/or maintenance work within the right-of-way;
      (2)   Construction or repair of asphalt, concrete or gravel driveways and
parking area tie-ins to existing edge of oil mat or back of curb, including
berms or drainage swales;
      (3)   Tree trimming or removal;
      (4)   Modification of the drainage swale in any manner from approved
development improvement drawings, including any type of landscaping, planting,
depth modifications and width modifications;
      (5)   All curb, gutter, sidewalk, paving or other street improvements not
under contract with the county; and
      (6)   All other activity within the right-of-way such as temporary
storage, stockpiling, demolition and any other activity expressed or implied to
be the administration responsibility of the county.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.05 REQUEST FOR PERMIT TO WORK IN COUNTY ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Permit applications shall be submitted to the Department for
processing.
   (B)   The request may include site plans, engineering plans and
specifications or other data as the Department may deem necessary for proper
evaluation of the application.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.06 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT CRITERIA.
   (A)   The Department shall coordinate, review and evaluate all applications
for right-of-way permits and consider possible hazards and risks of the
proposed construction and other policy considerations.
   (B)   Permits that are denied due to conflicts with current standards shall
be returned with clear indication of denial.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE; BODILY INJURY; PROPERTY DAMAGE.
   No right-of-way permit for construction purposes shall be issued unless and
until the applicant therefor has filed with the Department a certificate of
insurance providing for public liability coverage, in the sum of $500,000, in
accordance with Idaho Code §§ 6-924 and 6-926, to protect parties from any
expense, cost, damage and any liability of any kind or character whatsoever
resulting from or which may arise as a result of said applicant’s opening any
such street, alley or other roadway, or which may in any way be connected
therewith or relating thereto. The certificate of insurance shall be continuous
until canceled whereas Department must receive ten days’ notice by registered
mail, in advance of such cancellation.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.08 PERMIT DEPOSIT/BOND.
   (A)   No right-of-way permit for construction purposes shall be issued
unless and until the applicant therefor has filed with the Department a cash
deposit or bond as outlined in the current version of the Department’s standard
specifications and drawings. Said deposit or bond shall guarantee the
satisfactory construction, repair or compliance of work performed under a
right-of-way permit and for a period of one year after date of completion.
   (B)   The bond shall be of a common format as established or accepted by the
county and will be continuous until cancelled with the exception that the
county must be notified by registered mail ten days in advance of such
cancellation.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.09 FORM OF PERMIT.
   The right-of-way permit shall be a unique and binding agreement between the
permit holder and the county. Said permit holder shall be a bona fide
representative of the principal group, firm or person to whom the permit is
issued and shall also be the owner or its authorized representative of the
facility authorized for construction, maintenance or repair. Said right-of-way
permit shall have a registered number and upon issuance be signed by the
Department. The permit shall confer the permission of performing the work
expressed on the permit, application or its attachments, and obligating the
permit holder to satisfactorily complete such expressed work within and in
compliance with the terms of the right-of-way permit, its attachments and all
Department specifications, standard drawings, policies or ordinances pertaining
to such work.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.10 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   General conditions for all permits are described in the current version of
the Department’s standard specifications and drawings.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.11 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES.
   Schedule of permit fees covering the cost to the county for issuance,
administration, inspection and policing of permits are identified in the
current version of the Department’s standard specifications and drawings and
shall be set by the Board of County Commissioners at the beginning of each
fiscal year.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.12 REVOCATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.
   (A)   All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter for any
activity in the right-of-way shall be temporary in nature, and shall not vest
any permanent right to a permit holder, and may, in any case be revoked by the
Department without advance notice where work in the right-of-way does not
comply with the provisions of the county standard construction specifications.
Where a right-of-way permit is revoked, before the work can be started up
again, a second permit must be obtained from the county.
   (B)   When any construction and/or maintenance is performed within the
right-of-way which requires a permit to be issued, and construction is already
started, a fee may be assessed to said public or private entity before any
further construction and/or maintenance shall be performed within the public
right-of-way. A penalty of two times the calculated permit fee may be assessed
for the failure to secure a permit prior to construction.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.13 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF EXISTING UTILITIES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The permit holder shall not interfere with any existing structure
without the written consent of the Department and the owner of the structure.
If it becomes necessary to relocate the existing structure, the owner shall do
this. No structure owned by the county shall be moved to accommodate the permit
holder unless the cost of such work is borne by the permit holder. The cost of
moving privately owned structures shall be similarly borne by the permit holder
unless it makes other arrangements with the person or entity owning such
structures. The permit holder shall support and protect all pipes, conduits,
poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the
excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect
them under, over, along or across said work area.
   (B)   The permit holder shall secure approval or method of support and
protection from the owner of the structure. In case any of said pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other encasement or devices are to be considered as
part of the substructure, the permit holder shall promptly notify the owner
thereof. The permit holder shall assume all liability for damage to structures
and any resulting damage and/or injury to any person or property because of
such structure damage shall be borne by the permit holder.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.14 ABANDONMENT OF STRUCTURES.
   Whenever the use of a structure is abandoned by a public or private entity
having a structure within the right-of-way, except the abandonment of service
lines designed to serve single properties, the public or private entity owning,
using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30 days after
such abandonment, file with the Department a statement in writing, giving in
detail the location of said structure so abandoned.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.15 URGENT WORK.
   When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public
or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as an
emergency, the Department shall have full power to order, at the time the
permit is granted, or the conditions warrant, that a crew of workers and
adequate facilities be employed by the permit holder 24 hours a day to the end
that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.16 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for
the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided
that the person making such excavation shall apply to the Department for a
permit on the first working day after such emergency work has commenced.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.17 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS AND PROPERTY MARKERS.
   (A)   Any monument or property marker set for the purpose of locating or
preserving the lines of any street, subdivision, property or a precise survey
reference point, or a permanent survey bench mark within the county, shall not
be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first
obtaining permission in writing from the property owner.
   (B)   Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points,
benchmarks or elevation marker shall only be granted upon condition that the
person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incidental to the
proper replacement of this monument.
   (C)   After written permission is granted, the survey marker shall be
referenced by a state licensed surveyor for replacement once construction is
completed per Idaho Code § 55-1613.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.18 MAIL, NEWSPAPER DELIVERY BOXES.
   (A)   No mailbox, newspaper delivery box, (hereafter referred to as mailbox)
will be allowed to exist on the county’s rights-of-way if it interferes with
the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance or operation of
the road system. A mailbox installation that does not conform to the provisions
of this section or the current version of the Department’s standard
specifications and drawings is an unauthorized encroachment under Idaho Code §§
49-221(2), 50-313 or 50-314.
   (B)   (1)   Exceptions to the mailbox location may be granted if, in the
judgment of the Department, the installation does not interfere with the safety
of the traveling public or the function, maintenance or the operation of the
road system.
      (2)   Any request for a mailbox exception shall be in writing.
      (3)   The request shall contain sufficient details to evaluate the
requested exception.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.19 ENCROACHMENT ON RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   If any highway or public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the county
is encroached upon by gates, fences, buildings, landscaping, rocks/boulders,
mailbox or mailbox stand, or anything similar to these, the county may require
the encroachment to be removed. If the encroachment is of a nature as to
effectually obstruct and prevent the use of the highway or public right-of-way
for vehicles, the county shall immediately cause the encroachment to be
removed, per Idaho Code § 40-2319.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.20 ACCESS FOR INSPECTION AND TESTING.
   The Department shall maintain the right of access to any activity occurring
upon the public right-of-way for the purposes of observation, testing and any
other enforcement measure necessary for the administration of that public
right-of-way. The permit holder shall be required to provide such excavation or
access as is necessary to allow measurement or testing of the quality of work
being performed.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
§ 153.21 PUBLIC UTILITY PLACEMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OUTSIDE SERVICES AGREEMENT. An agreement between the parcel owner and
utility provider for the provision of utility services outside of that utility
provider’s jurisdictional service area for a reasonable cost.
      PUBLIC WORKS. The Bonneville County Public Works Department.
      REASONABLE COST. A cost that does not exceed 150% of the utilities’
normally billed utility rate.
   (B)   Rules and regulations.
      (1)   Every utility provider desiring to locate its utility line/pipe/
conveyance within a county ROW must first apply for and obtain a ROW permit
from Public Works.
      (2)   Public Works will evaluate this request based on information
provided by the applicant and other information available to Public Works to
identify:
         (a)   Whether the proposed utility placement will, now or in the
reasonably foreseeable future, conflict with the use of a public highway;
         (b)   Whether the proposed utility placement will, now or in the
reasonably foreseeable future, conflict with the placement of existing or
future utility services;
         (c)   Whether said utility provider is willing and presently able,
without special conditions (including required annexation, but excepting
outside services agreements), to provide its service to all property/parcels
within 300 feet of their utility line/pipe/conveyance at a reasonable cost.
Such shall be confirmed in writing by the utility provider prior Public Works
completion of the evaluation process; and
         (d)   Whether alternative locations for said installation may exist.
(Ord. 258-23, passed 11-8-2023) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be guilty of an infraction or
misdemeanor as follows.
         (a)   Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty of a violation
of this chapter for the first time shall be punished by a fine in the amount of
$100.
         (b)   Any person who pleads guilty or is found guilty of a violation
of this chapter for a second or subsequent time, irrespective of the form of
the judgment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by up to a
$300 fine and/or up to one month in jail together with restitution.
      (2)   Each separate instance or day of a continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense and may be charged and punished separately.
   (B)   (1)   Failure to abide by the regulations in §
153.21 shall include the following actions or penalties:
         (a)   An infraction punishable by the following daily civil violation
penalties wherein each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense:
            1.   First violation: punishable in the amount of $100;
            2.   Second violation: punishable in the amount of $200;
            3.   Third violation: punishable in the amount of $300;
            4.   Fourth violation: punishable in the amount of $400; and
            5.   Fifth and subsequent violation(s): punishable in the amount of
$500.
         (b)   Immediately stop work, removal and/or ejecting of the utility
line/pipe/conveyance with the costs thereof to be assessed and immediately paid
by the utility provider to the county.
      (2)   These actions and penalties shall be subject to the court’s award
of appropriate and related fees and costs. Failure by the county to exercise
some or all of these remedies shall not constitute a waiver of such right for
subsequent enforcement.
(Ord. 231-17, passed 9-6-2017)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Statutory authority
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Findings of fact
   
154.04   Statement of purpose
   
154.05   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
154.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
154.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
154.08   Compliance
   
154.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.10   Interpretation
   
154.11   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
154.25   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.26   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.27   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
154.28   Permit procedures
   
154.29   Corrective procedures
   
154.30   Variances
   
154.31   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.45   General standards
   
154.46   Specific standards
   
154.47   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
154.48   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but
without established floodways
   
154.49   Standards for floodways
   
154.50   Standards for areas of shallow flooding
   
154.51   Standards for possible but undetermined flood hazards
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The legislature of the state, pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 46-1020, 46-1023 and
46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain management ordinances
that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development standards to
minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health and property. Therefore,
the Board of County Commissioners does hereby ordain as follows.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY AND AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure
on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure which is used
exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, raising or
drying of agricultural commodities and livestock; specifically excludes any
structures used for human habitation.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH Zone on a
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination by the Federal Insurance
Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state or other
source using FEMA- approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CLEANING (IRRIGATION). Mowing, cutting or burning of weeds, trees and other
nuisance growth, including algae growth, application of pesticides as
permitted, removal of beaver dams and removal of trash or other debris whether
floating, lodged or otherwise obstructing the conveyance of water flow through
channels and works.
   CRITICAL FACILITIES. Facilities that are vital to flood response activities
or critical to the health and safety of the public before, during and after a
flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation,
police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
storage facility or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the
flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials
facility, power generation facility, water utility or wastewater treatment
plant.
   DATUM. The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points)
from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of
points was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical
datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring
heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit such as: the construction of
buildings, structures or accessory structures; additions or substantial
improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers and
pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of
materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
   DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM). The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has
its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. An important administrative tool of the NFIP. It is
used to determine the proper flood insurance premium rate; it is used to
document elevation information; and it may be used to support a request for a
letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-
F).
   ENCLOSURE. An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area
formed when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or
partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below
the BFE/RFPE is not considered an ENCLOSURE.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the original floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community, June 6, 1974.
   EXISTING STRUCTURES. See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source; and
         (c)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding as defined in division (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a
river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as
when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current.
      (2)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding as defined in division (1)(a) of this definition.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The FBFM shows how the floodplain is
divided into the floodway and flood fringe where streams are studied in detail.
They also show general floodplain areas where floodplains have been studied by
approximate methods.
   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION. See BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. See FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Insurance Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood,
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been
designated as Zones A, M and/or E.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM
that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate
map (DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map (FHBM)
or flood insurance rate map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or type of
flooding in the area, and applicable insurance rate.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See definition of FLOODING.)
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard.
      (1)   In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot of
freeboard.
      (2)   In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. The physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a SYSTEM typically includes dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. The base flood elevation
(BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the flood protection elevation (FPE).
FREEBOARD shall be one foot.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A facility that cannot be used for its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair facilities. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   GENERAL IRRIGATION FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT (GIFD PERMIT). A permit
with the intent to collectively authorize low-to-no impact irrigation and
drainage development activities or uses in the floodplain which inherently do
not increase the BFE. GIFD PERMITS apply to all qualifying activities within
the spatial extents of an irrigation delivery or drainage system and within the
regulatory floodway or SFHA, over a predetermined period of time, not to exceed
five years. Issuance of a GIFD PERMIT requires coordination between the
irrigation entity and the Floodplain Administrator.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure.
Refer to the FEMA elevation certificate for HAG related to building elevation
information.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. A structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and
determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that
have been certified either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FIRMs that can be accomplished by letter.
They include letter of map amendment (LOMA), letter of map revision (LOMR) and
letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
      (1)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood insurance study (FIS). Upon
submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map
revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building
permits and/or flood development permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR,
because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An official amendment, by letter,
to an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes
a property’s or structure’s location in relation to the special flood hazard
area (SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property or structure has been
inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high
ground above the base flood elevation.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). FEMA’s modification to an effective
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or a flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) or
both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that
affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective base flood elevations (BFEs) or the special flood hazard area (SFHA).
The LOMR officially revises the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood
boundary and floodway map (FBFM), and sometimes the flood insurance study (FIS)
report and, when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The
LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of
the FIRM, FBFM or FIS report.
      (4)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). FEMA’s modification
of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
The LOMR-F does not change the FIRM, FBFM or FIS report.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control or
divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The lowest point of the ground level next to
the structure. Refer to the FEMA elevation certificate for LAG related to
building elevation information.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 and this
chapter.
   MAINTENANCE (IRRIGATION). The act of ongoing upkeep of existing structures
required to keep channels in a condition adequate to support the conveyance of
irrigation and drainage water (this does not include the complete replacement
or substantial replacement of an existing structure). MAINTENANCE is further
defined as the care or upkeep of channels, works, appurtenances, easements,
utility corridors and property; to keep in an existing state, specified state
of repair, and efficiency; return to a former condition, elevation, place and
position; to preserve from failure or decline; or repair or renovate so as to
return it to its original condition. MAINTENANCE does not include dredging as
defined herein.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. This includes tiny homes
and park model manufactured homes. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include
a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP),
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum (such as
North America Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88)) to which base flood elevations
(BFEs) shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW). Describes a condition where there is a river, flow
or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on
the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide
is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if the
MUDFLOW, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall
program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans,
mudslide control works and floodplain management regulations.
   MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA. An area with land surfaces and slopes
of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a
potential for mudflow.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program
created by Congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide through sound,
community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to
affordable, federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after June
6, 1974, and before the effective start date of this chapter, is subject to the
ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A place where the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after June 6, 1974, which is the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by the county.
   OPERATION (IRRIGATION). The regular and reoccurring performance of typical
work by an irrigation or drainage entity, including, but not limited to, the
delivery or drainage of water, measurement of water and adjustment of
irrigation and drainage works and all related appurtenances.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map (FIRM).
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before June 6, 1974, the effective date of the initial
flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that is:
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light
duty truck; and
         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
      (2)   This includes tiny homes and park model manufactured homes.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See FLOODWAY.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   REPAIR (IRRIGATION). The restoration to good or sound conditions of any part
of an existing structure, channel, channel bank or service road for the purpose
of maintenance (this does not include the complete replacement or substantial
replacement of an existing structure). REPAIR does not include dredging as
defined herein.
   REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE. An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least
two paid flood losses of more than $1,000 each in any ten-year period since
1978.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. For
the purpose of this chapter, the term SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous
in meaning with the phrase AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of its market value before the damage occurred. See definition of
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant
to this chapter.
   TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS. FEMA publications that
provide guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP,
which are contained in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are
intended for use primarily by state and local officials responsible for
interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development
community, such as design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as
updates of existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins
do not create regulations. Rather, they provide specific guidance for complying
with the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations. It should be noted
that TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS provide guidance on the
minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or community requirements
that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design professionals should
contact the community officials to determine whether more restrictive state or
local regulations apply to the building or site in question. All applicable
standards of the state or local building code must also be met for any building
in a flood hazard area.
   TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED. Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this
chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the finished construction elevation certificate,
other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. §
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.03 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic
inundation that results in:
      (1)   Loss of life and property;
      (2)   Health and safety hazards;
      (3)   Disruption of commerce and governmental services;
      (4)   Extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection;
and
      (5)   Impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses may be caused by development in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
   (C)   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adopting and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.04 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life, health and property;
   (B)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
   (C)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas;
   (D)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (E)   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (F)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (G)   Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
   (H)   Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.05 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and
provisions to:
   (A)   Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (B)   Restrict or prohibit development which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities or erosion;
   (C)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
   (D)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
   (E)   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels and natural
protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the county. Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses
or structures that are otherwise prohibited by
Chapter 156.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance
Administrator in a scientific and engineering report titled “Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for Bonneville County, Idaho,” dated April 2, 2002 with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate
maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared
a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the County Planning
and Zoning Office located at 683 N Capital Ave Idaho Falls, ID 83402.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.08 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other laws, ordinances, regulations,
easements, covenants or deed restrictions and the like. However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or
greater restrictions shall control.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.25 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator, hereinafter referred to as the Floodplain
Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.26 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and all proposed development
is reasonably safe from flooding;
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. § 1334;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Water
Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA) (this is the
LOMC procedure);
   (D)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained (this is a hydraulic and
hydrology analysis);
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways unless the certification and
flood hazard reduction provisions of §
154.49 are met;
   (F)   Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of §
154.28(C);
   (G)   Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of §
154.28(C);
   (H)   Review plans to verify public utilities are constructed in accordance
with the provisions of §
154.45(E) through (G);
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain and
maintain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
154.28(C) and
154.46(B);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, and floodways (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in this chapter;
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of §
154.07, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway
data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed
pursuant to §
154.47(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway data
has been provided in accordance with the provisions of §
154.07, require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones AE on the
community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community (this is a hydraulic and
hydrology analysis);
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area (SFHA)
is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the
option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy
of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file;
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974,
being 5 U.S.C. § 552a, as amended;
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of the Inspections Department shall have a right, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial
jurisdiction of the Department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action;
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
154.29;
   (T)   Review, provide input and make recommendations for variance requests;
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of §
154.07, including any revisions thereto, including letters of map change,
issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of the community’s
mapping needs;
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs);
   (W)   A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting
from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable,
but not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA)
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with
this part. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those
physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data; and
   (X)   Upon occurrence, notify the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA) in
writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that all FHBMs and FIRMs accurately represent the community’s boundaries,
include within such notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for
reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for
which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.27 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
154.26.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.28 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan, drawn to scale, which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
154.07, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area
as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
154.07;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) as determined in §
154.07;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
154.07,
154.27 or
154.47;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation and method thereof of all development within a
special flood hazard area, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in Zone A, AE, AH or AO will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility equipment and machinery will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise and
maintenance of floodproofing measures will be required prior to certificate of
occupancy/completion;
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
154.45(H)(2) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH
and AO.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
154.46(E) and (F) are met;
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and
      (10)   A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. (This is a hydraulic and
hydrology analysis, and may involve the LOMC procedure).
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, rip-
rap, docks, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials and the like);
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
154.07;
      (3)   The flood protection elevation required for the lowest floor and
all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The flood protection elevation required for the protection of all
utility equipment and machinery;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway of any watercourse, as applicable;
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH or AO;
      (8)   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the
start of construction of work within 180 days. A floodplain development permit
shall expire 180 days after issuance unless the permitted activity has
commenced as per the definition for start of construction; and
      (9)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   A construction drawings elevation certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-
33) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be
the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation to mean sea
level. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit.
         (b)   A building under construction elevation certificate (FEMA Form
86-0-33) is required after the lowest floor is established. Within seven
calendar days of establishment of the lowest floor elevation, it shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, in relation to mean sea
level. Any work done within the seven-day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final as-built finished construction elevation certificate
(FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to
certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy. The finished construction elevation
certificate certifier shall provide at least two photographs showing the front
and rear of the building taken within 90 days from the date of certification.
The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description
and diagram number provided in Section A of the certificate. To the extent
possible, these photographs should show the entire building, including
foundation. If the building has split-level or multi-level areas, provide at
least two additional photographs showing side views of the building. In
addition, when applicable, provide a photograph of the foundation showing a
representative example of the flood openings or vents. All photographs must be
in color and measure at least three inches by three inches. Digital photographs
are acceptable.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.
         (a)   If nonresidential floodproofing is used to meet the flood
protection elevation requirements, design plans, with supporting data, an
operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to
the actual start of any new construction.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the lowest floor and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
         (c)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data,
the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval.
         (d)   Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
         (e)   Prior to request for a certificate of compliance/occupancy, a
floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34) shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and approval.
      (3)   Manufactured home. If a manufactured home (includes tiny home or
park model) is placed within Zone A, AE, AH or AO, and the elevation of the
chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation
certification is required in accordance with the provisions of §
154.46(C)(2).
      (4)   Watercourse. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the
following shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit:
         (a)   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation;
         (b)   A professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream;
         (c)   A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation; and
         (d)   A state stream channel alteration permit approval shall be
provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures are exempt from
the elevation/ floodproofing certification requirements specified in divisions
(C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
154.46(E)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
154.46(F); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 200 square feet meeting
requirements of §
154.46(G).
   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, improvements, repairs of damage and
any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the
Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the adopted State
Building Code and this chapter is required.
   (E)   Additional information. Any other information deemed necessary for
review of public safety and floodplain management requirements by the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.29 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.30 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission as established by the county,
hereinafter referred to as the “appeal board,” shall hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the
definition provided in §
154.02; and provided provisions of divisions (H)(2), (H)(3) and (H)(4) below
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (C)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, as defined
in §
154.02, as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the
above factors in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(11) above with their application
for a variance.
   (E)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (F)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official specifying the difference
between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure
is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life
and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
$25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with
a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (G)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administrator and the
state upon request.
   (H)   Conditions for variances are as follows.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if the
variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (I)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The lowest floor of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at
least the flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
   (J)   The county will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of the State
Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at least 30
calendar days prior to granting the variance.
   (K)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in Idaho Code § 67-6535.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.31 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof for
which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter. Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of 180 days subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.45 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction, substantial improvements and development shall
be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction, substantial improvements and development shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
in accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements, available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (C)   All new construction, substantial improvements and development shall
be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters and electric outlets/ switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved
structures, which is below the lowest floor used solely for parking, access and
storage shall:
      (1)   Be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials at least to
the flood protection elevation; and
      (2)   Include, in Zones A, AE, AH and AO, flood openings to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or flood-resistant wood underpinning, regardless of
structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as
outlined above.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
   (J)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, or stream
setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the flood
protection elevation in the floodway, or stream setback, and provided that such
repair, reconstruction or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter.
   (K)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
154.30(I). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood
protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
154.28(C).
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (O)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
   (P)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals greater than
50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such
proposals base flood elevation data.
   (Q)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (R)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.46 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
154.07 or
154.48, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
154.45, are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction, substantial improvements
and development of any residential structure (including manufactured homes,
tiny homes and park models) shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
and utilities, including ductwork, elevated no lower than the flood protection
elevation, as defined in §
154.02.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction, substantial
improvements and development of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
residential construction. New construction, substantial improvements and
development of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, and utilities, including ductwork,
elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in §
154.02, elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in §
154.02. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH and AO may be floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation, provided that all areas of the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the
flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AH
and AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with §
154.50(B)(2). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the floodproofing standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in
§
154.28(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes (including tiny homes and
park models) shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in §
154.02.
      (2)   Manufactured homes (including tiny homes and park models) shall be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation
system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the State Division of
Building Safety’s “Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standard” in accordance
with Idaho Code § 44-2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by
an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the
chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When
the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of §
154.45(H).
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to noncompliant post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other
than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to
comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to noncompliant post-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five-year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, must comply with
the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the five-
year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. If the
structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
requirement does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the Building
Official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (E)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be either:
      (1)   Temporary placement. Must be on-site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently
attached additions); or
      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles (including tiny homes
and park models) that do not meet the limitations of temporary placement shall
meet all the requirements for new construction, as set forth in §
154.45 and divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (F)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed six months, renewable up to one year;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure;
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved;
and
      (6)   Temporary structures in the floodway must provide a hydraulic and
hydrology analysis along with a no-rise certification.
   (G)   Accessory and agricultural structures (appurtenant structures).
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages and the like)
used solely for parking, and storage are to be placed within a special flood
hazard area, elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all
accessory structures in accordance with §
154.28(C), and the following criteria shall be met.
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas).
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled.
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
154.45(A).
         (f)   All utility equipment and machinery, such as electrical, shall
be installed in accordance with the provisions of §
154.45(D).
         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of §
154.45(H).
         (h)   Accessory structures not used solely for parking, access and
storage must be elevated per divisions (A) and (B) above.
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 200 square feet
and is a minimal investment of $7500 and satisfies the criteria outlined in a
divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(g) above is not required to provide the
elevation certificate per division (B) above.
   (H)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met.
      (1)   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of
buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty).
      (2)   Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be
attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area.
      (3)   Not elevated above-ground tanks may be permitted in flood hazard
areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects
of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
      (4)   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
         (a)   At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
   (I)   Construction of below-grade crawlspace.
      (1)   The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE and
must not be more than two feet below the exterior lowest adjacent grade (LAG).
      (2)   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall,
must not exceed four feet at any point.
      (3)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained
within a reasonable time after a flood event.
      (4)   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet
per second for any crawlspace.
      (5)   See Technical Bulletin 11 for further information. Caution:
Buildings that have below-grade crawlspaces will have higher flood insurance
premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawlspace construction, with
the interior elevation of the crawlspace soil at or above the base flood
elevation (BFE).
   (J)   Subdivision plats; flood zones. A note must be provided on the final
plat documenting the current flood zone in which the property or properties are
located. The boundary line must be drawn on the plat in situations where two or
more flood zones intersect over the property or properties being surveyed.
 
FEMA FIRM panel(s): #160xxxxxxC, & 160xxxxxxE and the like
FIRM effective date(s): mm/dd/year
Flood Zone(s): Zone X, Zone A, Zone AE, A Zone, AO Zone, AH, Zone D and the
like
Base Flood Elevation(s): AE       .0 ft. and the like
Flood Zones are subject to change by FEMA and all land within a floodway or
floodplain is regulated by county ordinance.
 
   (K)   Critical facilities. Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard
area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-year
flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should
also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing
measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by
or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of
the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the
extent possible.
   (L)   Floodplain development permits related to irrigation activities and
development.
      (1)   Activities that do not require a floodplain development permit.
Consistent with Idaho Code §§ 46-1021 and 46-1022, operation, cleaning,
maintenance or repair of any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure
or other irrigation or drainage works, as defined within this chapter, do not
constitute development under state law and therefore do not require either a
GIFD permit or an individual permit. The Floodplain Administrator must exercise
his or her professional judgment when reviewing activities to determine if an
activity requires a permit. When in doubt, the Floodplain Administrator should
seek consultation from the IDWR Floodplain Coordinator to determine permit
necessity. The below list of activities delineates some activities that do not
require a permit, but said list is not exhaustive:
         (a)   General farming, pasture, horticultural activities and forestry
that do not involve earthwork that permanently alters the topography or any
clearing/grubbing of an area;
         (b)   Grading of existing roads or easements along or near channels
and within the SFHA, provided that the grading does not add fill within the
regulatory floodway or SFHA;
         (c)   Maintenance of underground utilities (work must not permanently
alter topography);
         (d)   In-kind replacement of existing piers or posts supporting a
conforming deck;
         (e)   Activities associated with land-surface construction stormwater
best management practices (“BMP”), provided the measures are temporary in
nature (i.e., not in place for longer than 180 days) or do not increase the
BFE. Examples of stormwater BMP activities that do not require a permit include
the following: dust control; materials and equipment covers; mulching;
geotextile fabrics; matting; bio-filter bags; fiber rolls; silt fences;
vegetative buffer strips; temporary swales; and temporary berms; and
         (f)   New installation or maintenance of non-solid fences constructed
parallel to the flow of water during a flood event. Non-parallel or solid
fences that block the flow will need to go through the individual permitting
process.
      (2)   General irrigation floodplain development permit.
         (a)   Upon review of the proposed activities and projects, the
Floodplain Administrator will assess whether or not they fall, in whole or in
part, under the GIFD permit, and whether any components require an individual
permit and notify the applicant in writing accordingly.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator shall advise the applicant or
project sponsor of their assessment via written notice (email is preferable).
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a copy of all proposed project
notifications and responses.
         (c)   The GIFD permit does not include the following types of
development activities and projects:
            1.   Fill, except as outlined in the examples below;
            2.   New construction or replacements that do not meet the in-kind
definition;
            3.   Activities or projects that trigger any requirement found in
the local floodplain management or NFIP regulations; and
            4.   Activities or projects that increase flood damage and/or
increase exposure to flood hazards.
         (d)   GIFD permit activities and projects:
            1.   Dredging and grading of irrigation and drainage channels,
provided that fill from dredging or grading is not deposited on the banks of
channels or anywhere within the regulatory floodway or SFHA for longer than ten
days;
            2.   Seasonal grading within natural stream channels to check or
direct water into irrigation facilities (i.e., earthen “push-up dams” and “wing
dams”);
            3.   Deposition of fill within the SFHA for less than ten days.
After ten days, deposited fill must be removed from the SFHA, or graded and
compacted to existing grade within plus or minus 0.2 feet. Deposition of fill
includes deposition of material resulting from grading or excavating irrigation
or drainage channels. Deposition of fill within the mapped floodway requires an
individual permit;
            4.   Construction of new underground utilities that do not
permanently alter the topography. Excess soil from new pipes larger than two
feet in diameter must be disposed of outside the regulatory floodway and SFHA;
            5.   In-kind replacement of irrigation and drainage works or
components, including, but not limited to, control gates or head gates,
measuring devices and their housing structures/stilling wells, culverts, pumps,
pipes, flumes, siphons and similar works. GIFD permits cannot authorize the in-
kind replacement of dams or bridge structures;
            6.   New driveways, trails, sidewalks, roads and streets
constructed completely at or below existing grade;
            7.   New underground utilities that do not permanently alter the
existing grade elevations by plus or minus 0.5 feet; and
            8.   Armoring, stabilizing, securing or in-kind replacement of
existing infrastructure within the channel banks (such as bridge piers, sewer/
utility supports and stormwater/sewer drainage outfalls/headwalls) provided the
dimensions (bank slopes, channel location, channel elevation) of the channel
are not altered. This should not involve replacement with larger or additional
above-ground infrastructure.
      (3)   Individual floodplain development permits. An individual permit is
required for all other permitted activities and projects within the regulatory
floodway and SFHA that do not meet the requirements of a GIFD permit.
   (M)   Compensatory storage. New development shall not reduce the effective
flood storage volume of the regulatory floodway and SFHA. A development
proposal shall provide compensatory storage if grading or other activity
eliminates any effective flood storage volume. Compensatory storage shall:
      (1)   Provide equivalent volume at equivalent elevations to that being
displaced. For this purpose, EQUIVALENT ELEVATION means having similar
relationship to ordinary high water and the best available 100-year water
surface profiles;
      (2)   Be hydraulically connected to the source of flooding; and
      (3)   Provide compensatory storage in the same construction season as
when the displacement of flood storage volume occurs and before the flood
season begins.
   (N)   Pit, mine, quarry or gravel extraction. Approval of a CLOMR shall be
required as a condition of approval for any proposed pit, mine, quarry or
gravel extraction. The CLOMR application shall demonstrate that the extraction
site will be designed to avoid river avulsion (the sudden separation of land
from one property and its attachment to another, especially by flooding or a
change in the course of a river). FEMA must approve the CLOMR prior to
commencement of the use or breaking ground. Gravel mining operations or
excavations are not permitted within 100 feet of the top of river bank
regardless of floodway or floodplain designation. Material stockpiles and
permanently installed structures shall not be located within the regulatory
floodway.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.47 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A (also known
as Unnumbered A Zones) and established in §
154.07, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
154.45, shall apply.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall
be determined based on the following criteria:
      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
154.45 and
154.46.
      (2)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of §§
154.46 and
154.49.
      (3)   It is required that all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser,
include within such proposals base flood elevation data. Such base flood
elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with §
154.07 and utilized in implementing this chapter. (See FEMA 480 and/or FEMA 265
for further information.)
      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to two feet above the highest
adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the flood protection elevation
(FPE) whichever is higher, as defined in §
154.02. All other applicable provisions of §
154.46 shall also apply.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.48 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS.
   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
by FEMA or is available from another source but floodways are not identified
for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following
requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §
154.45 and
154.46; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development shall be
permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.49 STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways located within the special flood hazard
areas established in §
154.07. The floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential
projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in §
154.45 and
154.46, shall apply to all development within such areas:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit (this is a no-rise analysis
and certification); or
         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six
months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Manufactured homes (including tiny homes and park models) may be
permitted, provided the following provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
154.46(C); and
         (b)   The encroachment standards of division (B)(1) above.
      (4)   Regulations for other development in regulated floodways are as
follows.
         (a)   Fences that have the potential to block the passage of
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of this section.
         (b)   Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks and driveways that involve
the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of this
section.
         (c)   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges,
culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to
travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into
regulated floodways, shall meet the limitations of this section.
         (d)   Drilling water, oil and/or gas wells, including fuel storage
tanks, apparatus and any equipment at the site, that encroach into regulated
floodways shall meet the limitations of this section.
         (e)   Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking
facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding and ship repair facilities that
encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of this section.
         (f)   Gravel and sand and their subsequent extraction on lands within
the special flood hazard area that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet
the limitations of this section. A reclamation plan bond for LOMR shall be
posted by the mine/property owner with the county to cover the estimated costs
of a reclamation LOMR as determined by the mine/property owner and shall
provide supporting documentation for the estimated LOMR cost. A reclamation
LOMR shall be completed within one year of the completion of mining. Upon
failure of the property owner to obtain a reclamation LOMR of the mining site
within one year, the reclamation plan bond for LOMR will be forfeited.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.50 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   (A)   Areas designated as shallow flooding areas have special flood hazards
associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate.
   (B)   In addition to §
154.45 and
154.46, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   The lowest floor shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of one foot, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
      (2)   (a)   Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in division (B)(1) above so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that
level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Certification is required in accordance with §§
154.28(C) and
154.46(B).
      (3)   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) (sheds, detached
garages and the like):
         (a)   Used solely for parking and storage:
            1.   Shall have the lowest floor elevated at least as high as the
depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of one foot, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; and
            2.   Shall have flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization
of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation
in conformance with the provisions of §
154.45(H).
         (b)   Not used solely for parking and storage: shall be elevated per §
154.46(A) and (B).
      (4)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
      (5)   Where hazardous velocities are noted on the FIRM, proper
construction techniques and methods shall be used to mitigate the effects of
the velocities.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.51 STANDARDS FOR POSSIBLE BUT UNDETERMINED FLOOD HAZARDS.
   (A)   Generally. All development within a D Zone shall be subject to the
procedural requirements of this chapter, as applicable.
   (B)   Drainage. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be
provided in a D Zone to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Grading. Any site work in excess of ten cubic yards of cut or fill
will require a detailed grading permit. All grading shall be done so as to
minimize impacts and maintain compensatory storage within all special flood
hazard areas. Depending on the extent and nature of the grading, a LOMC may be
required.
   (D)   Base flood data.
      (1)   It is required that all new subdivision proposals and other
proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser,
include within such proposals base flood elevation data. Such base flood
elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with this
chapter and utilized in implementing this chapter. The applicant/developer
shall submit an application for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
prior to preliminary plat approval and have obtained a letter of map revision
(LOMR) prior to any building permits for structures being issued. (See FEMA 480
and/or FEMA 265 for further information.)
      (2)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to two feet above the highest
adjacent grade (HAG) at the building site or to the flood protection elevation
(FPE) whichever is higher, as defined in this chapter. All other applicable
provisions of §§
154.45 and
154.46 shall also apply.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted
or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both. Each day
the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 251-23, passed 1-5-2023)
CHAPTER 155: AIRPORT ZONING
Section
   
155.01   Declaration of purpose
   
155.02   Title
   
155.03   Definitions
   
155.04   Zones established
   
155.05   Instrument approach zone
   
155.06   Non-instrument approach zone
   
155.07   VFR approach zone
   
155.08   Transition zones
   
155.09   Horizontal zone
   
155.10   Conical zone
   
155.11   Height limitations
   
155.12   Use restrictions
   
155.13   Nonconforming uses
   
155.14   Permits
   
155.15   Enforcement
   
155.16   Map
   
155.17   Amendments
   
155.18   Conflicting regulations
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   Whereas, the public policy of this state is declared to be that any
hazard to the safety of air flight may cause disastrous and needless loss of
life and property, that safety in air flight is of paramount importance for the
protection and well-being of the people, that the use of the air space is
constantly increasing and is vital to the continued growth, development and
enjoyment of the great natural resources and economy of this state and that the
general welfare of the citizens of this state requires, under the police powers
of the state, that maximum safety precautions to air commerce be enacted and
maintained, all as is set forth in Idaho Code § 21-513, and whereas, it is
hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users
of Fanning Field Airport and of occupants of land or to property in its
vicinity, and also, if of the obstruction type, in effect reduces the size of
the area available for the landing, taking off and maneuvering of aircraft,
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of Fanning Field Airport and the
public investment therein.
   (B)   Accordingly, it is declared:
      (1)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and an injury to the region served by Fanning Field Airport;
      (2)   It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety
and general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be
prevented; and
      (3)   The prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation.
   (C)   It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or
establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration,
mitigation or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public
purposes for which political subdivisions may raise and expend public funds and
acquire land or interests in land.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Fanning Field Airport
Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Fanning Field Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The established elevation of the highest point on the
usable landing area.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the
airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport.
   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT. The point established as the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing area and so designated.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Board appointed by the County Commissioners
pursuant to Chapter 156, or the Board of County Commissioners sitting as a
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea
level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway equipped or to be equipped with a precision
electronic navigation aid or landing aid or other air navigation facilities
suitable to permit the landing of aircraft by an instrument approach under
restricted visibility conditions.
   LANDING AREA. The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or
taxiing of aircraft.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, tree, natural growth or use
of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment thereto.
   NON-INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway other than an instrument runway.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver,
assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.
   RUNWAY. The paved surface of an airport landing strip.
   STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans, including, but
without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission
lines.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.04 ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which shall include all of the land lying
within the instrument approach zones, non-instrument approach zones, transition
zones, horizontal zone and conical zone. Such areas and zones are shown on the
Fanning Field Airport zoning map, consisting of one sheet, prepared by the City
of Idaho Falls Engineering Department, and dated October 19, 1967, denominated
Airport Vertical zoning map which is hereby declared to be an official record
and a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The various zones are hereby established and are defined as
hereinafter provided.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.05 INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONE.
   An instrument approach zone is established at each end of the instrument
runway 2-20, for instrument landings and takeoffs. The instrument approach
zones shall have a width of 1,000 feet at a distance of 200 feet beyond each
end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a
distance of 50,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.06 NON-INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONE.
   A non-instrument approach zone is established at each end of the non-
instrument runway 16-34, for non-instrument landings and takeoffs. The non-
instrument approach zone shall have a width of 500 feet at a distance of 200
feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of
2,500 feet at a distance of 10,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its
centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.07 VFR APPROACH ZONE.
   A visual flight ruled approach zone shall have a width of 200 feet at a
distance of 100 feet beyond each end of the runway widening thereafter
uniformly to a width of 500 feet at a distance of 3,100 feet beyond each end of
the runway.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.08 TRANSITION ZONES.
   (A)   Transition zones are hereby established adjacent to each instrument
and non-instrument runway and approach zone as indicated on the zoning map.
Transition zones are symmetrically located on either side of variable width as
shown on the zoning map. Transition zones extend outward from a line of 250
feet on either side of the centerline of the non-instrument runway, for the
length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end; and 500 feet on either side of
the centerline of the instrument runway, for the length of such runway plus 200
feet on each end, and are parallel and level with such runway centerline.
   (B)   The transition zones along such runways slope upward and outward one
foot vertically for each seven feet horizontally to the point where they
intersect the surface of the horizontal zone. Further, transition zones are
established adjacent to both instrument and non-instrument approach zones for
the entire length of the approach zones. These transition zones have variable
widths, as shown on the zoning map. Such transition zones flare symmetrically
with either side of the runway approach zones from the base of such zones and
slope upward and outward at the rate of one foot vertically for each seven feet
horizontally to the points where they intersect the surfaces of the horizontal
and conical zones.
   (C)   Additionally, transition zones are established adjacent to the
instrument approach zone where it projects through and beyond the limits of the
conical zone, extending a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the
edge of the instrument approach zones at right angles to the continuation of
the centerline of the runway.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.09 HORIZONTAL ZONE.
   A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area within a circle with its
center at the airport reference point and having a radius of 13,000 feet. The
horizontal zone does not include the instrument and non-instrument approach
zones and transition zones.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.10 CONICAL ZONE.
   A conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a distance of
7,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the instrument approach zones and
transition zones.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.11 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be
erected, altered, allowed to grow or maintained in any zone created by this
chapter to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such
zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in
question as follows:
   (A)   Instrument Approach Zone. One foot in height for each 50 feet in
horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the centerline
elevation of the end of the instrument runway and extending a distance of
10,200 feet from the end of the runway; thence one foot in height for each 40
feet in horizontal distance to a point 50,200 feet from the end of the runway;
   (B)   Non-instrument Approach Zones. One foot in height for each 40 or 20
feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet from and at the
centerline elevation of the end of the non-instrument runway and extending to a
point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway;
   (C)   VFR Airport Approach Zones. One foot in height for each 20 feet in
horizontal distance beginning at a point 100 feet from and at the centerline
elevation of the end of the runway and extending to a point 3,100 feet from the
end of the runway;
   (D)   Transition Zones. One foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal
distance beginning at any point 250 feet normal to and at the elevation of the
centerline of non-instrument runways, extending 200 feet beyond each end
thereof, and 500 feet normal to and at the elevation of the centerline of the
instrument runway, extending 200 feet beyond each end thereof, extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 4,738 feet above mean
sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of
one foot vertical height for each seven feet horizontal distance measured from
the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and
extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal
or conical surfaces. Further, where the instrument approach zone projects
through and beyond the conical zone, a height limit of one foot for each seven
feet of horizontal distance shall be maintained beginning at the edge of the
instrument approach zone and extending a distance of 5,000 feet from the edge
of the instrument approach zone measured normal distance of 5,000 feet from the
edge of the instrument approach zone measured normal to the centerline of the
runway extended;
   (E)   Horizontal Zone. One hundred fifty feet above the airport elevation or
a height of 4,888 feet above mean sea level;
   (F)   Conical Zone. One foot in height for each 20 feet of horizontal
distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone, extending to a
height of 500 feet above the airport elevation; and
   (G)   Excepted height limitations.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to
75 feet above the surface of the land.
      (2)   Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the
more restrictive limitations shall prevail.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.12 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of
land within any zone established by this chapter in such a manner as to create
electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare to the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing,
taking off or maneuvering of aircraft.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.13 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other
changes or alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this chapter or otherwise interfere
with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall
require any change in the constructions, alteration or intended use of any
structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the
effective date of this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this
section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to
permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and
lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Airport Manager to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such
airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the City of Idaho Falls.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.14 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses.
      (1)   Except as specifically provided in this division (A)(1), no
material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall
be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby
created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each
application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is
desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether
the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be
granted.
         (a)   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when because of
terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone.
         (b)   In the areas lying within the limits of the instrument and non-
instrument approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200
feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
instrument or non-instrument approach zone.
         (c)   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground
except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or
topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such
transition zones.
      (2)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or
growth of any structure of tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this chapter except as set forth in §
155.11.
   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to
air navigation, than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any
amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the County
Building Inspector determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his or her property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for variance from such regulations. Such
variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public
interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit
of this chapter.
   (E)   Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if
such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and
be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner
of the structure or tree in question to permit the City of Idaho Falls, at its
own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights
as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.15 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the County Building Inspector upon a form furnished by him or her.
Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the County Building
Inspector shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him or her.
Application for action by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be forthwith
transmitted by the County Building Inspector. The provisions of Chapter 156
shall be applicable for the following:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the County Building Inspector in the enforcement of this
chapter;
   (B)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter
upon which such Planning and Zoning Commission, under such regulations, may be
required to pass;
   (C)   To hear and decide specific variances;
   (D)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the County Building Inspector; and
   (E)   To provide for judicial review.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.16 MAP.
   (A)   The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on the
Fanning Field Airport zoning map of Idaho Falls, Idaho, and said map with all
notations, references and other information shown thereon is hereby declared to
be an official record and a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The Fanning Field Airport zoning map shall be identified by the
signatures of the Chairperson of the Board of County Commissioners, attested by
the County Recorder, and shall bear the seal of the county.
   (C)   The Fanning Field Airport zoning map shall be located in the office of
the County Building Inspector and shall accurately designate the current
boundary lines of the several zones within the county.
   (D)   Whenever amendments are made in zone boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Fanning Field Airport zoning map, said Fanning Field Airport
zoning map shall be promptly changed by the County Building Inspector.
   (E)   No amendment to the Fanning Field Airport zoning map shall become
effective, however, until the map has been duly changed in accordance with the
amending chapter and the amending chapter has been signed by the Chairperson of
the Board of County Commissioners and attested to by the County Recorder.
   (F)   In the event of a conflict between the chapter and zone map, the
chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.17 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   This chapter, including the map, may be amended, supplemented, changed
or modified from time to time.
   (B)   Amendments to this chapter and map may be adopted only after a public
hearing has been held in relation thereto before the Board of County
Commissioners in which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
   (C)   A notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in
the official newspaper of the county at least 15 days before the date of the
hearing.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.18 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who is found guilty of violation of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction. A conviction for violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine
of $100 and no imprisonment. The judge may also enter a permanent or temporary
injunction, restraining order or such other relief, as the court deems
appropriate. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Construction and purpose
   
156.002   Conflict
   
156.003   Definitions
   
156.004   Nonconforming uses
   
156.005   Repairs
   
156.006   Discontinuance
   
156.007   Reclassification
   
156.008   Interpretation
   
156.009   Registration of nonconforming uses
   
156.010   Amendments
   
156.011   Public hearing; notice
   
156.012   Limitations on petitions to amend
   
156.013   Conditional use permits
   
156.014   Notice
Supplementary Regulations to Zones
   
156.025   Yard space for one building only
   
156.026   Sale or lease of required space
   
156.027   Sale of lots below minimum space requirements
   
156.028   Yards to be unobstructed, graded and elevated
   
156.029   Area of accessory buildings
   
156.030   Additional height allowed for public buildings
   
156.031   Clear view of intersection streets
   
156.032   Effect of official map
   
156.033   Width required for dwelling sites
   
156.034   Flood channels and water courses
   
156.035   Swimming pools
   
156.036   Concessions in public parks and playgrounds
   
156.037   Land previously subdivided
   
156.038   Agricultural land
   
156.039   School, church and park standards
   
156.040   Agricultural building exceptions
   
156.041   Prohibitions of uses
   
156.042   Location of gasoline pumps and canopy standards
   
156.043   Domestic water and sewage disposal
   
156.044   Setbacks from major county roads
   
156.045   Public dumping grounds
   
156.046   Excavations
   
156.047   Location of livestock facilities
   
156.048   Parking and loading space
   
156.049   Off-street parking required
   
156.050   Parking space for dwellings
   
156.051   Parking space for buildings or uses other than dwellings
   
156.052   Parking space for churches, schools, hospitals and certain other uses
   
156.053   Collective provisions
   
156.054   Parking space regulations
   
156.055   Off-street truck loading space
   
156.056   Off-street loading space at schools
   
156.057   Motor vehicle access
   
156.058   Roadways and curbs
   
156.059   Access requirements to county roads
   
156.060   Purpose of regulations
   
156.061   Dwellings to front upon streets
   
156.062   Fences and controls for sight obstruction
   
156.063   Supplement to definition of subdivision and development standards
   
156.064   Drainage standards; drainage design and maintenance
   
156.065   Location of manufactured homes
   
156.066   Animal regulations
   
156.067   Wind generation facilities
   
156.068   Hobbyist apiaries
   
156.069   Temporary uses and structures
   
156.070   Public facilities
   
156.071   Cemetery approval standards
Enforcement and Administration
   
156.085   Office of Zoning Administrator established
   
156.086   Permits required; exceptions
   
156.087   Powers and duties of the enforcing officers
   
156.088   Building permits required; fees
   
156.089   Permits to comply with zoning regulations
   
156.090   Variances allowed
   
156.091   Organization of the Commission
   
156.092   Decision on appeals
   
156.093   Appeals; application; form
   
156.094   Notice of hearing
   
156.095   Power and duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission
   
156.096   Appeal from decision of Commission
   
156.097   Business license to be approved by Zoning Administrator
Establishment of Zones
   
156.110   Division of county into zones
   
156.111   Zone map
   
156.112   Regulations
   
156.113   Location of zone boundaries
A-1, Agricultural Zone
   
156.125   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.126   Permitted uses
   
156.127   Uses
   
156.128   Standards controlling use hearings
   
156.129   Area
   
156.130   Width
   
156.131   Front yard
   
156.132   Side yards
   
156.133   Rear yard
   
156.134   Special provisions
RA-1, Residential Agricultural Zone
   
156.145   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.146   Permitted uses
   
156.147   Area
   
156.148   Width
   
156.149   Front yard
   
156.150   Side yard
   
156.151   Rear yard
   
156.152   Barns and corrals
   
156.153   Height of buildings
RA-2, Residential Agricultural Zone
   
156.165   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.166   Permitted uses
   
156.167   Area
   
156.168   Width
   
156.169   Front yard
   
156.170   Side yard
   
156.171   Rear yard
   
156.172   Barns and corrals
   
156.173   Height of buildings
RA-3, Residential Agricultural Zone
   
156.185   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.186   Permitted uses
   
156.187   Area
   
156.188   Width
   
156.189   Front yard
   
156.190   Side yard
   
156.191   Rear yard
   
156.192   Barns and corrals
   
156.193   Height of buildings
RA-4, Residential Agricultural Zone
   
156.205   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.206   Permitted uses
   
156.207   Area
   
156.208   Width
   
156.209   Front yard
   
156.210   Side yard
   
156.211   Rear yard
   
156.212   Barns and corrals
   
156.213   Height of buildings
R-P, Residence Park Zone
   
156.225   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.226   Permitted uses
   
156.227   Area
   
156.228   Width
   
156.229   Front yard
   
156.230   Side yard
   
156.231   Rear yard
   
156.232   Special provisions
   
156.233   Lot coverage
R-1, Residence Zone
   
156.245   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.246   Permitted uses
   
156.247   Area
   
156.248   Width
   
156.249   Front yard
   
156.250   Side yard
   
156.251   Rear yard
   
156.252   Height of buildings
   
156.253   Lot coverage
R-1.5, Residence Zone
   
156.265   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.266   Permitted uses
   
156.267   Area
   
156.268   Width
   
156.269   Front yard
   
156.270   Side yard
   
156.271   Rear yard
   
156.272   Height of buildings
   
156.273   Lot coverage
R-2, Residence Zone
   
156.285   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.286   Permitted uses
   
156.287   Area
   
156.288   Width
   
156.289   Front yard
   
156.290   Side yard
   
156.291   Rear yard
   
156.292   Height of buildings
   
156.293   Lot coverage and landscaping
R-3, Residence Zone
   
156.305   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.306   Permitted uses
   
156.307   Area
   
156.308   Width
   
156.309   Location of buildings and structures
   
156.310   Side yard
   
156.311   Rear yard
   
156.312   Height requirements
   
156.313   Size of buildings
   
156.314   Lot coverage and landscaping
MH, Manufactured Home Zone and Regulations
   
156.325   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.326   Location
   
156.327   MH Zone
   
156.328   Permitted uses
   
156.329   Lot coverage
   
156.330   Mobile home court regulations; standards and requirements
   
156.331   Travel trailer park; standards and requirements
   
156.332   Manufactured home and mobile home subdivision; standards and
requirements
LNC, Limited Neighborhood Commercial Zone
   
156.345   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.346   Permitted uses
   
156.347   Standards
   
156.348   Location
   
156.349   Height of buildings
   
156.350   Other standards
SC-1, Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone
   
156.365   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.366   Development plan
   
156.367   Permitted uses
   
156.368   Area
   
156.369   Width
   
156.370   Location
   
156.371   Height of buildings
   
156.372   Size of buildings
   
156.373   Special provisions
C-1, Limited Commercial Zone
   
156.385   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.386   Permitted uses
   
156.387   Area, width, location, height and size
   
156.388   Special provisions
HC-1, Limited Business Zone
   
156.400   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.401   Permitted uses
   
156.402   Area, width, location, height and size
   
156.403   Special provisions
C-2, General Commercial Zone
   
156.415   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.416   Permitted uses
   
156.417   Area
   
156.418   Width
   
156.419   Location of buildings and structures
   
156.420   Height of buildings
   
156.421   Size
   
156.422   Lot coverage
   
156.423   Special provisions
P-B, Professional Business Office Zone
   
156.435   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.436   Permitted uses
   
156.437   Area and width
   
156.438   Location
   
156.439   Height of buildings
   
156.440   Buffering
M-1, Manufacturing Zone
   
156.455   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.456   Permitted uses
   
156.457   Area
   
156.458   Width
   
156.459   Location
   
156.460   Height of buildings
   
156.461   Size of buildings
   
156.462   Lot coverage
   
156.463   Special provisions
M-1A, Manufacturing Zone
   
156.475   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.476   Permitted uses
   
156.477   Area
   
156.478   Width
   
156.479   Location
   
156.480   Height of buildings
   
156.481   Size of buildings
   
156.482   Lot coverage
   
156.483   Special provisions
I&M-1, Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
   
156.495   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.496   Permitted uses
   
156.497   Area
   
156.498   Width
   
156.499   Location
   
156.500   Height of buildings
   
156.501   Size of buildings
   
156.502   Special provisions
I&M-2, Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
   
156.515   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.516   Permitted uses
   
156.517   Area
   
156.518   Width
   
156.519   Height of buildings
   
156.520   Size of buildings
   
156.521   Location
I&M-3, Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
   
156.535   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.536   Permitted uses
   
156.537   Special provisions
   
156.538   Site buffering system
   
156.539   Width
R-F, Recreational-Forestry Zone
   
156.550   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.551   Permitted uses
   
156.552   Area
   
156.553   Width
   
156.554   Front yard
   
156.555   Side yard
   
156.556   Rear yard
   
156.557   Special provisions
   
156.558   Planning Commission approval
G-1, Grazing Zone
   
156.570   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.571   Permitted uses
   
156.572   Area
   
156.573   Width
   
156.574   Location
   
156.575   Height of buildings
   
156.576   Size of buildings
B-1, Buffer Zone
   
156.590   General objectives and characteristics
   
156.591   Permitted uses
PUD, Planned Unit Development
   
156.605   Definitions
   
156.606   Purpose
   
156.607   Priority of PUD
   
156.608   Designations
   
156.609   Provisions governing unit development
   
156.610   Minimum area
   
156.611   Uses permitted
   
156.612   Ownership requirements
   
156.613   Common open space
   
156.614   Utility requirements
   
156.615   Increased residential density
   
156.616   Standards and criteria for residential uses
   
156.617   Standards and criteria for commercial uses
   
156.618   Standards and criteria for industrial areas
   
156.619   Standards and criteria for all uses
   
156.620   Procedure for approval of a planned unit development
   
156.621   Pre-application meeting
   
156.622   Contents of application for approval of preliminary development plan
   
156.623   Procedure for public notice
   
156.624   Approval in principle by the Commission
   
156.625   Contents of application for approval of final development plan
   
156.626   Recommendation by Commission
   
156.627   Action by the Board
   
156.628   Expiration and extension of approval period
   
156.629   Fees
Subdivision Regulations
   
156.640   Approval required for subdivision
   
156.641   Application of regulations
   
156.642   Application for preliminary plat approval
   
156.643   Pre-application procedure
   
156.644   Preliminary plat approval
   
156.645   Procedure for approval of final plat
   
156.646   Preliminary plat
   
156.647   Final plat
   
156.648   Variances and appeals
   
156.649   Expenses for processing application
   
156.650   Design standards
   
156.651   Required improvements
Moving of Buildings
   
156.665   Moving of buildings
   
156.666   Application
   
156.667   Requirements for approval of application
   
156.668   Requirements prior to occupancy
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 CONSTRUCTION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning and
Building Ordinance of Bonneville County.”
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive zoning plan
adopted in accordance with the provisions here are:
      (1)   To promote the health, safety, peace, morals, convenience, order,
prosperity, free enterprise and general welfare of the residents of the county;
      (2)   To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development within
the county;
      (3)   To secure safety from fire, floods, traffic and other hazards;
      (4)   To achieve economy in providing fire and police protection and
other governmental services;
      (5)   To reduce traffic congestion and to permit the most efficient use
of streets and roads in the county;
      (6)   To maintain an adequate tax base;
      (7)   To foster the growth and development of agriculture and industry;
      (8)   To maintain property values;
      (9)   To avoid undue concentration of population; and
      (10)   To facilitate the making of adequate provisions to meet public
needs which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the requirements for
transportation, water, sewage, other public utilities and schools.
   (C)   Declaration. In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof and the
regulations applicable to each of the zones, due and careful consideration has
been given to such factors as the suitability of land for particular uses and
the need to preserve the value of land and buildings and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land within the county. In the preparation of this chapter
and the comprehensive zoning plan adopted in accordance with the provisions
hereof, consideration has been given to the location, boundaries and probable
future growth of cities, villages, reservations and other areas which are not
subject to zoning regulations adopted by the Board of County Commissioners and
to the zoning regulations applicable within such cities, villages or
reservations.
   (D)   Interpretation and intent. This chapter shall be liberally construed
to affect its purposes and to achieve the objectives and characteristics of the
zones established pursuant thereto.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.002 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to nullify any provisions of
covenants, agreements or other ordinances or laws which are more restrictive
than the provisions hereof, but this chapter shall prevail and be controlling
in the event of any conflict between the provisions hereof and any provisions
of covenants, agreements or other ordinances or laws which are less
restrictive.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words in
the present tense include the future, and the future includes the present; the
singular number includes the plural and plural the singular; the words SHALL
and MUST are always mandatory.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building.
   ACCESSORY USE. A related use which is incidental to the prescribed and
permitted use.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Bonneville County Zoning Administrator.
   AGRICULTURE. The growing of soil crops in the customary manner in the open,
on tracts of land which size is dependent upon the “growth ring” in which the
parcel of ground is located. In “growth ring one,” the size is ten acres or
larger, in “growth ring two,” the size is 20 acres or larger and in “growth
ring three,” the size is 60 acres or larger. AGRICULTURE shall include all
farming and livestock raising activities associated with the acreage so used in
the neighborhood where situated. AGRICULTURE shall also include the incidental
retail selling on the premises of goods and products raised on the premises,
and the placing of non-agriculturally related dwellings in accordance with
zoning restrictions.
   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. A building or structure designed and constructed for
agricultural use.
   ALLEY. A public way primarily for utility use and for servicing the property
adjacent thereto.
   ANIMAL UNITS. The number of animals multiplied by applicable animal
equivalency factor.
   ANIMAL WASTE. Animal excrement, feed wastes, process wastewater or any other
waste associated with the confinement of animals.
   ANIMAL WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. Any structure or system that provides for
the collection, treatment or storage of animal waste.
   APARTMENT. Any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented,
leased or let to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of
two or more families living in independent units each with private bathroom and
cooking facilities.
   APIARY. A place where bee colonies are kept.
   BEE. Any stage of the life cycle of the common domestic honey bee, Apis
mellifera, species.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (FOR ANIMALS). A practice or combination of
practices found to be the most effective, practicable means of preventing or
reducing the amount of pollution or odor generated by a source, point or non-
point, to a level compatible with water quality, nutrient management, waste
management and air pollution goals.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. Where a dwelling is
separated by a division wall with no openings, each portion of such dwelling
shall be deemed to be a separate BUILDING.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Zoning Administrator.
   BOARD. The Bonneville County Board of County Commissioners.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building containing not more than one kitchen where meals
are provided for compensation for three or more persons pursuant to a previous
agreement on at least a weekly basis as distinguished from a hotel or café. For
the purpose of this chapter, where the number of boarders are two persons or
less, such boarders shall be considered as part of the family.
   CABANA or ADD-ON. A building or shelter constructed on a mobile home space
and used for storage or shelter purposes by the occupants of the space on which
the CABANA or ADD-ON is located.
   CAFO. Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation, as defined by the Department of
Agriculture.
   CAFO FACILITY. A contiguous area or parcel of land or the use of a
contiguous area or parcel of land, upon which there are confined or fed
livestock, fish or birds in enclosures or ponds for 45 days or more of the
year, which does not sustain crops, vegetation or forage growth in the normal
growing season or post-harvest residues, and which consists of any combination
of animal units which total 1,000 animal units. Areas or parcels of land are
deemed contiguous when separated by county roads. Areas or parcels of land also
are deemed contiguous if they are not adjacent, but are owned or operated by a
CAFO operator and a pipeline exists which is capable of conveying process
wastewater to the non-adjacent land.
   CAFO IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements to the CAFO real property, including, but
not limited to, buildings, barns, feed stalls, feeding yards, corrals, feed
containment structures or areas, the waste lagoon and truck or motor vehicle
parking areas. CAFO IMPROVEMENTS do not include ditches or irrigation systems
used to transport or apply animal waste.
   CAMPGROUND. An area open to the public and operated either by public
authority or as a private business where space and certain facilities, which
may include grocery stores, and services, which may include utilities, are
provided for accommodation and parking of campers and trailer houses and for
similar uses.
   CARPORT. A structure enclosed by only two walls for the shelter of
automobiles.
   CEMETERY. A place or grounds set apart for the burial of the dead for which
perpetual care and maintenance is provided.
   COLONY. A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb,
honey, pollen and brood.
   COMMERCIAL BEEKEEPER. A person engaged in the management of honey bees for
their products and for pollination services.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of Bonneville County, Idaho.
   COUNTY. Bonneville County, Idaho.
   COURT. An open space surrounded by buildings other than a side, rear or
front yard.
   CURB CUT. A cut in the curb line for passage of vehicles.
   DAYCARE NURSERY. A dwelling or building in which daytime care is provided
for children for which compensation is paid and which is licensed by or
otherwise regulated by public authority.
   DEDICATION. The setting apart of land interests in land for use by the
public.
   DISTRICT. Zone.
   DWELLING. Any building which is used for residential purposes, except a
hotel, tourist court, boarding or rooming house, rest home or child care home.
   EASEMENT. A grant of the right to use a strip or parcel of land for specific
purposes.
   ENGINEER. The individual or individuals appointed by the County
Commissioners to perform the work prescribed by this chapter. The function is
an assigned responsibility and does not require a specific certification.
   ERECTED. Constructed, altered, moved or repaired.
   ESTABLISHED GRADE. The grade of the street curb line and established by the
Board of County Commissioners.
   EXISTING FACILITY (CAFO). A facility built and in operation at the time of
the effective date of this chapter.
   EXPANDING FACILITY (CAFO). An existing facility that increases its one-time
animal unit capacity to 1,000 or more animal units or increases its one-time
animal unit capacity above that which had been previously approved.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption living together in a dwelling unit. For the purpose of this chapter,
guests in excess of two shall be considered as boarders and the building in
which they abide shall be considered as a boarding house.
   FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION. The keeping of domestic animals and fowl for the
production of food for the sale and use of the family occupying the premises.
   FINAL PLAT. The plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication or any portion
thereof prepared for filing and recording with the County Recorder in
compliance with the provisions of §§
156.640 through
156.651. After such plat has been properly filed and recorded, it shall
thereafter be known as an authorized plat, subdivision or dedication.
   FLOOR AREA. The floor area of a building and the sum of the areas of the
several floors of the building, including basements, mezzanine and intermediate
floored tiers and penthouses of headroom height, measured from the exterior
walls or from the centerline of walls separating buildings. For purposes of
this definition, the architectural area of covered walkways, open roofed-over
areas that are paved, porches and similar spaces shall be multiplied by a
factor of 0.50. The architectural area shall not include such features as pipe
trenches, exterior terraces or steps, chimneys or roof overhangs.
   GARAGE. A building or portion thereof for the housing or care of self-
propelled vehicles.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Director of the County Department of Health, or any
member of the staff of such Department who is authorized to act for the
Director.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance from the grade to the square of
the building.
   HIGHWAY. A street so designated as a state or federal highway by the state
or federal agency responsible therefor.
   HIVE. A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. A HIVE typically
consists of a cover, supers, brood chambers and a bottom board.
   HOBBYIST BEEKEEPER. A person engaged in the management of honey bees for
pleasure and whose stock does not exceed nine colonies.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession conducted entirely within the
dwelling and carried on by persons residing therein and which does not involve
the regular sale of products that are not produced on the premises.
Agricultural products must be nurtured on-site for a minimum of one growing
season.
   HORSE FOR PRIVATE USE. A horse kept and maintained for the pleasure and use
of the occupants of a dwelling, and not used for commercial purposes.
   HOTEL. Any building used, rented or hired out to be occupied on a daily or
weekly basis for sleeping purposes by guests.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Animals or fowl customarily permitted in the house and kept
for company or pleasure, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, canaries
and chinchillas.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs over four months of
age are kept.
   LAND APPLICATION. The spreading on or incorporation of animal waste into the
soil mantle primarily for beneficial purposes.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building or buildings together
with such spaces as required under this chapter and having its principal
frontage on a street or an officially approved place. The word LOT also means
building sites without reference to lots as recorded on official plats, and
includes the word plot, tract or parcel of land as the sense may require it.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot situated at a junction of two public streets or
situated on a curved street or way whose radius is 35 degrees or less and where
the angle formed by the intersection of the tangent is 105 degrees or less.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot.
      (3)   THROUGH LOT. A lot having frontage on two streets which are
parallel or nearly so.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure which does not comply with the International
Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire Codes, but do comply with
accepted HUD manufactured home standards, which are used as residential living
units only per their listing. Other uses of HUD units are not allowed.
   MANUFACTURED HOME COURT. A tract of land five acres or more retained under
one ownership for the purpose of lease or rental of spaces for the placement of
mobile homes, as defined in this chapter; or any lot or parcel of land whether
for rent, lease, hire or otherwise, where two or more manufactured homes are
parked and used for living and/or sleeping purposes, including any buildings,
structures, vehicles or enclosures used or designed for use as a part of the
facilities for such manufactured home court that is located on a tract of land
five acres or more retained under one ownership for the purpose of lease or
rental of spaces for the placement of mobile homes as defined in this chapter.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME COURT shall be deemed to be synonymous with the
terms TRAILER PARK, TRAILER CAMP and such other terms as may be used to
identify similar facilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A parcel of ground in a manufactured home park,
manufactured home subdivision or manufactured home planned unit development
intended to be leased, rented or sold as a place to locate a mobile home for
dwelling purposes.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PAD. The area upon which the mobile or manufactured home
will be placed, the area of which would be covered by the mobile or
manufactured home perimeter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a manufactured home court
designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A tract of land five acres or more,
subdivided according to the subdivision rules and regulations county, to
provide for the sale of individual lots for the express purpose of placement of
mobile and/or manufactured homes.
   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle used or constructed to permit its use as a
conveyance upon the public streets or highways and to permit occupancy thereof
as a dwelling or a sleeping place for one or more persons. The term is
synonymous with TRAILER HOUSE and manufactured homes built prior to June 15,
1976.
   MULTI-SECTIONAL MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home consisting of two or
more sections lined horizontally at the site to form a single dwelling, while
still retaining their individual chassis for possible future movement.
   NEW FACILITY. A new CAFO having a one-time animal unit capacity of 1,000 or
more animal units, which is built after the effective date of this chapter.
   NON-CAFO SITE. Any site with less than 1,000 animal units.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building, structure or portion thereof which does
not conform to the regulations of this chapter applicable to the zone or
district in which such building is situated.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building or land occupied by a use that does not
conform with the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. A school operated on a regular basis which provides daytime
care or instruction for two or more children from two to five years of age,
inclusive.
   NURSING HOME. A building or portion thereof where nursing care is provided
for five or more persons who are aged, ill or infirm.
   NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN. A plan prepared in compliance with the nutrient
management standard or other equally protective standard approved by the
Director of the State Department of Agriculture or his or her designee for
managing the amount, source, placement, form and timing of the land application
of nutrients and soil amendments for plant production and to minimize potential
for environmental degradation, particularly impairment of water quality and
complying with best management practices.
   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. An area adjoining a building providing for the
parking of motor vehicles which does not include but has convenient access to a
public street.
   ONE-TIME ANIMAL UNIT CAPACITY. The maximum number of animal units that a
facility is permitted to and is capable of housing at any given point in time.
   POTATO WAREHOUSE. A building or structure used for the storage of potatoes
or for grading, packing and shipping of potatoes, but not including the
manufacture of processed potato products.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A preliminary plan of the plat, subdivision or dedication
containing the elements and requirements set forth in §§
156.640 through
156.651.
   REGISTRANT. The owner or operator of an existing facility in existence at
the passage of this chapter who files a registration notice with the office of
the Administrator and provides the information required under this chapter.
   REPLAT. A change in the plat of an approved or recorded subdivision that
affects the layout of any street or area reserved for public use, or which
creates any additional lots.
   RESIDENCE COURT. A group of one-story buildings connected or detached facing
directly on a street or common court which opens into a street.
   ROADWAY. A means of vehicular access in a mobile, manufactured home or
travel trailer court, which is not a dedicated street.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building containing not more than one kitchen where for
compensation, lodging is provided for three or more persons pursuant to
previous arrangement on at least a weekly basis as distinguished from a hotel.
For the purpose of this chapter, where the number of roomers are two or less,
such roomers shall be considered a part of a family.
   SALVAGE YARD. A place where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled or stored,
including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards and lumber yards and places
or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials
and equipment, but not including such places where such uses are conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawn shops
and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and
household equipment, used cars in operable condition or salvage materials
incidental to manufacturing operations conducted on the premises.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. A place dedicated by and subject to supervision and
maintenance by public authority for the dumping or disposal of garbage, trash
and other waste material by the public.
   SCREENING. The use of any structure or material primarily for the purpose of
obstructing vision.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A building housing facilities for the use of the public
and occupants within a mobile/manufactured home court, including laundry
equipment and facilities, slop-water closet, toilet and bathing facilities.
   SERVICE STATION. A building or portion thereof and the adjacent land used in
connection therewith for the purpose of selling gasoline and other fuels, oil
and other supplies, as well as certain parts, accessories, batteries, tires and
other materials, and for the furnishing of services for motor vehicles,
including minor repairs.
   SETBACK. The shortest distance between the property line and the building or
part thereof.
   SHOP. A building or portion thereof in which goods and merchandise are sold
at retail or where mechanical work is performed and the products of such work
are sold or where mechanics otherwise carry on their trade.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and
the ceiling next above it.
   STREET. A right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
adjacent properties, the dedication of which the Board has accepted by official
action. It shall include the terms street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other similar terms.
      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street used primarily for fast or heavy traffic
when designated as such by the Board.
      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street used primarily for carrying traffic from
minor streets to arterial streets when designated as such by the Board.
      (3)   FRONTAGE STREET. A minor street parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial street providing access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
      (4)   HALF STREET. A portion of the width of a street, usually along the
edge of a subdivision where the remaining portion of the street could be
provided in another subdivision.
      (5)   MINOR STREET. A street used exclusively for access to abutting
properties.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as the bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or roof.
   STRUCTURE. A building or other object constructed, erected or installed by
humans, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, smoke stacks, lines
and poles for the transmission of electricity, mine or pit, railroad tracks and
anything else that is built or constructed.
   SUBDIVIDER. An individual, firm or group who undertake the subdivision of a
lot, tract or parcel of land for the dedication of streets or changes in the
street or lot lines.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into three or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development or if
a new street is involved. The term includes re-subdivision and, when
appropriate to the content, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to
the land subdivided. A division of land uses for agricultural purposes into
lots or parcels of ten acres or more and not involving a new street shall not
be deemed a SUBDIVISION.
   TOURIST COURT. A group of residence units detached or connected wherein each
unit contains not less than one living and/or sleeping room, a bathroom and a
garage or parking space, which units face on one or more common courts, places
or streets. The term shall be synonymous with AUTO COURT, MOTOR COURT, MOTEL
and MOTOR HOTEL.
   TRAVEL TRAILER COURT. A tract of land five acres or more retained in one
ownership, for the purpose of rental of spaces for temporary placement of
travel trailers, as defined in this chapter.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. Includes all living accommodation units, which are capable
of unrestricted highway use, and not placed upon any foundation. The term shall
include, but not be limited to, travel trailers, motor home units, campers
mounted on automotive vehicles and camping tents.
   UNINCORPORATED TERRITORY. All of the territory within the boundaries of the
county, which lies outside of incorporated cities and villages.
   UTILITIES. Facilities for service to, and used by, the public, including
electrical power, water, gas, telephone service and other similar services.
   YARD. An open space on the lot with a building unoccupied or unobstructed
from the ground upward, as otherwise provided in this chapter.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. The minimum horizontal distance between the street line
and the front line of the building or any projection thereof excluding steps.
      (2)   REAR YARD. A yard unoccupied by an accessory building as
hereinafter permitted extending across the full width of a lot between the rear
line of a building or structure and the rear line of the lot. Where the lot
lines are not parallel and/or where the slant line or the rear wall of the
building or structure is not parallel with the rear property line, the rear
yard setback shall be not less than twice the distance from the rear wall of
the building or structure to the center of gravity of the plane area of the
REAR YARD, measured perpendicular to rear wall of the building or structure.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. A yard between the building and side line of the lot and
extending from the street line to the rear of the lot. Porches and similar
structures shall be considered as part of the building.
   ZONE. District.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Building Inspector.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.004 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The nonconforming use of buildings, structures and land may be continued to
the same extent and character as that which existed on the effective date of
this chapter. New and additional buildings, structures and uses of land must
conform to the provisions of this chapter, and no nonconforming use of
buildings, structures or land shall be extended or enlarged.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.005 REPAIRS.
   Repairs may be made to a building constituting a nonconforming use or a
building housing a nonconforming use, but subject to the relevant provision of
Idaho law pertaining to applicable Building Code and expansion of a
nonconforming use or of increasing the capacity or volume of business.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.006 DISCONTINUANCE.
   If a nonconforming use of land or use of a building is changed to a
conforming use or is discontinued for a period of one year or more, any further
use of said building or land or construction, alteration or repairs to
building, shall thereafter be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.007 RECLASSIFICATION.
   The provisions relating to nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall
also apply to buildings, structures, land or uses, which shall hereafter become
nonconforming due to any change in regulations or reclassification of land.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.008 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for
the purposes set forth.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.009 REGISTRATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   The owner of land on which a nonconforming use is located shall file in the
office of the Zoning Administrator a statement describing such nonconforming
use, together with an affidavit stating the time that such use came into
existence. The Zoning Administrator shall preserve such statements and
affidavits and issue a certificate of occupancy on the basis of such documents.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.010 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   This chapter and the zone map may be amended in the manner herein
provided. A proposed amendment must: be considered reasonably necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter; serve the public interest; and be in
harmony with the purposes and objectives of this chapter. For the purpose of
establishing and maintaining sound, stable and orderly development within the
county, it is declared to be the public policy that amendments shall not be
made to the zoning ordinances and zone map except to promote more fully the
objectives and purposes of the land use plan or to correct manifest errors.
   (B)   Any person may petition the Commission for a plan amendment at any
time. The Commission may recommend amendments to the plan to the County
Commissioners not more frequently than every six months to correct errors in
the original plan or to recognize substantial changes in the actual conditions
in the area. The Commission may recommend amendments to other ordinances
authorized by this chapter to the Board of County Commissioners on its own
initiative at any time.
   (C)   Any person seeking an amendment, rezone, conditional use, special use,
use hearing or any other matter before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
pay a filing fee of $100 plus $6 for each certified letter which is required to
be sent plus mailing and publication costs. Said fee shall not be returnable.
The applicant shall submit to the County Zoning Administrator a petition in
writing describing the request desired. The petition shall set forth the
reasons for the requested change and wherein the proposed amendment would
promote the objectives and purposes of this chapter.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a petition proposing an amendment to a zoning
ordinance or zone map, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit the same to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider such petition and
shall hold a public hearing before making any recommendation to the Board of
County Commissioners. Notice of any public hearing before the Commission shall
be at least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and a
summary of the amendment to be discussed shall be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the area. The Commission shall
also make available a notice to other papers, radio and television stations
serving the jurisdiction for use as a public service announcement. The
applicant shall post the notice on the premises not less than one week prior to
the hearing. Following the Commission hearing, if the Commission makes a
material change in the amendment, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the Commission forwards the plan with its recommendation to the Board of
County Commissioners. A record of the hearings, findings made and actions taken
shall be maintained. The failure on the part of the Planning Commission to take
action on any proposed amendment within 40 days from the date of receipt of the
petition by the Zoning Administrator shall constitute approval of such proposed
amendment by the Planning Commission unless a longer period is granted by the
County Commissioners.
      (1)   If the request is in accordance with the adopted plan, the Planning
Commission may recommend acceptance or rejection of the ordinance amendment
under the notice and hearing procedures, provided that in the case of a zoning
district boundary change, additional notice shall be provided by mail to
property owners and residents within the land being considered; 300 feet of the
external boundaries of the land being considered; and any additional area that
may be impacted by the proposed change as determined by the Commission. When
notice is required to 200 or more property owners or residents, alternate forms
of procedures, which would provide adequate notice may be provided by local
ordinance in lieu of mailed notice.
      (2)   If the request is not in accordance with the adopted plan, the
request shall be submitted to the Planning Commission, which shall recommend
acceptance or rejection of an amendment to the plan under the notice and
hearing procedures. After the plan has been amended, the Planning Commission
may recommend acceptance or rejection of the zoning ordinance amendment.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.011 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   Amendments to this chapter and the zone map may be adopted only after
at least one public hearing before the County Commissioners, notice of which
being the same notice and hearing procedures as the Commission’s, at which
parties in interest and any member of the public shall have the right to appear
and be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing and the nature of
the proposed amendment shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (B)   The County Commissioners shall not hold a public hearing upon the
ordinance, amendments or appeals until a recommendation from the Commission has
been received.
   (C)   Amendments to the zoning ordinance and zone map may be adopted only
upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board of County
Commissioners, unless a different vote is required by law.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.012 LIMITATIONS ON PETITIONS TO AMEND.
   Following final action by the Board of County Commissioners on any petition
to amend the zoning and planning ordinance of the county’s zone map, as herein
above provided, no further petition to amend raising the same or substantially
the same parcel of real property, can be submitted to the County Planning and
Zoning Commission within a period of six months following final action on the
previous petition to amend by the Board of County Commissioners. For the
purposes of this section, FINAL ACTION BY THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
means the adoption or rejection of a petition to amend by the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.013 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   The Board of County Commissioners may grant conditional use permits. Prior
to approving the conditional use permit, the Board shall conduct at least one
public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be
heard. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place and
a summary of the plan to be discussed shall be published in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction for use as a
public service announcement. Following the Board hearing, if the Board makes a
material change in the permit, further notice and hearing shall be provided
before the Board approves said conditional use. A record of the hearings,
findings made and actions taken shall be maintained. Conditional use permits
will only be issued for uses, which will exist for a period of time of less
than six months and will be reviewed utilizing the criteria specified in §
156.128.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.014 NOTICE.
   Notice shall also be provided to property owners and residents within the
land being considered, within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the land
being considered and within any additional area that may be substantially
impacted by the proposed special use as determined by the County Commissioners.
When notice is required to 200 or more property owners or residents, alternate
forms of procedures, which would provide adequate notice may be provided by
local ordinance in lieu of mailed notice.
(Ord. passed - -)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS TO ZONES
§ 156.025 YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY.
   No yard or other open space around an existing building or which is required
herein for any building to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as yard or open space for any other building, nor shall any yard or
other space on a lot adjoining a lot on which a building is to be located be
considered as providing yard or open space for such building.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.026 SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE.
   No space required to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this chapter for any lot or building may be sold or leased
apart from such lot or building unless sufficient space remains to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.027 SALE OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area
requirements for the zone in which it is located may be severed and sold apart
from such larger parcel for the purpose of locating a building or other
development thereon.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.028 YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED, GRADED AND ELEVATED.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed
except for permitted accessory buildings. All yards are to be graded up to and
along the perimeter of all structures to prevent the accumulation of water to a
point one foot above the adjacent terrain. In areas subject to backup
accumulation of water because of roads, structures must be backfilled to a
point one foot above the adjacent road elevation.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.029 AREA OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building or group of accessory buildings in a residential zone
shall cover more than 30% of the rear yard.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.030 ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   Public buildings, public utility buildings, public and parochial schools and
churches may be erected to any height, provided the building is set back from
required building setback lines at least one foot for each additional foot of
building height above the maximum height otherwise permitted in the zone in
which the building is located.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.031 CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTION STREETS.
   In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of
three feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area
formed by the street property lines and the line connecting them at points 40
feet from the intersection of the street lines, except for a reasonable number
of trees pruned at least seven feet above curb or grade or high enough to
permit unobstructed view, whichever is greater, and except for pumps at
gasoline service stations.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.032 EFFECT OF OFFICIAL MAP.
   Wherever a front yard is required for a lot facing on a street for which an
official map has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, the depth
of such front yard shall be measured from the map street line as shown on the
official map or from the existing street or right-of-way line, whichever is the
greater distance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.033 WIDTH REQUIRED FOR DWELLING SITES.
   At least one side of each lot used as a dwelling site shall abut upon a
public street, and the length of such abutting side measured at the building
line shall be at least as great as the width required for dwelling sites in the
zone in which such building is located except for lots on culs-de-sac, the
lot’s frontage shall be maintained at the prescribed width for the zone from
the street right-of-way line to the front of the dwelling itself.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.034 FLOOD CHANNELS AND WATER COURSES.
   No building or structure shall be constructed within the banks of and within
75 feet out from the banks of a natural flood channel except as permitted by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
not grant a permit for a building or a structure unless and until adequate
measures are taken to prevent damage due to floods.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.035 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   Swimming pools not completely enclosed within a building having solid
walls shall be set back at least five feet from the property lines and shall be
completely surrounded by fence or wall having a height of at least five feet.
   (B)   There shall be no openings larger than 36 square inches except for
gates, which shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices.
Installation of an adequate approved cover may be substituted for the fencing
requirements.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.036 CONCESSIONS IN PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.
   Concessions, including, but not limited to, amusement devices, recreational
buildings and refreshment stands, shall be permitted on a public park or
playground when approved by the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.037 LAND PREVIOUSLY SUBDIVIDED.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any lot or parcel of
land which was of record at the time this chapter became effective may be used
as a dwelling site in any zone in which dwellings are listed as a permitted use
provided the front, side and rear setback requirements are complied with.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.038 AGRICULTURAL LAND.
   The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to deprive the owner
of agricultural land of the full and complete use of said land for the
production of any agricultural products. For the purpose of this section, the
definition of AGRICULTURAL shall be found in §
156.003, and may include canal and railroad rights-of-way, which is used
exclusively for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.039 SCHOOL, CHURCH AND PARK STANDARDS.
   (A)   These facilities should be located on collector streets that are near
to an arterial street. All structures shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet
from all side and rear property lines. All exterior lighting shall be designed
so as to avoid direct glare on the adjacent residential uses. The facility
shall be designed so as to be in harmony with the neighborhood with appropriate
buffers and landscaping.
   (B)   Adequate pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns shall be designed
for, while still limiting the impact to the neighborhood and the road system.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.040 AGRICULTURAL BUILDING EXCEPTIONS.
   Exceptions to the Uniform Building Code for agricultural buildings will be
granted upon compliance with the following items.
   (A)   The parcel upon which the exemption is sought must be an agricultural
unit of land of five acres or more. Aggregation of acreage may be allowed.
   (B)   To be excluded from the Building Code, it must be a structure designed
and constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or
other horticultural products. The structure shall not be a place of human
habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed,
treated or packaged; nor shall it be a place used by the public.
   (C)   The agriculturally exempt structure must be utilized for a qualified
agricultural use and shall not be converted to any alternate uses unless a
conversion permit is issued and the structure is brought into compliance with
the then current building code before an occupancy permit could be issued.
   (D)   The structure will require a zoning permit and it must comply with all
required setbacks from property lines, the same as for any other building.
   (E)   The owner shall sign a statement acknowledging the above requirements
and agreeing that the structure will remain in compliance with the same.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.041 PROHIBITIONS OF USES.
   Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within a zone are expressly
prohibited therein, except that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to properties of land owned by the state and by the United States government.
Persons obtaining state or federal properties by lease or other arrangement
shall utilize such properties in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.042 LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS AND CANOPY STANDARDS.
   Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than 20 feet from any street line
to which the pump island is at right angles and 15 feet from any street line to
which the pump island is parallel and not less than 12 feet from any
residential zone boundary line. If the pump island is set on an angle on the
property with respect to the street, it shall be so located that automobiles
stopped for service will not extend over the property line. In no case shall
gasoline pumps be set closer than 15 feet from any street line. Gas pump
canopies may be no closer than 14 feet to the right-of-way line.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.043 DOMESTIC WATER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   All domestic water and sewage disposal facilities shall comply with all
applicable state laws and rules and regulations of the State Board of Health.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.044 SETBACKS FROM MAJOR COUNTY ROADS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all buildings, except
temporary fruit stands abutting upon county roads which have been designated as
major roads, as shown on the county master plan of roads, and all section line
roads shall be set back at least 80 feet from the centerline, or at least 55
feet from the right-of-way of such roads, whichever is the greater; except
major roads in/or adjacent to platted areas shall be set back 30 feet from the
right-of-way line of said roads.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.045 PUBLIC DUMPING GROUNDS.
   In zones in which public dumping grounds are permitted, such grounds shall
be maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and rules and regulations
of the State Board of Health and shall be located at least 300 feet from any
building used for human occupancy.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.046 EXCAVATIONS.
   The banks of all gravel, sand, clay and topsoil pits and similar excavations
shall be smoothed and reconditioned at the termination of operations or use in
such manner and to such extent as the Board of County Commissioners shall
require so that the excavation shall not be hazardous or unsightly.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.047 LOCATION OF LIVESTOCK FACILITIES.
   On any lot on which animals and fowl are permitted, no barn, corral, pen,
coop or other enclosure for the keeping of animals and fowl shall be located
closer than 100 feet from an adjacent lot’s dwelling, church, school or other
building used for human occupancy nor closer than 50 feet from the property
line. Pastures and enclosures where vegetation remains year round are not
required to comply with these setback standards. Animals must have free access
to the amounts of land specified in each specific zone. Animals in the
Agriculture A-1 Zone are not required to have full access to the amount of land
specified.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.048 PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to require the parking of vehicles off the
public streets to improve safety, reduce congestion and facilitate street
maintenance and traffic flow. Exception: Roadways which are designed with
additional pavement width to allow for the short-term parking of vehicles for a
period of not more than seven days.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.049 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED.
   In all zones, there shall be constructed at the time of the erection of any
building, or at the time any main building is enlarged or increased in
capacity, minimum off-street parking space with adequate provision for ingress
and egress from the street to each parking space by standard-sized automobiles
as hereinafter provided. Minimum parking space size for personal vehicles shall
be ten feet by 20 feet. Parking areas must be hard surfaced.
   (A)   Backing onto street. No parking area, except those serving single-
family dwellings, shall be designed or constructed to create a situation that
requires vehicles to back onto a public street.
   (B)   Minimizing access to arterial streets. Parking areas shall be located
and designed to minimize access points to arterial streets by using non-
arterial streets or alleys.
   (C)   Circulation. No parking area shall be designed so that circulation
from one portion of the area to another relies on a public street.
   (D)   Landscaping generally. All parking lots shall have a 10% minimum
landscape to pavement ratio and may be installed at perimeter.
   (E)   Landscaping where parking areas adjoin uses or zones. A buffer shall
be provided between any parking lot for more than five vehicles and existing
residential uses or undeveloped land shown as residential in the comprehensive
plan, also existing schools and nursing homes, hospitals and other institutions
for long-term human care shall be protected from any new parking lots. The
minimum effective buffer shall be:
      (1)   A seven-foot wide planting strip with trees and ground cover plus a
masonry wall or opaque fence at least four feet in height or a dense evergreen
hedge that will attain a height of at least four feet; or
      (2)   A six-foot site obscuring fence.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.050 PARKING SPACE FOR DWELLINGS.
   In all zones except those in which dwellings are not permitted, parking
space shall be provided to park two automobiles for each dwelling unit in a new
dwelling or each dwelling unit added in the case of the enlargement of an
existing building. Where the designated parking space is not enclosed in a
private garage, carport or other building, sufficient yard area surrounding the
parking space shall be designated so that the automobile can be enclosed in a
building or carport having yard area, which will comply with the requirements
set forth in this chapter. Such parking space shall be located on the same lot
as the building except as may be permitted under collective use provision.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.051 PARKING SPACE FOR BUILDINGS OR USES OTHER THAN DWELLINGS.
   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained in connection
with the following new buildings and enlargements or increase in any existing
main building or change in use, which parking space shall be located on the
same lot as the building, except as permitted under the collective use
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   For boarding houses, lodging houses, rooming houses, dormitories,
apartments, fraternities or sororities, and dwelling units occupied by more
than three persons not related by blood or marriage, at least one parking space
for each automobile used or parked on or about the premises by persons
accommodated in such building, or one parking space for each bedroom contained
in the building, whichever is greater;
   (B)   For tourist courts, at least one parking space for each individual
sleeping room or living unit;
   (C)   For restaurants, cafés and similar eating establishments that serve
meals, lunches or drinks to patrons inside a building, for retail stores
selling directly to the public and for dance halls and recreational places of
assembly, at least one space for each 200 square feet of floor space in the
building, plus one space for each two employees working on the two largest
employment shifts or five parking spaces, whichever is greater;
   (D)   For drive-ins where ice cream, soft drinks or other food is sold to
customers in automobiles, 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of building;
   (E)   For mortuaries, at least 30 parking spaces or one space for each 25
square feet in the assembly room or chapel, whichever is greater;
   (F)   For medical and dental offices and clinics, at least four parking
spaces for each doctor or dentist having offices in such clinic, or one space
for each 200 square feet of floor space, whichever is greater;
   (G)   For all other office buildings and commercial establishments, one off-
street parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area in the building or
office; and
   (H)   For all wholesale and industrial uses not listed above, one parking
space for each employee working on the two largest employment shifts.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.052 PARKING SPACE FOR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND CERTAIN OTHER
USES.
   Off-street parking space shall be provided in connection with the following
new buildings and in connection with the enlargement or increase in seating
capacity or floor area of any existing building as hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Where benches are used, 18 inches of bench space shall be considered
as space for one seat. Where movable chairs are used, seven square feet of
floor space shall be considered as space for one seat;
   (B)   For churches, theaters, general auditoriums and stadiums, at least one
parking space for every three seats in main assembly halls; for university,
vocational and high schools, at least one space for each five full-time
students;
   (C)   For hospitals, at least one parking space for each two beds, including
infants’ cribs and children’s beds, plus one space for each two employees; and
   (D)   For elementary and junior high schools, at least three parking spaces
for each classroom.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.053 COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS.
   Parking space for two or more buildings as required in this chapter may be
combined into one lot and may be located on a lot adjacent to the building
provided the number of parking spaces is at least equal to the number required
when computed separately.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.054 PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS.
   Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be so arranged as to reflect
the light away from adjoining premises in any residential area.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.055 OFF-STREET TRUCK LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided on the same lot for
every building used for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, goods display,
department store, grocery, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry-cleaning or
other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicle of
materials or merchandise. Each space, unless otherwise adequately provided for,
shall include a minimum of ten feet by 25 feet loading space with a minimum 14
feet height clearance, for every 20,000 feet of floor space in the building or
fraction thereof.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.056 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE AT SCHOOLS.
   For each school, there shall be sufficient off-street bus loading and
unloading space provided to accommodate normal peak loading requirements.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.057 MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS.
   All motor vehicle access shall meet the requirements as hereinafter
provided.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.058 ROADWAYS AND CURBS.
   Accesses shall be controlled as follows.
   (A)   Access shall be by not more than one driveway from any one street;
except, two driveways may be allowed from lots in platted subdivisions onto
non-arterial roads; provided, that they comply with other ordinance standards.
For the purpose of this section, a DRIVEWAY is defined as a single approach
access to a road and not as a single driveway which has two separate approaches
accessing to the road.
   (B)   Driveways shall not be closer to each other than 80 feet when located
on the same lot.
   (C)   Each driveway shall not be more than 30 feet in width measured at
right angles to the centerline of the driveway for residential, or 40 feet in
width measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway for commercial
and industrial, except as increased in commercial and industrial by permissible
curve-return radii showing necessity based on need and using sound engineering
principles.
   (D)   No driveway shall be closer than six feet to a side property line
extended.
   (E)   On corner lots, no driveway shall be closer than 30 feet to the point
on intersection of the front property line with the side property line which
abuts upon a street on non-approaching traffic lanes. On approaching traffic
lanes, the minimum distance shall be 50 feet. All driveways shall be setback
from arterial corners a distance of 150 feet.
   (F)   In all cases where there is an existing curb and gutter on the street,
curb cuts and driveways shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
   (G)   Where there is no existing curb and gutter, a curb or fence shall be
installed in compliance with requirements of this section and as directed by
the County Engineer.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.059 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS TO COUNTY ROADS.
   Whereas this chapter limits the number of accesses to a street, all new
building sites will have to comply with the following restrictions.
   (A)   Existing lots of record will be entitled to only one point of access
to any existing arterial, section line or major collector road. Excepting
additional road access points may be approved during the platting process.
   (B)   Existing access points of record may be continued if they were
compliant with the access standards as established by this chapter and can be
substantiated.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.060 PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations herein set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the regulations within zones appearing elsewhere in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.061 DWELLINGS TO FRONT UPON STREETS.
   All dwellings, as defined in §
156.003, shall front upon a street, as defined in §
156.003.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.062 FENCES AND CONTROLS FOR SIGHT OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   In all residential zones, no fence, wall, hedge or other sight
obscuring object or structure which is more than three feet in height shall be
constructed or allowed to exist above said height within 15 feet of the front
lot line.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to permit any structure, shrub,
hedge or sight-obscuring object to exist in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.063 SUPPLEMENT TO DEFINITION OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Within an impact area, existing land division rights for the
development of land will continue to be allowed, provided that they comply with
access policy rules.
   (B)   Within an impact area, new parcel breaks created for the purpose of
building or development, whether now or in the future, will require that a plat
be filed on all new parcels created as well as the parent parcel. Exceptions:
In the impact area, if development rights are available, one parcel may be
taken off without requiring a subdivision plat be filed.
   (C)   The plat will require the dedication of all needed rights-of-way for
existing roads and new road rights-of-way for all land involved in the
transaction. Construction of said roads would be required in full or in part as
required by current policy.
   (D)   In the Agricultural Zone, residential density permits may be
transferred into a small lot agricultural subdivision without rezoning of the
land. Density permits may also be transferred from adjacent properties if a
subdivision plat is filed and the adjacent property is placed in reserve.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.064 DRAINAGE STANDARDS; DRAINAGE DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Runoff from all impervious surface areas on a lot shall be retained
on-site.
   (B)   The site shall be designed to retain a minimum of a five-year storm
event. Exception: In the Idaho Falls Impact Area on subdivisions of less than
one-half acre lot size then a flat one and one-half inch rainfall shall be
used.
   (C)   Modification of natural drain channel on a property shall be allowed
only if the flow capacity and discharge point is maintained.
   (D)   Borrow pit areas used for stormwater retention of roadway runoff shall
be maintained, as indicated on the approved cross-section, by the lot owner
adjacent to said right-of-way.
   (E)   The standards in this section are minimum standards. The road and
bridge standards could be more restrictive.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.065 LOCATION OF MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   Generally. A manufactured home may be temporarily (not to exceed two
years) located on a lot on which a building is being constructed, if:
      (1)   A permit to construct a building on such lot has been issued by the
Building and Zoning Administrator; and
      (2)   Water and sewerage facilities comply with the requirements of the
State Department of Health.
   (B)   Manufactured home and mobile home setup standards. All manufactured
homes and mobile homes must be placed on a manufacturer’s approved or state
approved foundation with tie downs, vapor barrier, ventilation, drainage and
perimeter enclosure.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.066 ANIMAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   CAFO uses generally. The following shall apply to all CAFO uses in the
county.
      (1)   Within six months from the effective date of this chapter, any
person or entity (“registrant”) operating an existing CAFO facility shall file
a registration notice with the Administrator. Failure to register will result
in a $150 fee per month for each month beyond the deadline. The registration
notice shall include the following where applicable: All of division (A)(5)(f)
below, excluding licensed engineering, two and one-half mile off-site plan, and
divisions (A)(7)(a) and (A)(8) below.
      (2)   The Commission shall review each registration notice and shall make
a determination regarding the completeness and accuracy of the registration
notice at the next available meeting date after submission. If the request is
approved then the applicant may apply for a use permit from the Administrator.
      (3)   A CAFO permit is required for an expanding facility or a new
facility.
      (4)   The Administrator shall be given notice of the transfer of a CAFO
permit setting forth the date of the transfer and the name and mailing address
of the party to whom transferred. CAFO permits may not be transferred to any
other location.
      (5)   A CAFO permit application shall contain the following:
         (a)   Legal description and address of the proposed facility;
         (b)   The name and address of the applicant and owners;
         (c)   The one-time animal unit capacity of the facility;
         (d)   The type of animals to be confined;
         (e)   Evidence that a valid water right exists to supply adequate
water for the proposed facility, with the approval of the State Department of
Water Resources, Department of Health and Welfare and the Division of
Environmental Quality;
         (f)   A complete site plan of the proposed facility, that is legible
and prepared by a licensed engineer, or other qualified individual approved by
the Administrator. Scale shall be as required for clarity. The site plan shall
include the following information (which is within a two-and-one-half-mile
radius of the proposed CAFO):
            1.   Building locations;
            2.   Animal waste management system;
            3.   General areas for land application;
            4.   Flood zones and data for the proposed facility;
            5.   All wells;
            6.   Irrigation canals and laterals;
            7.   Rivers, streams, springs and reservoirs and designated
wetlands;
            8.   Dead animal storage;
            9.   Confinement areas and feed storage areas; and
            10.   Contour lines and drainage.
         (g)   An animal waste management system design plan for animal waste,
and an odor management plan, which meets all state and federal requirements and
is approved by the responsible agency;
         (h)   Written comment on and approval of the filed site plan from the
applicable highway district; and
         (i)   Any other relevant information required by the Commission.
      (6)   The Commission may submit the above information to the State CAFO
Advisory Group, or any other similar entity, for review and comments.
      (7)   A fee shall be submitted with the application in an amount based
upon the following formula:
         (a)   New facility permits or expanding facility permits: $300 plus
$0.25 per animal unit; and
         (b)   Applications accompanied with a variance request shall include
an additional $100 fee.
      (8)   The applicant shall be billed for any postage and publication costs
incurred by the county.
      (9)   Following is the process for notice and application hearing for
CAFO permit approval.
         (a)   The Commission shall review the CAFO permit application for
completeness. Upon determining that the same is complete, the Commission shall
conduct a minimum of one public hearing. Hearings shall be advertised and
conducted according to the requirements of use permits contained in this
chapter; provided, however, that notice shall also be provided by first class
mail to property owners within two miles of the CAFO. The applicant shall also
physically post notices at the external boundaries of the site at least 15 days
prior to the hearing.
         (b)   If the Commission determines the application is not complete,
the hearing will be continued (one time only) until the next regularly
scheduled meeting to allow the applicant opportunity to provide the additional
information needed.
      (10)   Prior to approval of a CAFO permit, the Commission must find that
the facility meets the following requirements.
         (a)   General requirements.
            1.   The CAFO facility must be within an area zoned Agriculture A-
1.
            2.   The CAFO facility shall be located a minimum of two miles
(adjusted to the nearest full section) from any of the following: in a
residential zone, a platted subdivision or area of city impact line.
            3.   The CAFO facility must comply with and not be in violation of
any federal, state or local law regulation or guideline.
            4.   An applicant shall not begin construction prior to approval of
the CAFO permit.
            5.   No CAFO facility may have more than 20,000 animal units;
except, no swine or dairy facility shall have more than 1,000 animal units.
            6.   No corral facility shall have a confined concentration
(excepting birds and fish) of more than 220 animal units per acre (of
accessible land to the animals).
         (b)   Animal waste.
            1.   The CAFO facility shall comply with the terms of its nutrient
management plan for land application.
            2.   The CAFO facility shall use best management practices in
maintaining and operating its animal waste management system.
            3.   Aquiculture facilities are exempt from the animal waste
management system setbacks, except for the storage of solid waste on land.
         (c)   Site setbacks.
            1.   Confinement pens, silage, hay, potatoes or any feed product
resulting from the ensilage process which is stored in the open air shall be
located at least 1,000 feet from any existing residence not belonging to the
owner or operator of the facility.
            2.   All agricultural buildings, feed storage areas, feed bunks,
feed racks or confinement pens shall be set back 55 feet from road rights-of-
way or 80 feet from centerline of roads, whichever is greater.
            3.   Lights shall be placed and shielded to direct the light source
down and inside the property lines of the CAFO facility.
            4.   The animal waste management system shall not be located or
operated closer than 1,000 feet (two miles for swine), from a residence
belonging to someone other than the applicant, or be located and/or operated
closer than 500 feet from property lines or a domestic well.
            5.   Setbacks may be reduced if the owner of the residence consents
in writing to a lesser setback.
            6.   The setbacks contained herein shall not apply to land
application; except, that animal waste from a swine facility shall not be land
applied within one mile of a residence; provided however, that such setback may
be lessened if the owner and occupant of the residence consents in writing to a
lesser setback.
            7.   Aquiculture CAFO facilities are exempt from the setbacks
contained herein except for the storage of solid waste on the land.
         (d)   Closure of a facility. The applicant shall submit a plan for
closure and reclamation of the entire facility, including the confinement
areas, waste handling facilities for both liquids and solids, land application
areas and any other portions of the operation to a status equal to that which
existed prior to the start of construction. The site must be monitored for a
period of five years following completion of the reclamation effort to verify
that no residual effects remain from the operation. If any residual effects are
found during that time, then additional reclamation will be required. The
applicant shall post a bond equal to 125% (plus an inflation adjustment factor
per year) of the engineer(s) estimate for reclamation project. The bond will be
released at the end of the five-year period if the project shows clean.
Reclamation shall start within six months of closure of the facility no matter
the reason for the closure unless an extension has been applied for.
      (11)   Criteria for approval of expanding CAFO facilities is as follows.
Prior to approval of a CAFO permit for an expanding facility, the Commission
must find that the expanding facility meets and complies with the same rules
for approval as if it were a new CAFO as described in divisions (A)(4), (A)(5)
and (A)(6) above.
      (12)   The variance process is as follows.
         (a)   A variance may be sought relating to the requirements contained
in this chapter by making a written request for a variance at the time of the
filing of the application for the CAFO permit. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may authorize a variance from the requirements contained in this
chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
result in unnecessary hardship.
         (b)   Variance procedure shall be consistent with the provisions
contained in this chapter for variances, except notices shall be sent to
landowners within two miles of the site.
      (13)   Grant or denial of CAFO permit or expansion permit is as follows.
         (a)   In making such decision, the Commission may rely on information
and recommendations received from the State CAFO Advisory Group or any other
similar group.
         (b)   If construction is not commenced within two years of issuance of
the CAFO permit, the permit will be revoked. Once revoked, the applicant may
reapply. Reapplication shall be governed by statutes, regulations and
ordinances in effect at the date of reapplication.
      (14)   Prior to use of an expanding facility or a new facility by
livestock, fish or birds, an occupancy certificate is required.
      (15)   The process for an occupancy certificate is as follows.
         (a)   After approval of the CAFO permit, the CAFO permit holder shall
notify the Administrator of the date when construction commences. The CAFO
permit holder may present a written change request to the Administrator. The
request must clearly specify the proposed change(s) and shall provide an
explanation or justification for the proposed change(s). If the Administrator
determines the proposed change(s) is de minimis and not material, the
Administrator may approve the change request. If the proposed changes are
material, then a new application must be submitted to the Commission.
         (b)   Inspection of the construction progress of the CAFO facility
authorized by the CAFO permit shall occur at regular intervals. In addition,
inspection may be completed when requested by the CAFO permit holder. The
inspections shall be performed by the State Department of Agriculture, DEQ,
Health Department and the county.
         (c)   After completion of the construction of the CAFO facility
authorized by the CAFO permit, and receipt of proof by the Administrator that
all required permits and approvals have been obtained, the Administrator shall
issue an occupancy certificate to the CAFO permit holder.
         (d)   If the Administrator denies issuance of an occupancy
certificate, any appeal must be filed with the Office of the Administrator
within 20 days of the issuance of the denial.
      (16)   Any applicant or person who is aggrieved by a decision of the
Commission shall have a right to appeal to the Board. Appeals shall be governed
and processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Non-CAFO facilities. The following applies only to non-CAFO
facilities.
      (1)   Non-CAFO sites must comply with at minimum, best management
practices in the operation and maintenance of their site for odor control,
waste management, runoff, dead animal removal, dust and noise.
      (2)   The maximum density of animal units for any non-CAFO site shall not
exceed five animal units per acre on the contiguous real property on which the
facility is operated.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   (a)   If the Administrator receives a signed written complaint of
alleged noncompliance with the terms of a CAFO permit or non-CAFO site, the
Administrator shall give notice of the complaint to the owner or permit holder
and shall determine the validity of the complaint. The CAFO permit holder can
submit rebuttal evidence to the Administrator concerning the complaint within
ten days of receiving a determination about the complaint. The CAFO permit
holder may correct any noncompliance or appeal the Administrator’s decision to
the Commission within 30 days of the date of the Administrator’s determination,
unless a written extension has been granted by the Administrator.
         (b)   If a CAFO or non-CAFO facility is in violation of any federal,
state or local law, regulation or guideline, any agency shall have the
authority to issue and post on the premises of the facility a stop-work order
for that portion of the facility in violation, if an inspection reveals a
material violation. All work specified in the order must STOP after posting the
order. The facility owner may appeal such an order to the Commission.
      (2)   The judge may also enter a permanent or temporary injunction,
restraining order or such other relief, as the court deems appropriate. Each
day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Animal types Animal equivalency factor
Animal types                                         Animal equivalency factor
Beef cattle/bison
                       Bull (each)                  1.4
                       Calves (under 600 lbs.)      0.4
                       Steers/cows (600-1,000 lbs.) 0.6
                       Steers/cows (over 1,000      1.0
                        lbs.)
Chickens
                       Broilers                     0.005
                       Layers (each)                0.01
Dairy cattle
                       Heifers (1 to 2 years old)   .70
                       Heifers (2 years and older)  1.0
                       Calves (3 months to 1 year)  0.40
                       (Under three months)         .25
                       Milking and dry cows         1.4
Fish                    (500 lbs.)                   1.0
Horses                  (Each)                       1.0
Sheep                   (Each)                       0.15
Swine
                       Boars (each)                 2.0
                       Sows (each)                  2.0
                       Pigs (35 lbs. to market)     2.0
                       Pigs (up to 55 lbs.)         0.5
For species not         (350 lbs.)                   1.0
specifically identified
 
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.067 WIND GENERATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The county recognizes the increased demand for alternative
energy generating facilities and the need for more inexpensive power that wind
turbine facilities may provide. The purpose of these supplemental regulations
is to protect the community’s interest in properly siting wind turbine towers
in a manner consistent with sound land use planning, while also allowing
private and commercial providers to meet their power generating objectives.
   (B)   Permitted and prohibited uses.
      (1)   Private pole mounted non-guyed wind turbine towers are permitted in
all zones.
      (2)   Commercial wind power generating facilities are permitted upon
granting of a special use permit within the A-1 Agricultural, G-1 Grazing
Zones, all industrial zones and commercial zones.
   (C)   Additional standards; use permit criteria. No permit shall be granted
for a private wind turbine tower or commercial wind power generating facilities
unless it is determined that the proposed use meets all of the following
criteria.
      (1)   Maximum tower height for private wind turbines shall be 60 feet to
the top of the blades.
      (2)   The minimum required setback distance between each wind turbine
tower and all surrounding property lines, overhead utility lines, shall be no
less than the tower height plus the rotor radius plus ten feet unless extended
by an easement for fall distance and waiver of decibel level is recorded. The
recorded easement cannot be used to adjust the minimum acreage requirement.
      (3)   The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the rotor
blade system shall be 20 feet.
      (4)   Wind turbine tower facilities shall be located with relation to
property lines so that the level of noise produced during any wind turbine
operation shall not exceed 45 dBa, measured at the boundaries of all adjacent
parcels that are owned by non-site owner or at any point past the property
line.
      (5)   Minimum site area is as follows. Private wind turbine towers shall
be allowed only on lands with a minimum lot area of one acre. A maximum of
three towers will be allowed per parcel with an acre required for each tower.
      (6)   All wind turbines must have an automatic braking, governing or
feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation creating excessive pressure
on the tower structure, rotor blades and turbine components.
      (7)   All power transmission lines from the wind turbine tower to the on-
site electrical panels shall be underground.
      (8)   Procedures for emergency shutdown of power generation units shall
be established and posted prominently and permanently within three feet of the
meter panel.
      (9)   No experimental, homebuilt or prototype wind turbines shall be
allowed without submitting documentation of their maximum probable blade throw
distance in the event of failure and setback an appropriate distances based on
that documentation.
      (10)   No wind turbine tower facilities shall be installed in any
location where its proximity with an existing microwave communications link, an
existing fixed broadcast, retransmission or reception antenna (including
residential reception antenna) for radio, television or wireless phone or other
personal communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with
signal transmission or reception.
      (11)   Building permit applications for wind energy systems shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the
tower, base and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing
compliance with the Building Code and certified by a licensed professional
engineer shall also be submitted.
      (12)   Building permit applications for small wind energy systems shall
be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient
detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to
the National Electrical Code. This information is frequently supplied by the
manufacturer.
      (13)   No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned turbine.
      (14)   Use of nighttime and overcast daytime condition, strobe lighting
to satisfy tower facility lighting requirements for the FAA shall be required.
Towers over 60 feet in height shall have steady on white and red lighting.
      (15)   Wind measurement for commercial generating facilities is as
follows. A wind study using an anemometer shall be performed for the five-month
prime wind period of May to September at the proposed site prior to the hearing
application filing. Any certified study within a one-half mile distance of the
proposed installation shall meet the requirements of this section.
   (D)   Liability insurance; commercial towers only. Prior to issuance of a
building permit for a wind turbine tower, and continuing after construction
until such facility is removed from the site, the applicant shall provide
documentation satisfactory to the county and at such reasonable intervals as
determined by the county of the existence of liability insurance coverage with
$1,000,000 limit, for property damage, injury or death resulting from the
construction, placement, use, maintenance, operation of a wind generation
facility, by the owner of the site.
   (E)   Removal of obsolete wind turbine facilities.
      (1)   Obsolete or unused wind turbines and accessory structures shall be
removed from any site within six months of the discontinuance of the use
thereof. Owner of the site shall notify the county in writing within 30 days of
the discontinuance of the use of such turbine tower or facility.
      (2)   Failure to notify and/or remove the obsolete or unused tower or
facility in accordance with this section shall be a violation of this law. The
county may remove such facilities after 180 days and treat the cost as a tax
lien on the property.
   (F)   Permit and site plan procedures/submittal.
      (1)   Private wind turbines must submit documentation showing that they
comply with the above requirements.
      (2)   Commercial generating facilities shall provide a digital elevation
model-based project visibility map showing the impact of topography upon
visibility of the project from other locations throughout the region, to a
distance of five miles from the center of the project. The scale used shall
depict a three-mile radius no smaller than 2.7 inches, and the base map shall
be a published topographic map showing cultural features and other landmarks.
      (3)   Color photographs, at least three inches by five inches, taken from
several locations within a three-mile radius of the boundaries of the
commercial facility site, shall be provided. Said photographs shall be computer
enhanced to simulate the appearance of the as-built aboveground site facilities
as such would appear from said locations.
   (G)   Wind access claims against adjacent parcels. Unless a prior wind
access easement has been acquired claims cannot be filed against neighbors for
obstructing wind, based on either current or future improvements on their
parcels.
   (H)   Overlay boundary areas. Commercial wind farms shall be limited to the
overlay boundary area as follows.
Township 3 North, Range 39, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 13: S1/2, NE1/4 except that land lying S and W of boundary line of
Black Canyon Rim
Section 14: S1/2
Sections: all of 23, 24, 25, 26, 35, 36
Township 3 North, Range 40, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 17: S1/2SW1/4
Section 18: S1/2S1/2
Section 19: all
Section 20: W1/2
Section 29: W1/2
Section 30: NE1/4, E1/2SE1/4, SW1/4SE1/4, W1/2W1/2, NE1/4NW1/4
Section 31: all
Section 32: NW1/4, W1/2SW1/4
Township 2 North, Range 39, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 1, 2, 11, 12, 13, 14
Section 23: less the E1/2SE1/4
Section 24: less the E1/2E1/2SE1/4
Sections: all of 25, 26, 35, 36
Township 2 North, Range 40, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 3: S1/2
Section 4: all except the N1/2N1/2
Sections: all of 5, 6, 7
Section 8: W1/2W1/2, SE1/4SW1/4, NE1/4NW1/4, N1/2NE1/4, SE1/4NE1/4
Section 9: N1/2
Section 10: N1/2
Section 17: NW1/4, SW1/4NE1/4
Section 19: N1/2
Sections: all of 31, 32, 33
Township 1 North, Range 39, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 1: S1/2
Sections: all of 2, 11, 12, 13, 14
Section 23: all less the N1/4SE1/4 lying E of the county road
Section 24: all less the NW1/4SW1/4, E1/2SW1/4, SE1/4
Section 25: all land lying W of the county road, and the E1/2SE1/4
Sections: all of 26, 35, 36
Township 1 North, Range 40, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 4: W1/2, S1/2SE1/4
Section 5: all
Section 6: E1/2
Section 7: NE1/4, NWSE1/4, E1/2SE1/4
Sections: all of 8, 9
Section 13: all lying S of Bulls Fork Road
Section 14: all lying S of Bulls Fork Road
Section 15: all less all that portion of the NE1/4SW1/4 lying S and E of a line
drawn diagonally from the SW corner to the NE corner, excluding the N 265 feet
Sections: all of 16, 17
Section 18: E1/2E1/2
Section 19: N1/2NE1/4
Section 20: all less the following described parcels:
1. Part of the S1/2, described as: beginning at the SW corner of said Section
20, and running thence North 0 degrees, 07'57" W 2,640.42 feet along the
section line to the W1/2 corner of said Section 20; thence along the E-W half
section line North 89 degrees, 58'25" E 1,599.47 feet; thence S 72 degrees,
28'54" W, 353.10 feet; thence S 40 degrees, 48'24" W 752.05 feet; thence S 5
degrees, 42'24" W 485.03 feet; thence S 13 degrees, 20'48" W 358.08 feet;
thence S 2 degrees, 07'26" W 464.66 feet; thence S 88 degrees, 16'46" E 425.00
feet; thence S 52 degrees, 30'41" E 425.70 feet; thence S 76 degrees, 39'18" E
720.41 feet; thence S 88 degrees, 38'26" E 523.47 feet; thence N 74 degrees,
53'14" E 494.86 feet; thence N 69 degrees, 12'50" E 931.53 feet; thence N 16
degrees, 55'44" E 523.0 feet; thence N 57 degrees, 21'09" E 584.80 feet; thence
N 82 degrees, 33'29" E 684.49 feet, more or less to a point on the E section
line of said Section 20; thence N 82 degrees, 33'29" E 979.08 feet; thence N 38
degrees, 05'30" E 565.87 feet more or less to a point on the 1/16 line of said
Section 21; thence along said 1/16 line S 0 degrees, 06'14" E 2151.05 feet,
more or less, to the S section line of said Section 21; thence along the
section S 89 degrees, 54'37" W 1,321.73 feet to the SE corner of said Section
20; thence along the S section line of said Section 20, S 89 degrees, 54'18" W
2,640.50 feet to the S quarter corner of said Section 20; thence continuing
along the S section line of said Section 20, N 89 degrees, 58'00" W (basis of
bearing) 2,637.62 feet to the point of beginning.
2. Part of the NE1/4 described as: beginning at the N1/4 corner of said Section
20, said point being S 89 degrees, 58'00" E (basis of bearing) 2,637.62 feet
along the section line to the S1/4 corner of said Section 20, (and along the N-
S half section line N 0 degrees, 05'20" W 5,283.17 feet from the SW corner of
said Section 20), and running thence N 89 degrees, 58'25" E 1,492.09 feet along
the section line; thence S 47 degrees, 43'59" W 549.29 feet; thence S 11
degrees, 04'25" W 410.12 feet; thence S 43 degrees, 27'38" W 1,459.60 feet;
thence along the N-S half section line of said Section 20, N 0 degrees, 05'20"
W 1,830.69 feet to the point of beginning.
3. Part of the SW1/4NE1/4 described as: beginning at the center of said Section
20, said center being S 89 degrees, 58'00" E (basis of bearing) 2,637.62 feet
along the section line and N 0 degrees, 05'20" W 2,643.17 feet along the N-
S half section line of said Section 20 from the SW corner of said Section 20,
and running thence N 0 degrees, 05'20" W 809.31 feet along the N-S half section
line; thence N 43 degrees, 27'38" E 72.58 feet; thence S 0 degrees, 05'20" W
861.97 feet to the E-W half section line; thence along said E-W half section
line S 89 degrees, 58'25" W 50.00 feet to the point of beginning
Section 21: all less this parcel: beginning at a point that is N 0 degrees,
04'34" W 2640.00 feet along the E line of said Section 21 and N 89 degrees,
54'36" E 1,320.59 feet along the E-W half section line from the SW corner of
said Section 21 and running thence S 0 degrees, 06'14" E 488.81 feet along the
E line of said NW1/4SW1/4; thence S 38 degrees, 05'30" W 80.87 feet; thence N 0
degrees, 06'14" W 552.38 feet; thence along said E-W half-section line N 89
degrees, 54'36" E 50.0 feet to the point of beginning
Section 22: all less all that portion of the section lying N and E of a line
drawn diagonally from the NW corner of the NE1/4NW1/4 to the SE corner of the
NE1/4SE1/4
Section 23: all less SW1/4SE1/4, and SW1/4 lying NE of a line drawn diagonally
from the NW corner of the SW1/4SW1/4 to the SE corner of the SW1/4SW1/4SW1/4
Sections: all of 24, 25
Section 26: all less NW1/4NE1/4, NE1/4NW1/4, and the NW1/4NW1/4 lying NE of a
diagonal line extending from the NW corner of NE1/4NW1/4NW1/4 to the SE corner
of the NW1/4NW1/4
Sections: all of 27, 28
Section 29: NW1/4, E1/2
Section 30: E1/2NW1/4, NE1/4, S1/2
Section 31: all
Section 32: NE1/4NE1/4, S1/2NE1/4, SE1/4, NE1/4SW1/4, SW1/4SW1/4, W1/2NW1/4NW1/
4
Sections: all of 33, 34, 35, 36
Township 1 North, Range 41, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 27: S1/2SW1/4
Section 28: SE1/4SE1/4
Section 29: W1/2SE1/4
Sections: all of 30, 31, 32
Section 33: all except SE1/4NE1/4
Township 1 South, Range 40, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 1, 2
Section 3: E1/2E1/2
Section 5: all less the E1/2 Lot 1
Sections: all of 6, 7, 8
Section 9: W1/2SW1/4, W1/2NE1/4SW1/4, a portion of the E1/2NE1/4SW1/4 described
as beginning at a point that is N.89 25"46"E along the section line 2,135.53
feet and N 2,332.33 feet from the SW corner of Section 9, running thence N21
31"39"E 300 feet more or less to the N line of the E one-half of the NE quarter
of the SW quarter of said Section 9: thence W to the NW corner thereof; thence
S along the W line of said Section 9 to a point that is S21 31"39"W from the
point of beginning thence N21 31'39" to the point of beginning. W1/2SE1/4SW1/
4 less the described tract: beginning at a point that is N 89 25'46"E 1476.84
feet along the section line from the SW corner of Section 9, running thence N04
09'10"E 574.84 feet; thence N 77 degrees 18'07"E 460 feet more or less to the E
line of the W one-half of the SE1/4SW1/4 of said Section 9; thence S to the SE
corner of said W one-half of the SE quarter of the SW 1/4; thence S 89 degrees,
25'46"W 488 feet more or less to the point of beginning
Section 10: E1/2NE1/4, NE1/4SW1/4
Section 11: all less the SW1/4SW1/4
Section 12: all
Section 13: all less the W1/2W1/2
Section 14: SW1/4SW1/4
Section 15: SW1/4, S1/2SE1/4
Section 16: NW1/4NW1/4, N1/2SW1/4NW1/4
Section 17: all less the lots 3 & 4, and less the described tract beginning at
the SE corner of lot 2 running thence N along the section line 641.84 feet; N45
39'57"W 653.324 feet; thence N58 36'W 528.36 feet; thence N88 11'W 60 feet more
or less to the W line of said Lot 2; thence S to the SW corner of said Lot 2;
thence E 970 feet more or less to the point of beginning
Sections: all of 18, 19
Section 20: W1/2SE1/4, S1/2NE1/4, W1/2 less the S 528 feet of the E 1,482 feet,
and the SE1/4SW1/4 lying E of Bone Road
Section 21: NE1/4NE1/4
Section 22: all
Section 23: all less E1/2NW1/4, N1/2NE1/4, SW1/4NE1/4
Section 24: E1/2, S1/2SW1/4
Section 25: all
Section 26: all less SW1/4, SW1/4SE1/4
Section 27: E1/2NW1/4, W1/2SE1/4, NW1/4SE1/4
Section 29: W1/2W1/2, SE1/4SW1/4, NW1/4NE1/4, NW1/4NE1/4NW1/4
Sections: all of 30, 31
Section 32: W1/2, W1/2E1/2
Section 34: E1/2SE1/4, SW1/4SE1/4
Section 35: W1/2SW1/4
Section 36: all
Township 1 South, Range 41, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Section 1: all less N1/2NE1/4, N1/2NENW1/4
Sections: all of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
Section 11: all less SE1/4 and SE1/4NE1/4 both S of Hell Creek
Section 12: all less SW1/4NW1/4 and N1/2SW1/4 both S of Hell Creek S1/2S1/2
Section 14: W1/2W1/2, E1/2SW1/4
Sections: all of 15, 16, 17, 18, 19
Section 20: W1/2NW1/4, SW1/4, W1/2SE1/4
Sections: all of 21, 22
Section 23: all less E1/2E1/2
Sections: all of 25, 26, 27, 28
Section 29: E1/2
Sections: all of 30, 33, 34, 35, 36
Township 3 North, Range 34, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 1-36
Township 3 North, Range 35, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 4-9, 16-21, 28-33
Township 2 North, Range 3, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 1-36
Township 2 North, Range 35, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 4-9, 16-21, 28-33
Township 1 North, Range 34, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 1-36
Township 1 North, Range 35, East of the Boise Meridian, Bonneville County,
Idaho:
Sections: all of 4-9
 
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.068 HOBBYIST APIARIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for
sound beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid nuisances and other
problems that might otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in an
urban setting. This section does not apply to commercial or agricultural apiary
operations.
   (B)   Allowed beekeeping. The keeping of bees as an accessory use to
residential use shall be allowed in all zoning districts of the county subject
to the standards set forth herein, verification the beekeeper is registered
with the state and subject to compliance with this section. This section shall
not be interpreted to allow for keeping of wasps, hornets or other noxious
insects.
   (C)   Beekeeping standards.
      (1)   Density of hives and colonies. The keeping of bees shall not exceed
a density of three colonies per quarter acre. Any single parcel of land is
limited to nine maximum colonies, regardless of parcel size.
      (2)   Hives. All bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames. Hives shall be kept in usable condition.
      (3)   Setbacks required. All hives and related structures that form the
apiary shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the side and rear property
lines and behind the residence from the front property line. Hives shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from dwellings, porches, gazebos, decks, swimming
pools and permanently affixed play equipment on any adjoining lots or parcels,
unless the owner of the adjoining property has provided written recorded
permission for closer hive placement. The property owner maintaining the hive
(s) shall make reasonable accommodation for anticipated areas of human activity
on adjoining parcels. A six-foot fly-away barrier fence shall be placed around
the hives or at property lines. A minimum 100 square inch sign shall be posted
on the front of the property indicating that beehives are located on the
property.
      (4)   Water source. A supply of fresh water shall be maintained
throughout the day to prevent bees from congregating at neighboring swimming
pools and other water sources where they may cause human or domestic contact.
Said water supply shall be large enough and located to be readily accessible to
colonies on the site and shall be designed to allow bees to access water by
landing on a hard surface. A water supply is not required on the site during
winter and other inactive months.
      (5)   Maintenance. Hives shall be actively maintained. Hives not under
human management and maintenance shall be dismantled or removed.
Notwithstanding compliance with the requirements of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or
of such dispositions to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the
normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, or interfere with
the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others.
      (6)   Queens. In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually
aggressive characteristics, or when the colony consists of Africanized bees
(Apis mellifera scutellata), it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to destroy
or re-queen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness
and non-swarming characteristics.
      (7)   Compliance with state statues and county ordinances. The keeping of
bees shall be done in compliance with the State Bee Inspection Statute and
other applicable state laws. The county shall have the right to enter the
premises of any beekeeper where bees or equipment are kept, and inspect such
bees or equipment, and any person resisting or refusing to allow such
inspection shall be guilty of a zoning violation.
   (D)   Presumption of responsibility. It shall be presumed for the purpose of
this section that the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise
have the present right of possession and control of the parcel upon which a
hive or hives are situated.
   (E)   Violation. The keeping of bees and other insects in violation of this
section is prohibited. Any violation of this section shall be subject to
prosecution pursuant to this code.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.069 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following regulations govern the operation of certain transitory or
seasonal uses.
   (A)   Permits. Applications for a temporary use permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A description of the property to be used, rented or leased for the
temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately portray the
property;
      (2)   A description of the proposed use; and
      (3)   Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary
facilities and availability of parking space to service the proposed use.
   (B)   Uses. The following are temporary uses and are subject to the
following specific regulations and time limits and are in addition to the
regulations of any zone in which the use is located.
      (1)   Small temporary event. Upon the receipt of a complete application,
the Zoning Administrator shall authorize a temporary use permit for small
temporary commercial events, larger than 250 individuals on-site at any time,
in commercial and industrial zones, for a period of time not to exceed ten
consecutive calendar days, for not more than two such events per calendar year,
and with at least two months between events, if the Zoning Administrator finds
that all of the following conditions and requirements are met:
         (a)   No sale of alcoholic beverages;
         (b)   Hours of operation exclusively between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
         (c)   No paid admission;
         (d)   The applicant has submitted a completed temporary use permit
application with a site plan that details and identifies specific areas of the
small temporary event, including, but not limited to: designated off-road
parking designed to eliminate the need for an individual to cross a state, city
or county road to visit the event; location of booths or individual use areas;
restrooms; the total event area boundaries; and any required fire apparatus. A
minimum of five parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of event area must be
provided and shown on the site plan;
         (e)   Signs must comply with the zone requirements of this chapter;
         (f)   The applicant is responsible for all set-up and clean-up of the
site within the ten-day period;
         (g)   No portion of the small temporary event may be located closer
than 200 feet from any dwelling except the dwelling that exists on the parcel
of the small temporary event;
         (h)   A business license is approved by the Zoning Administrator and
all approving county departments. The temporary use permit, when issued,
constitutes a county business license for the event. Exception: If there are to
be additional vendors or participants other than the applicant, each will
individually need to pay a fee and obtain a vendors permit as part of the
temporary use; and
         (i)   Small temporary events shall not include concerts, dances,
vehicle sales or any use which is listed as a permitted conditional use in the
zone.
      (2)   Christmas tree sales. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
Zoning Administrator shall authorize a temporary use permit to be issued in any
commercial or industrial zone for display and open-lot sales of Christmas trees
for a period not longer than 45 days.
      (3)   Temporary construction yards. Upon receipt of a complete
application, the Zoning Administrator, in any zone, shall authorize a temporary
use permit for a temporary construction yard, if the Zoning Administrator finds
that all of the following conditions and requirements are met.
         (a)   For private construction projects, the temporary construction
yard is incidental to a construction project that is located on the same parcel
as the proposed temporary construction yard, and the proposed temporary
construction yard is limited to one or more of the following: a temporary
construction yard office; and temporary buildings and yards for storing
vehicles, materials and equipment, for the construction project.
         (b)   For private construction projects located more than 15 miles
travel distance from an existing approved commercial concrete or asphalt mixing
plant and where the use would be only for that construction project, a
temporary permit may be allowed for these said uses on that project only.
         (c)   The above listed permits shall be valid for as long as the
construction project maintains a valid county building permit.
         (d)   All structures, vehicles, materials, construction equipment,
mixing plants and related items and equipment shall be removed and the yard
restored upon the expiration of the permit.
         (e)   A bond in the amount of $20,000 shall be posted for temporary
construction yards that contain a concrete mixing plant or an asphalt mixing
plant, and a bond in the amount of $40,000 shall be posted for a temporary
construction yard that contains both a concrete mixing plant and an asphalt
mixing plant, to ensure their removal and clean up.
         (f)   A temporary construction yard containing a concrete mixing plant
or an asphalt mixing plant, shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any
dwelling. The temporary asphalt plant or concrete mixing plant shall be no
closer than 300 feet to a public roadway or an adjacent landowner’s property
line.
      (4)   Temporary existing dwellings. Upon receipt of a complete
application, in any zone that allows for residential dwellings, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a temporary use permit for an existing dwelling if
the Zoning Administrator finds that all the following conditions and
requirements are met:
         (a)   A building permit is issued concurrently for a one-family
dwelling to replace the existing dwelling on the same parcel of land;
         (b)   A bond in the amount of $20,000 is posted with the Zoning
Administrator to ensure that the property owner removes the existing
residential structure and demolition debris and brings the demolition site to a
finished grade equivalent to the surrounding grade. Exception: The Zoning
Administrator may refund the bond when the subject former dwelling structure is
not demolished upon finding the building:
            1.   Meets all current setback standards;
            2.   Will not be used for human occupancy;
            3.   Will have a use, such as an agricultural shed, which is a
permitted use in the zone;
            4.   Meets the currently adopted State Building Code standards for
an unoccupied building; and
            5.   Has had all residential occupancy facilities removed,
including plumbing and fixtures for sinks, toilets, tubs and showers; wiring,
plumbing and fixtures for stoves, refrigerators and food preparation counters;
and wiring, plumbing and fixtures for water heaters and furnaces.
         (c)   The existing dwelling must be demolished within 30 days from the
date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy zoning compliance permit,
unless an exception has been approved as per division (B)(4)(b) above. An
extension of the 90-day period may be made by the Zoning Administrator when
unusual weather or other conditions exist.
      (5)   Tents, canopies and temporary membrane structures (excludes
structures used in association with a permitted construction project). Upon
receipt of a complete application, in any zone the Zoning Administrator shall
issue a temporary use permit for a membrane structure if the Zoning
Administrator finds that all of the following conditions and requirements are
met:
         (a)   The tent, membrane, canopy or temporary membrane structure
complies with the adopted Fire Code of the county;
         (b)   The tent, canopy or temporary membrane structure is not used for
a period to exceed a use period of 180 consecutive days within a 12-month
period on a single premises;
         (c)   Adequate parking is provided based on the requirements of this
chapter;
         (d)   The structure will be removed at the end of 180 days or when the
need for the structure has ended, whichever comes first;
         (e)   The tent, canopy or temporary membrane structure shall be in
good repair;
         (f)   The tent, canopy or temporary membrane structure shall be used
only for those land uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, or as
approved temporary uses in this section;
         (g)   No tent, canopy or temporary membrane structure may be used as a
residential dwelling; and
         (h)   Any electrical, mechanical, ADA access or other requirements of
the County Building Codes that are part of the temporary structure, must be
permitted, approved and inspected by the county.
      (6)   Corn maze, haunted house or outside haunted event. Upon receipt of
a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall authorize a temporary
use permit for a corn maze, haunted house or outside haunted event, in any zone
except the R-P, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MH Zones for a maximum of 65 days annually,
if the Zoning Administrator finds that all of the following conditions and
requirement are met:
         (a)   A state road or county road access permit has been issued;
         (b)   Approval from the County Fire Marshal; approval from the County
Health Department; approval from the County Building Official; and approval
from the County Sheriff have been obtained;
         (c)   No portion of the event, or its related activities may be
located closer than 500 feet from any dwelling except dwellings on the site of
the application or dwellings adjacent to the site of the application and in the
same ownership as the property owner unless waivers have been signed;
         (d)   A manned observation tower is provided or sufficient attendants
within the maze for help and assistance, and sufficient attendants within a
haunted house or for an outside haunted event are provided;
         (e)   Adequate lighting for assembly and parking areas, and within the
maze, haunted house or outside haunted event, during evening hours, is
provided;
         (f)   The applicant has submitted a completed county temporary use
permit application with a site plan that details and identifies specific areas
of the corn maze, haunted house or outside haunted event, including, but not
limited to, designated off-road parking designed to eliminate the need for an
individual to cross a state, city or county road to access the site; restroom
location; boundary of the entire site area to be utilized; concession locations
(an independent concessionaire must obtain a temporary vendor permit); and any
required fire apparatus;
         (g)   Parking is provided as per the current county land use
ordinance;
         (h)   Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m.;
         (i)   A dust mitigation plan has been submitted and approved by the
Zoning Administrator;
         (j)   An adequate number of trash receptacles shall be provided on-
site and shall be emptied or removed when necessary at the applicant’s expense;
and the site shall be cleaned and restored to its original condition or better
at the conclusion of the event;
         (k)   No sale of alcoholic beverages;
         (l)   Must conform to applicable noise standards; and
         (m)   The application may include a travel trailer, recreational
vehicle or camper, for a security attendant during the approved length of the
event; otherwise, the site must be secured from the public during the hours it
is not in operation.
      (7)   Temporary commercial filming. Upon receipt of a complete
application, in any zone, a temporary use permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Administrator for temporary commercial filming in a natural setting or a
temporary film set if the Zoning Administrator finds that all of the following
conditions and requirements are met:
         (a)   An application to film on private property requires written
approval by the property owner;
         (b)   The permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six
weeks, but is renewable up to a maximum of three permits per calendar year per
location;
         (c)   Any film set structure, prop or other material shall be removed
and any land disturbance restored upon completion of the filming in that
location;
         (d)   The temporary use permit is for zoning compliance only; approval
from other county departments or agencies may also be required; and
         (e)   A separate temporary use permit is required for each filming
location. Adequate parking must be provided.
      (8)   Temporary recycling equipment during demolition. Upon the receipt
of a complete application, in any zone, a temporary use permit shall be issued
by the Zoning Administrator for the crushing, shredding or mulching of
materials generated by the demolition of a structure located on the parcel if
the Zoning Administrator finds that all of the following conditions and
requirements are met.
         (a)   The equipment shall be on the same parcel as the structure that
is being demolished and the temporary use permit can only be issued after a
county permit for demolition has been obtained.
         (b)   The temporary use permit is valid only during the demolition and
must be removed within 30 days of the completion of the demolition of the
structure.
         (c)   The temporary use permit shall only be issued for a maximum of
six months for an individual parcel during a calendar year.
      (9)   Seasonal sales and services. Upon receipt of a complete
application, the Zoning Administrator shall authorize a temporary use permit
for seasonal sales and services, in commercial zones for a maximum of six
months annually, if the Zoning Administrator finds that all of the following
conditions and requirements are met:
         (a)   The applicant has submitted a completed county temporary use
permit application with a site plan that details and identifies specific areas
of the seasonal use and services, including, but not limited to, all stands,
booths or structures associated with the use; all vehicles to be used for the
use; designated off-road parking designed to eliminate the need for an
individual to cross a state, city or county road to access the site; restroom
location; boundary of the entire site area to be utilized; and any required
fire apparatus;
         (b)   Provide off-road parking as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, but not less than three spaces per seasonal use;
         (c)   Access to roads shall be limited to existing legal approaches;
         (d)   Approval from the County Fire Marshal; approval from the County
Health Department; approval from the County Building Official have been
obtained;
         (e)   All stands, booths and structures associated with the seasonal
sales and services use shall be temporary and removable, not for public
occupancy, and must be removed from the property at the completion of each
year’s seasonal use. Hours of operation are limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
         (f)   All signs shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 152; and
         (g)   No sale of alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.070 PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall
approve the following public facilities in any zone if the Zoning Administrator
finds that all of the conditions and requirements are met:
   (A)   Electric power transmission and distribution lines. Transmission lines
of 138 kV and over within new transmission corridors (not required for the
widening of existing corridors) require use permit approval;
   (B)   Gas transmission and distribution lines and pumping stations;
   (C)   Canals and water transmission and distribution lines and pumping
stations;
   (D)   Sewer lines and sewage pumping and lift stations;
   (E)   Telephone lines;
   (F)   Cable television lines;
   (G)   Cellular telephone, radio, television or microwave transmission
facilities that do not exceed a maximum height of 60 feet; and
   (H)   Any rights-of-way, service driveways or accessory structures which are
appurtenant to the above uses.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.071 CEMETERY APPROVAL STANDARDS.
   The Planning Commission, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
may approve a use permit for a cemetery provided the following provisions are
met.
   (A)   The applicant has submitted the following drawings made at a scale of
one inch equals 50 feet, or larger:
      (1)   A plat of the proposed cemetery showing the perimeter boundary,
survey points and monuments and location of each individual burial plot (each
shall be numbered);
      (2)   A landscaping plan which shows the planting plan or areas to remain
in natural vegetation and the layout of the irrigation system if required; and
      (3)   A drainage plan showing the system of disposal of surface waters.
   (B)   The applicant has submitted the following supportive information:
      (1)   The total number of acres in the cemetery;
      (2)   The location of any existing drainage channels and floodways;
      (3)   The location of areas where groundwater rises to within eight feet
of the surface of the ground;
      (4)   The location of areas covered in the event of a base flood;
      (5)   The location of the access roads;
      (6)   The source of water to be used in the maintenance of the
vegetation; and
      (7)   Any additional information related to the cemetery that is required
by the Board.
   (C)   Additional standards are as follows.
      (1)   The cemetery plat shall be recorded, following approval of the
Board, in the office of the County Recorder according to the terms of state
law.
      (2)   The parcel of land contained within the cemetery plat shall be
properly maintained as per the approved site plan.
      (3)   Areas rendered unsuitable due to potential for flooding, high
topographic relief, shallow depth to groundwater or other problems peculiar to
the site, shall not be used as burial sites.
      (4)   No burial sites shall be within ten feet of the boundary of an
adjacent property ownership or road right-of-way line.
      (5)   Above-grade markers or monuments may be used.
      (6)   Vehicular travel ways within the cemetery shall be all weather
surfaced for a width of at least 20 feet.
      (7)   Burial sites shall be properly surveyed and the survey shall be
maintained on a plat and with corresponding monuments on the ground.
      (8)   Buildings shall be limited to a sexton’s office, storage and
maintenance sheds.
      (9)   The location of the cemetery and the layout shall not interfere
with the adopted street plans and public facilities of the county.
   (D)   Except for public cemeteries, the applicant for a cemetery shall put
into effect a deed covenant, endowment fund and agreement to guarantee that the
applicant and his or her successors will provide continued care and maintenance
as long as any part of the plat is used as a burial site. Together the
documents shall require:
      (1)   Permanent fencing to prevent animals and unauthorized vehicles from
entering the cemetery;
      (2)   Maintained areas of grass and plants;
      (3)   Repair of any deterioration or damage to the grounds and
facilities;
      (4)   The designation of a corporate or other perpetuating party as
trustee to operate and maintain the cemetery;
      (5)   The removal and proper disposal of the remains at the termination
of the cemetery at the expense of the applicant and his or her successors,
rather than the public or some other party (for this purpose the cemetery shall
not be severable from the endowment fund properties);
      (6)   The county may enforce these provisions, including maintenance of
neglected cemeteries, or the removal of remains at the termination of
operations, and use the endowment assets to defray the expense; and
      (7)   The endowment assets used to guarantee such maintenance and removal
shall bear a reasonable relationship to the current costs of the same,
including changes due to increasing numbers of occupied burial plots and
inflation. The endowment properties used to guarantee maintenance and removal
must bear a reasonable relationship to the current costs of same and provide
for inflation.
   (E)   Other requirements reasonably imposed by the county to implement the
street plan, general plan and the legislative intent of the zoning district in
which the cemetery lie.
(Ord. passed - -)
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.085 OFFICE OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established in the county the office of Zoning
Administrator, which shall be under the jurisdiction of the Board of County
Commissioners. The Building Inspector appointed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be the Zoning Administrator, who shall be the officer charged
with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. However, the Board of
County Commissioners may from time to time delegate the authority and
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, in whole
or in part, to any other officer of the county.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.086 PERMITS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a building in
the unincorporated territory of the county, which will have a value when
completed of $100 or more, shall first apply for a permit therefor to the
Zoning Administrator. All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by a plat showing the size and location of the existing buildings
and buildings to be erected. The plat shall also show the zone in which a lot
or parcel of land is located.
   (B)   No permit shall be required for a barn, corral, coop, pen or other
structure used exclusively for agricultural purposes having a value of less
than $100.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.087 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ENFORCING OFFICERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to inspect or cause
to be inspected all buildings in the course of construction or repair. He or
she shall enforce all provisions of this chapter and report all violations to
the County Prosecuting Attorney. He or she shall file actions in the courts
when necessary, but his or her failure to do so shall not legalize any
violation of such provisions, nor shall the failure of the Prosecuting Attorney
to file an action in the courts legalize any violation of such provision.
   (B)   Upon appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission of any matter on
which it is required to pass, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly transmit
all papers, records and other pertinent data pertaining to the appeal to the
Commission. The Zoning Administrator shall also refer such matters to the
Health Department, Board of County Commissioners and Planning Commission as is
required by this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.088 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   Erection, alteration, reconstruction or moving of any building or
structure, or any part thereof, without the prior issuance of a written permit
for the same by the Zoning Administrator is prohibited.
   (B)   The Board of County Commissioners is authorized to adopt a schedule of
fees to be charged for the issuance of permits required by this section. The
amount of such fees may be based on the value of the building or structure for
the alteration or reconstruction of the same for which the permit is issued.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.089 PERMITS TO COMPLY WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.
   From the time of the effective date of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall not grant a permit for the construction of any building or
structure, or for the moving of the building or structure onto a lot, or for
the change in any use of land, building or structure if such construction,
alteration, moving or change in use would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, nor shall any officer grant any permit or license
for the use of any building or land if such would be in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.090 VARIANCES ALLOWED.
   There is hereby allowed that the Planning and Zoning Commission may assist
in the administration of this chapter with powers and duties as hereinafter set
forth. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall assume the responsibility for
considering variances. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a time for
the hearing of an appeal or other matters upon which it is required to pass
within a reasonable time after appeal or other matter has been submitted to it.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, prior to approving the variance, shall
conduct at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an
opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the
time and place and a summary of the variance to be discussed shall be published
in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the
jurisdiction. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also make available a
notice to other papers, radio and television stations serving the jurisdiction
for use as a public service announcement. Following the Planning and Zoning
Commission hearing, if the Commission makes a material change in the variance,
further notice and hearing shall be provided before the Commission approved
said variance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.091 ORGANIZATION OF THE COMMISSION.
   Shall be defined by county ordinance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.092 DECISION ON APPEALS.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide appeals from
any decision or requirement made by the Zoning Administrator and shall hear and
decide other such matters as are provided for in this chapter. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall render a decision within 30 days after the next
regularly scheduled meeting date on which the appeal or request is heard.
   (B)   Every decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission must be based
upon findings of fact, and every finding of fact must be supported in the
records of the proceedings of the Board.
   (C)   Upon the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay a fee as
set forth in §
156.010 to the Zoning Administrator who shall then promptly transmit to the
Planning and Zoning Commission all papers, records and other pertinent data
relative to the appeal or other matters on which it is required to pass.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.093 APPEALS; APPLICATION; FORM.
   (A)   Any person and any officer or department of the county may appeal to
the Planning and Zoning Commission by filing a request in writing with the
Zoning Administrator on forms to be furnished by the county. Such appeal must
be made within 30 days from the grant or refusal of a building permit by the
Zoning Administrator or from the date of any other action, which is the subject
of the appeal.
   (B)   The request to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be made on the form to be prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.094 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a time for the hearing of an
appeal or other matter that has been submitted to it. The Commission shall give
notice of such hearing to the public by publishing the same in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county and shall also give written notice to all
interested parties. The Commission shall render its decision at its regular
meeting, which has been duly published.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.095 POWER AND DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and
duties.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide appeals in
cases where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative officers in the enforcement of this chapter, and shall decide
questions involving interpretation of this chapter, including the determination
of zone boundary lines.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant variances from the strict
letter of this chapter where a property owner can show that:
      (1)   Because of unusual narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific
lot or parcel of land; or
      (2)   By reason of peculiar topographical features or other special
circumstances peculiar to the particular lot or parcel of land, the strict
application of the terms of this chapter would prohibit the use of the
applicant’s property in a manner reasonably similar to that of other lots in
the same zone.
   (C)   Before a variance can be granted, the Planning and Zoning Commission
must find upon the evidence before it that:
      (1)   Special circumstances do actually attach to the particular property
covered by the application, which do not apply generally to the other
properties in the same zone;
      (2)   Because of some special circumstances the appellant’s property is
deprived of privileges possessed by the properties in the same zone;
      (3)   The granting of such variance will not substantially affect the
comprehensive plan of zoning in the county;
      (4)   Adherence to the strict letter of this chapter will cause
difficulties and hardships, the imposition of which is unnecessary in order to
carry out the purposes of the zoning plan;
      (5)   The hardship is not the result of any action by the property owner
taken after the effective date of this chapter; and
      (6)   A personal hardship may be considered for the placement on a
temporary basis of a manufactured home adjacent to an existing residence for
the care of a family member where the medical necessity is verified and
documented by a physician.
   (D)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant the following special
exceptions or special use permits.
      (1)   Where a boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the
effective date of this chapter, the Commission may permit a use allowed on
either portion of such lot to extend not more than 50 feet into the other
portion of the lot, provided such use will not be contrary to the plan of
zoning and provided values of adjoining property will be fully preserved.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit buildings to be
constructed within 75 feet of a natural flood channel, provided measures are
taken which will adequately protect the building or structure from damage due
to floods, and provided that the hazard of flood damage to surrounding land in
accordance with a plan of flood drainage approved by the Board of County
Commissioners.
      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize the issuance of a
permit for the use which is not specifically mentioned in the list of permitted
uses within an SC-1, A-1, C-1, C-2, PB, LNC, HC-1, M-1, M-1A, I&M-1, I&M-2,
I&M-3 and R-2 Zones provided such use is similar to and compatible with the
uses permitted in the same zone and will be in harmony with the objectives and
characteristics of the zone in which it is located. No use on which the
Commission is required to pass for the purpose of this division (D)(3) shall be
considered as a similar use if it is contrary to the purpose or intent of this
chapter or if it is inconsistent with the characteristics of the zone in which
it is located.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a permit for the
construction of a shooting range if it finds, on the basis of competent
evidence, that the safety of the surrounding area will be fully maintained and
that such use does not constitute a public nuisance.
      (5)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant other special
exceptions or other special use permits if it is expressly authorized to do so
by the provisions of this chapter, but it shall not grant a use permit, whether
temporary or permanent, for any use in a zone if such use is not listed therein
as a permitted use or is not similar to such permitted uses as determined by
division (D)(3) above.
   (E)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may attach reasonable conditions or
requirements to the grant of a variance, exception or special use permit which
the petitioner must comply with as a condition of the grant or approval and the
Commission may attach a time limit on the exercise or non-exercise of any
grant.
   (F)   In performing the duties and powers as set forth herein, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall have the power to reverse or affirm in whole or in
part, or to modify the order, requirement decision or determination of the
enforcing officer and may make such order or requirement as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter, provided, however, that the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall not have the power to amend this chapter or to
permit or prohibit actions which have the effect of amending this chapter.
   (G)   The powers and duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission are
limited to such administrative matters as are herein provided which shall be
strictly construed. The Planning and Zoning Commission may not grant a request
which would have the effect of amending this chapter or correcting what it may
consider to be an unwise requirement in this chapter, or to substitute its
judgment for that of the Board of County Commissioners on matters of zoning
policy. However, the Planning and Zoning Commission will express administrative
authority as set forth in this chapter and shall have the power to perform
those acts as are herein set forth and such administrative actions shall not be
interpreted as unauthorized amendments to this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.096 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final
if determined by the Board of County Commissioners sitting as a Board of
Adjustment; however, if the determination is made by a separate Board of
Adjustment, then it shall be final unless a written appeal is made to the Board
of County Commissioners within ten days from the date of the Commission’s
decision. A written notice of appeal shall be filed with the County Planning
and Zoning Office specifying wherein the Planning and Zoning Commission erred
in its decision. A hearing shall be held before the County Commissioners to
consider said appeal.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of County
Commissioners may have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in
any court of competent jurisdiction as regulated by state law.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.097 BUSINESS LICENSE TO BE APPROVED BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   No business license or permit pertaining to the use of land or building
shall be issued by any officer or employee of the county, unless the
application for the permit or license has first been approved by the Zoning
Administrator as being in conformance with the provisions of this chapter,
provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator must approve such applications
for a permit when all of the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with. Any permit or license if issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed - -)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
§ 156.110 DIVISION OF COUNTY INTO ZONES.
   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, the
county is hereby divided into the following zones.
A-1   Agricultural Zone
B-1   Buffer Zone
C-1   Limited Commercial Zone
C-2   General Commercial Zone
G-1   Grazing Zone
HC-1  Limited Business Zone
I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
I&M-2 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
I&M-3 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
LNC   Limited Neighborhood Commercial Zone
M-1   Manufacturing Zone
M-1A  Manufacturing Zone
MH    Manufactured Home Zone
PB    Professional Business Zone
PUD   Planned Unit Development
R-1   Residence Zone
R-1.5 Residence Zone
R-2   Residence Zone
R-3   Residence Zone
RA-1  Residential Agricultural Zone
RA-2  Residential Agricultural Zone
RA-3  Residential Agricultural Zone
RA-4  Residential Agricultural Zone
R-F   Recreation-Forestry Zone
R-P   Residence Park Zone
SC-1  Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.111 ZONE MAP.
   The Zoning Administrator shall at all times maintain a zone map of the
county. Said zone map shall be located at the office of the Zoning
Administrator and shall be available for examination and inspection by any
member of the public during regular business hours. The location and boundaries
of the zones shown on the zone map of the county, and all boundaries, notations
and other data shown thereon are hereby incorporated in this chapter as if
fully described herein.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.112 REGULATIONS.
   Within each of the zones, the height, dimensions, number of stories, size of
buildings or structures, the portion of any lot that may be occupied by
buildings or structures, the area and dimensions required for yards, courts and
other open spaces, the density of population and location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes are hereby
regulated and restricted as set forth in this chapter, provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be deemed to contradict or be in conflict with the
agricultural exemption as provided in state law.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.113 LOCATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of
zones, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   When indicated boundaries on the zone map approximate street, road or
land survey lines, said street, road or land survey lines shall be deemed to be
the zone boundaries.
   (B)   Where the indicated boundaries approximate canal, natural streams,
water courses or other clearly defined natural features, the centerline of said
canal, natural stream water course or natural feature shall be deemed to be the
zone boundaries.
   (C)   In the absence of any street, road, land survey lines, canal, natural
stream, water course or other natural feature or measurement as forming the
boundaries of any zone, the scale of measurement shown on the map shall be used
to determine the location of zone boundary lines.
   (D)   Where other uncertainty exists, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall determine the location of the zone boundaries from the information shown
on the zone map.
(Ord. passed - -)
A-1, AGRICULTURAL ZONE
§ 156.125 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The primary intent is to assure that the use is agriculturally
compatible and that the location of the use will not adversely affect adjoining
uses, nor will the adjoining uses adversely affect the proposed use.
   (B)   Representative uses of land within the A-1 Zone, which require a use
hearing include uses, which usually require a rural setting such as plant
nurseries, water reservoirs, quarries and also public facilities.
   (C)   The objectives of the A-1 Agriculturally Compatible uses are:
      (1)   To promote development of uses compatible with production of
agriculture;
      (2)   To encourage the location of agriculturally compatible uses in
areas where impacts on agriculture would be minimized;
      (3)   To keep the cost of police and fire protection, school bus
transportation, road construction and maintenance and other public services to
a minimum; and
      (4)   To maintain and support the agricultural economic base in the
county.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.126 PERMITTED USES.
   The following shall be permitted in the A-1 Agricultural Zone:
   (A)   The growing, handling and storing of agricultural and livestock
products, beehives for pollination, the location of buildings, structures,
equipment and facilities incident thereto except plants for the manufacture of
animal byproducts or fertilizer from animal products;
   (B)   Poultry production;
   (C)   Fruit and vegetable stands for the sale of produce raised on the
premises which are of wood frame or light metal construction, which do not
exceed 100 square feet and are maintained in an orderly manner in accordance
with standards prescribed by the Board of Health;
   (D)   Dwellings:
      (1)   Dwellings with a minimum lot size of one acre and an average
density of one lot per ten acres within one mile of any incorporated city or
urban growth area as designated on the comprehensive plan:
         (a)   Outside of this area, a dwelling with a minimum lot size of one
acre and an average density of one lot per 20 acres will be allowed for
distance of seven miles from any incorporated city with a population in excess
of 500 people;
         (b)   Beyond this area, a dwelling with a minimum lot size of one acre
and an average density of one lot per 60 acres will be allowed;
         (c)   All lots must meet State Health Department standards, county
road and bridge requirements and all other applicable ordinances;
         (d)   Lots cannot be further divided unless rights are specifically
transferred to the new owner of said lot; and
         (e)   For the purpose of this section, all density lines which fall
beyond a section line will automatically extend to the next closest section
line.
      (2)   Lots will be subject to a site plan review by the zoning office to
assess the impact on existing agricultural operations, roads, future road
extensions, public utilities, irrigation and irrigation delivery systems. If it
is determined that there is an impact the permit will then be reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Board prior to issuance; and
      (3)   Deeds of record or notarized contracts of sale which would have
qualified as a valid building lot prior to January 1, 1986, will be recognized
as a valid building lot under this chapter.
   (E)   Farm labor dwellings: Mobile dwellings will be allowed for the
occupants who work solely for the farmer who operates the farm on which the
dwelling is located;
   (F)   Home occupation:
      (1)   Where the home occupation is to be conducted on a parcel of land of
one acre or less in size, all activities in connection with the occupation are
to be conducted within an occupied dwelling or else within a building which is
accessory to an occupied dwelling, which building will have a floor area of not
to exceed 1,000 square feet and the home occupation will be conducted by family
members residing in the dwelling only;
      (2)   Where the home occupation is to be conducted on a parcel of land
greater than one acre in size, all activities in connection with the occupation
are to be conducted within an occupied dwelling or else within a building which
is accessory to an occupied dwelling, which building will have a floor area of
not to exceed 2,000 square feet and the home occupation will be conducted only
by family members residing in the dwelling;
      (3)   All storage of materials, supplies, merchandise and products and
all activities in connection with the premises occupation shall be conducted
within buildings, except for the parking of vehicles, which are in running
order;
      (4)   No commercial vehicles shall be used in the business and only one
motorized vehicle may be used in association with the home occupation and shall
not exceed one ton rated capacity and one trailer which does not exceed 24 feet
in length, with adequate off-street parking provided for such business vehicles
and any visiting clientele;
      (5)   The business use does not create any odors, smoke, dust, heat,
fumes, light, glare, sounds, noises, vibrations, radio interference or
television interference which are not commonly created by residential use;
      (6)   Home occupations with visiting clientele shall have business
activity only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; and
      (7)   The home occupation does not include the storage or sale of
flammable, explosive or hazardous materials, junkyards, salvage yards,
automotive body work or painting, towing operations or cabinet shops.
   (G)   Feedlots, provided they are no closer than 300 feet from existing
dwellings;
   (H)   Advertising signs for the sale of goods or services produced on the
premises shall be limited to two signs of not more than 32 square feet per
sign; and
   (I)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.127 USES.
   The following uses shall be considered in the A-1 Agricultural Zone:
   (A)   Plant nurseries, non-retail;
   (B)   Water reservoirs and water facilities;
   (C)   Riding academies;
   (D)   Fur farms, kennels, commercial beehive facilities, gravel pits, rock
crushers, temporary hot mix plants used for government sponsored paving
projects, clay pits, rock quarries, mines and oil and gas wells;
   (E)   Schools;
   (F)   Churches with minimum lot size of two acres;
   (G)   Public parks and playgrounds;
   (H)   Sewage disposal plants and facilities, which meet the requirements of
the Board of Health;
   (I)   Fairgrounds or rodeo grounds;
   (J)   Golf courses and nonresidential private clubs with a minimum area of
40 acres;
   (K)   Penal institutions;
   (L)   Radio and television broadcasting transmitters, antenna and other
facilities;
   (M)   Cemeteries;
   (N)   Sanitary landfills approved by the Board of County Commissioners which
meet the requirements of the State Board of Health;
   (O)   Public utility buildings and facilities and other public buildings;
   (P)   Railroad tracks, spurs, switches and other railroad facilities;
   (Q)   Irrigation district and canal company facilities of a support nature,
including an administrative office;
   (R)   Other recreational uses; and
   (S)   Other similar uses as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
which are in harmony with the objectives and characteristics of this zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.128 STANDARDS CONTROLLING USE HEARINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Procedures for conduct of the hearing shall be that notice will
be sent to all adjoining property owners within 300 feet of the proposed use
site’s property lines as required in Idaho Code § 67-6509. However, only the
Planning and Zoning Board will need to conduct a hearing provided that no
appeal is filed against its decision within a ten-day period.
      (2)   If an appeal is filed, the County Commissioners will hold a second
public hearing under the same hearing procedures.
   (B)   The following criteria shall be addressed:
      (1)   Assess impact on existing agricultural operations;
      (2)   Establish need for proposed change;
      (3)   Assess benefit of proposed change to the county and neighborhood;
      (4)   Assess compatibility of proposed change with comprehensive plan;
      (5)   Assess proximity to fire protection and if the area is in a fire
district. The Fire Chief shall review each application that is within a fire
district;
      (6)   Assess proximity to police protection. The Sheriff shall review
each application;
      (7)   Assess impacts on traffic loads, access to public roads, assess
quality of county roads, assess width of right-of-way, relationship to long
range road designs and networks. County Road and Bridge shall review each
application;
      (8)   Health Department approval mandatory;
      (9)   Assess need for buffers, landscaping, assess impact of noise, dust
and vibration on neighborhood and compatibility with surrounding land uses;
      (10)   Location relative to the floodplain, depending on use;
      (11)   Availability of sufficient utilities; and
      (12)   Preservation of unique scenic or ecological areas.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.129 AREA.
   Each dwelling shall be situated upon a lot with a minimum area of one acre.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.130 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any lot on which a dwelling is situated shall be 100
feet along a county approved road.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.131 FRONT YARD.
   Every lot on which a dwelling is situated shall have a front yard of not
less than 80 feet from the centerline, or at least 55 feet from the right-of-
way of all county roads, whichever is the greater; except for lots in platted
areas which shall be set back 30 feet from the road right-of-way line.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.132 SIDE YARDS.
   (A)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of any
main building of not less than 20 feet. There shall be a side yard of not less
than 20 feet for an accessory building, provided, however, that no side yard
shall be required for an accessory building which is located at least 12 feet
from the main building and a distance of not less than 100 feet from any
street.
   (B)   For a corner lot that fronts on two roads, the provisions of §
156.131 shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.133 REAR YARD.
   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet from main buildings. The
rear yard for accessory buildings shall be the same as for main buildings,
except that no yard shall be required for an accessory building which is
located a distance of not less than 12 feet to the rear of the main building.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.134 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   The minimum distance between main buildings used for human occupancy shall
be 40 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
RA-1, RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE
§ 156.145 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The RA-1 Residential Agricultural Zone is established to encourage the
orderly and timely conversion of certain open land areas into residential areas
as the need arises. The RA-1 Zone includes portions of the county which have
been devoted to agricultural or other open land uses, but into which
residential development should be directed as needed.
   (B)   Representative uses in the RA-1 Zone include dwellings and maintenance
of buildings and facilities for the keeping of animals and fowl for the
production of family food and for the convenience and pleasure of those
residing on the premises.
   (C)   The use of land for residential purposes is given primacy in the RA-
1 Zone. Use of certain lands for the production of animals and fowl may be
required to be terminated with the development of the land for residential
purposes.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, the
regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the RA-1 Residential
Agricultural Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.146 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-1 Zone:
   (A)   One-family dwellings and buildings customarily accessory thereto;
   (B)   Agriculture, provided that animals and fowl shall be raised only for
the purpose of providing family food and for the pleasure of those residing on
the premises, but not for commercial purposes. No more than one cow, pig or
horse and their dependent young shall be kept for each 20,000 square feet of
lot area. No more than one sheep or goat and their dependent young and poultry
flock of not more than 100 birds and their dependent young shall be kept for
each 5,000 square feet of lot area. The total number of cows, pigs, horses,
sheep and goats, including dependent young, which may be kept on any one lot
shall not exceed five. A poultry flock of not more than 100 birds may be kept
on any one lot;
   (C)   Barns, corrals, pens, coops for the keeping of animals and fowl, when
maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health;
   (D)   Churches and public, private and parochial school and educational
institutions;
   (E)   Campgrounds, public parks, public recreation grounds and buildings,
not including outside storage yards;
   (F)   Parking lots in connection with permitted buildings;
   (G)   Identification signs for the identification of buildings not to exceed
12 square feet when attached to the building. Any lighting of said signs shall
be diffused or screened;
   (H)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation;
   (I)   Offices for professional persons and home occupation, provided:
      (1)   The home occupation is conducted entirely within the dwelling and
is carried on only by members of the family residing in the dwelling;
      (2)   The home occupation does not involve the use of any accessory
building or yard space for storage or activities outside of the dwelling not
normally associated with residential use;
      (3)   The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the
building from that of a dwelling;
      (4)   Signs are limited to one non-flashing sign not larger in area than
one and one-half square feet. If lighted, the lighting shall be indirect;
      (5)   Not more than the equivalent of 25% of the ground floor area of the
dwelling is devoted to the home occupation; and
      (6)   The activities in connection with the home occupation do not
involve the regular sale of goods on the premises.
   (J)   Customary household pets; and
   (K)   Public utility buildings and structures.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.147 AREA.
   An area of not less than 15,000 square feet shall be provided and maintained
for each one-family dwelling and uses accessory thereto.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.148 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be 90 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.149 FRONT YARD.
   There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet, except as required
under §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.150 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   (1)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of
the main building of not less than one and one-half inches for each foot of
building length, or eight inches for each foot of building height, whichever is
greater, provided that no main building shall be set back less than ten feet
from a side property line.
      (2)   Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as
for main buildings, except that no side yards shall be required for accessory
buildings which are located more than 100 feet from the front property lot line
and at not less than 12 feet from the main building.
   (B)   (1)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the side street
of not less than 30 feet.
      (2)   The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for interior
lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.151 REAR YARD.
   (A)   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20
feet.
   (B)   For accessory buildings, no rear yard shall be required on interior
lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.152 BARNS AND CORRALS.
   Barns, corrals, pens and coops for the keeping of animals and fowl shall be
located at least 100 feet from the nearest dwelling or other building used for
human occupancy.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.153 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   No building shall be erected to a height of greater than 20 feet, and
no building shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade,
except as permitted under the provisions of §
156.030.
   (B)   Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flagpoles,
television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human
occupancy are excluded in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
RA-2, RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE
§ 156.165 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The RA-2 Rural Estates Zone is established to encourage the orderly
and timely conversion of certain land areas into residential areas as the need
arises. It is anticipated that this RA-2 Zone will be applied to those areas of
the county which are still rural in character, but which have a definite
residential potential. To accomplish this purpose, large lot areas and open
space will be required to correspond to the rural character while at the same
time permitted uses and activities will be controlled to ensure a high standard
for single-family residential use.
   (B)   Representative uses in the RA-2 Zone include dwellings on large lots
and maintenance of buildings and facilities for the keeping of animals and fowl
for the production of family food and for the convenience and pleasure of those
residing on the premises.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, the
regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the RA-2 Rural Estates
Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.166 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-2 Zone:
   (A)   One-family dwellings and buildings customarily accessory thereto;
   (B)   Agriculture, provided that animals and fowl shall be raised only for
the purpose of providing family food and for the pleasure of those residing on
the premises, but not for commercial purposes. No more than one cow, pig or
horse and their dependent young shall be kept for each 20,000 square feet of
lot area. No more than one sheep or goat and their dependent young shall be
kept for each 20,000 square feet of lot area. A poultry flock of not more than
100 birds may be kept on any one lot;
   (C)   Barns, corrals, pens, coops for the keeping of animals and fowl, when
maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health;
   (D)   Churches and public, private and parochial schools and educational
institutions;
   (E)   Public parks, public recreation grounds and buildings, not including
outside storage yards;
   (F)   Parking lots in connection with permitted buildings;
   (G)   Identification signs for the identification of buildings not to exceed
12 square feet when attached to the building. Any lighting of said signs shall
be diffused or screened;
   (H)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation;
   (I)   Offices for professional persons and home occupations, provided that
it conforms to the requirements of §
156.146(I);
   (J)   Customary household pets; and
   (K)   Public utility buildings and structures.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.167 AREA.
   An area of not less than one acre shall be provided and maintained for each
one-family dwelling and uses accessory thereto.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.168 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be 100 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.169 FRONT YARD.
   There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet, except as required
under §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.170 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of the
main building of not less than 20 feet. Side yard requirements for accessory
buildings shall be the same as for main buildings, except that no side yards
shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more than 100 feet
from the front lot line and more than 12 feet from the main building.
   (B)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the side street of not
less than 30 feet. The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for
interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.171 REAR YARD.
   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet. For
accessory buildings, no rear yard shall be required on interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.172 BARNS AND CORRALS.
   Barns, corrals, pens and coops for the keeping of animals and fowl shall be
located at least 100 feet from the nearest dwelling or other building used for
human occupancy.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.173 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   No building shall be erected to a height of greater than 20 feet, and no
building shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade,
except as permitted under the provisions of §
156.030. Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flagpoles,
television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human
occupancy are excluded in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
RA-3, RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE
§ 156.185 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The RA-3 Rural Estates Zone is established to encourage the orderly
and timely conversion of certain land areas into residential areas as the need
arises. It is anticipated that this RA-3 Zone will be applied to those areas of
the county which are still rural in character, but which have a definite
residential potential. To accomplish this purpose, large lot areas and open
space will be required to correspond to the rural character while at the same
time permitted uses and activities will be controlled to ensure a high standard
for single-family residential use.
   (B)   Representative uses in the RA-3 Zone include dwellings on large lots
and the maintenance of buildings and facilities for the keeping of animals and
fowl for the production of family food and for the convenience and pleasure of
those residing on the premises.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, the
regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the RA-3 Rural Estates
Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.186 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-3 Zone:
   (A)   One-family dwellings and buildings customarily accessory thereto;
   (B)   Agriculture, provided that animals and fowl shall be raised only for
the purpose of providing family food and for the pleasure of those residing on
the premises, but not for commercial purposes. No more than one cow, pig or
horse and their dependent young shall be kept for each 20,000 square feet of
lot area. No more than one sheep or goat and their dependent young shall be
kept for each 20,000 square feet of lot area. A poultry flock of not more than
100 birds may be kept on any one lot;
   (C)   Barns, corrals, pens, coops for the keeping of animals and fowl, when
maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health;
   (D)   Churches and public, private and parochial schools and educational
institutions;
   (E)   Public parks, public recreation grounds and buildings, not including
outside storage yards;
   (F)   Parking lots in connection with permitted buildings;
   (G)   Identification signs for the identification of buildings not to exceed
12 square feet when attached to the building. Any lighting of said signs shall
be diffused or screened;
   (H)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation;
   (I)   Offices for professional persons and home occupations, provided that
it conforms to the requirements of §
156.146(I);
   (J)   Customary household pets; and
   (K)   Public utility buildings and structures.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.187 AREA.
   An area of not less than two and one-half acres shall be provided and
maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses accessory thereto.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.188 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be 150 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.189 FRONT YARD.
   There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet, except as required
under §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.190 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of the
main building of not less than 20 feet. Side yard requirements for accessory
buildings shall be the same as for main buildings, except that no side yards
shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more than 100 feet
from the front lot line and more than 12 feet from the main building.
   (B)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the side street of not
less than 30 feet. The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for
interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.191 REAR YARD.
   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard area of not less than 20
feet. For accessory buildings, no rear yard shall be required on interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.192 BARNS AND CORRALS.
   Barns, corrals, pens and coops for the keeping of animals and fowl shall be
located at least 100 feet from the nearest dwelling or other building used for
human occupancy.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.193 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   No building shall be erected to a height of greater than 20 feet, and
no building shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade,
except as permitted under the provisions of §
156.030.
   (B)   Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flagpoles,
television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human
occupancy are excluded in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
RA-4, RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL ZONE
§ 156.205 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The RA-4 Rural Estates Zone is established to encourage the orderly
and timely conversion of certain land areas into residential areas as the need
arises. It is anticipated that this RA-4 Zone will be applied to those areas of
the county which are still rural in character, but which have a definite
residential potential. To accomplish this purpose, large lot areas and open
space will be required to correspond to the rural character, while at the same
time permitted uses and activities will be controlled to ensure a high standard
for single-family residential use.
   (B)   Representative uses in the RA-4 Zone include dwellings on large lots
and the maintenance of buildings and facilities for the keeping of animals and
fowl for the production of family food and for the convenience and pleasure of
those residing on the premises.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, the
regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply in the RA-4 Rural Estates
Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.206 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the RA-4 Zone:
   (A)   One-family dwellings and buildings customarily accessory thereto;
   (B)   Agriculture, provided that animals and fowl shall be raised only for
the purpose of providing family food and for the pleasure of those residing on
the premises, but not for commercial purposes. No more than one cow, pig or
horse and their dependent young shall be kept for each 20,000 square feet of
lot area. No more than one sheep or goat and their dependent young shall be
kept for each 20,000 square feet of lot area. A poultry flock of not more than
100 birds may be kept on any one lot;
   (C)   Barns, corrals, pens and coops for the keeping of animals and fowl,
when maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of
Health;
   (D)   Churches and public, private and parochial schools and educational
institutions;
   (E)   Public parks, public recreation grounds and buildings, not including
outside storage yards;
   (F)   Parking lots in connection with permitted buildings;
   (G)   Identification signs for the identification of buildings not to exceed
12 square feet when attached to the building. Any lighting of said signs shall
be diffused or screened;
   (H)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation;
   (I)   Offices for professional persons and home occupations, provided that
it conform to the requirements of §
156.146(I);
   (J)   Customary household pets; and
   (K)   Public utility buildings and structures.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.207 AREA.
   An area of not less than five acres shall be provided and maintained for
each one-family dwelling and uses accessory thereto.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.208 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any building site for a dwelling shall be 200 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.209 FRONT YARD.
   There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet, except as required
under §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.210 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of the
main building of not less than 20 feet. Side yard requirements for accessory
buildings shall be the same as for main buildings, except that no side yards
shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more than 100 feet
from the front lot line and more than 12 feet from the main building.
   (B)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the side street of not
less than 30 feet. The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for
interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.211 REAR YARD.
   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet. For
accessory buildings, no rear yard shall be required on interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.212 BARNS AND CORRALS.
   Barns, corrals, pens and coops for the keeping of animals and fowl shall be
located at least 100 feet from the nearest dwelling or other building used for
human occupancy.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.213 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   No building shall be erected to a height of greater than 20 feet, and no
building shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade,
except as permitted under the provisions of §
156.030. Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flagpoles,
television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human
occupancy are excluded in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
R-P, RESIDENCE PARK ZONE
§ 156.225 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The R-P Residential Park Zone is established to encourage residential
development consisting of single-family dwellings situated on lots of 15,000
square feet or greater size, which are attractively planted, landscaped and
maintained. It is the objective of the zone to provide conditions favorable to
family living and the raising of children in a quiet atmosphere with a minimum
of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   (B)   Representative uses within the R-P Residence Park Zone include single-
family dwellings, parks, playgrounds, schools, churches and other community
facilities which are consistent with the characteristics and purposes of the
zone. Boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and other multiple-family
dwellings and commercial and industrial uses shall not be permitted. Privacy
shall be given to single-family dwellings which are situated on lots not less
than 90 feet in width and which have an area of not less than 11,000 square
feet.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the R-P Residence Park Zone, the regulations
provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.226 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-P Residence Park Zone:
   (A)   Single-family dwellings and necessary accessory buildings and
structures, such as private garages, carports, private greenhouses, private
swimming pools, arbors and other garden structures;
   (B)   Signs not exceeding eight square feet to inform the public as to the
sale of property and name plates attached to dwellings not exceeding one and
one-half square feet which are designed and maintained to harmonize with the
residential character of the zone;
   (C)   Fences, walls and hedges;
   (D)   Public schools, public libraries, public recreation buildings and
similar public buildings and grounds;
   (E)   Churches;
   (F)   Public utility buildings and structures;
   (G)   A temporary building or yard storage of construction materials and
equipment incidental and necessary to construction of housing development,
utilities or other community facilities, provided such temporary building or
yard is located on the same tract of land on which the houses, utilities or the
community facilities are constructed. A permit, therefore, shall be issued only
to the contractor or builder and shall be valid for not more than two years at
the expiration of which time said buildings or yards shall be removed from the
premises and said use discontinued;
   (H)   A temporary office or dwelling used temporarily as an office when used
in connection with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction, provided that such temporary office is located on the same tract
of land as the subdivision. A permit, therefore, shall be valid for not more
than two years at the expiration of which time said use shall be discontinued;
   (I)   Customary household pets, such as dogs, cats and canaries, but not
including the breeding of any animals for sale;
   (J)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation;
   (K)   Offices for professional persons and home occupations, provided:
      (1)   The home occupation is conducted entirely within the dwelling and
is carried on only by members of the family residing in the dwelling;
      (2)   The home occupation does not involve the use of any accessory
building or yard space for storage or activities outside of the dwelling not
normally associated with residential use;
      (3)   The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the
building from that of a dwelling;
      (4)   Signs are limited to one non-flashing sign not larger in area than
one and one-half square feet. If lighted, the lighting shall be indirect;
      (5)   Not more than the equivalent of 25% of the ground floor area of the
dwelling is devoted to the home occupation; and
      (6)   The activities in connection with the home occupation do not
involve the regular sale of goods on the premises.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.227 AREA.
   The area requirements for the R-P Zone shall be the same as those required
for the RA-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.228 WIDTH.
   The width requirements for the R-P Zone shall be the same as those required
for the RA-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.229 FRONT YARD.
   The front yard requirements for the R-P Zone shall be the same as those
required for the RA-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.230 SIDE YARD.
   The side yard requirements for the R-P Zone shall be the same as those
required for the RA-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.231 REAR YARD.
   The rear yard requirements for the R-P Zone shall be the same as those
required for the RA-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.232 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   The special provisions requirements for the R-P Zone shall be the same as
those required for the RA-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.233 LOT COVERAGE.
   The total area of structures on a lot shall not exceed 40%.
(Ord. passed - -)
R-1, RESIDENCE ZONE
§ 156.245 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The R-1 Residence Zone is established to provide a residential
environment characterized by small lots and somewhat greater density of
population than is permitted in the R-P Residence Park Zone.
   (B)   (1)   Representative uses in this zone include single-family
dwellings, parks, playgrounds, schools, churches and other similar and
compatible uses.
      (2)   However, duplexes, apartment buildings and other multiple-family
dwellings and other uses normally associated with a high density population
residential area as well as all commercial and industrial uses shall not be
permitted in this zone.
   (C)   Primacy in the R-1 Residence Zone is given to single-family dwellings
situated on lots not less than 75 feet wide and containing not less than 8,000
square feet in area.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the R-1 Zone, the regulations provided in this
subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.246 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Residence Zone: all uses
permitted in the R-P Residence Park Zone shall be permitted in the R-
1 Residence Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.247 AREA.
   A lot with an area of not less than 8,000 square feet shall be provided and
maintained for each single-family dwelling.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.248 WIDTH.
   A lot on which a single-family dwelling is situated shall not be less than
75 feet in width.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.249 FRONT YARD.
   Every lot on which a single-family dwelling is situated shall have a front
yard of not less than 30 feet, except as otherwise required by §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.250 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   (1)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of
any main building of not less than one and one-half inches for each foot of
building length, or eight inches for each foot of building height, whichever is
the greater distance, provided, however, that no main building shall be set
back less than eight feet from the side property line.
      (2)   Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as
for main buildings, except that no side yard shall be required for accessory
buildings which are located more than 100 feet from the front lot line and not
less than 12 feet from the main building.
   (B)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the side street of not
less than 30 feet. The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for
interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.251 REAR YARD.
   The rear yard requirements for the R-1 Residence Zone shall be the same as
those required for the R-P Residence Park Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.252 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   The height requirements for the R-1 Residence Zone shall be the same as
those required for the RA-1 Residential Agricultural Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.253 LOT COVERAGE.
   The total area of structures on a lot shall not exceed 40%.
(Ord. passed - -)
R-1.5, RESIDENCE ZONE
§ 156.265 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The R-1.5 Residence Zone is established to provide a residential
environment characterized by small lots and somewhat greater density of
population than is permitted in the R-1 Residence Zone.
   (B)   Representative uses in this zone include single-family dwellings, zero
lot line twin-homes, parks, playgrounds, schools, churches and other similar
and compatible uses. However, duplexes, apartment buildings and other multiple-
family dwellings and other uses normally associated with a high density
population residential area, as well as all commercial and industrial uses
shall not be permitted in this zone.
   (C)   Primacy in the R-1.5 Residence Zone is given to single-family
dwellings and zero lot line twin-homes situated on separate lots.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the R-1.5 Zone, the regulations provided in this
subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.266 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1.5 Residence Zone: All uses
permitted in the R-P Residence Park Zone shall be permitted in the R-1.5
Residence Zone along with zero lot line twin-homes.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.267 AREA.
   A lot with an area of not less than 5,200 square feet shall be provided and
maintained for each half of the single-family twin-home dwelling. The area for
an independent single-family residence shall be not less than 6,000 square
feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.268 WIDTH.
   A lot on which a single-family twin-home dwelling is situated shall not be
less than 52 feet in width. The width for an independent single-family
residence shall be not less than 60 feet in width.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.269 FRONT YARD.
   Every lot on which a single-family dwelling is situated shall have a front
yard of not less than 30 feet, except as otherwise required by §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.270 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   The required side yard on each side of any main building of not less
than one and one-half inches for each foot of building length, or eight inches
for each foot of building height, whichever is the greater distance; provided,
however, that no main building shall be set back less than eight feet from the
side property line. Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the
same as for main buildings, except that no side yard shall be required for
accessory buildings which are located more than 100 feet from the front lot
line and not less than 12 feet from the main building. The common wall of the
zero lot line twin-home must be built on the common lot line between the
adjacent subdivision lots.
   (B)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the side street of not
less than 30 feet. The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for
interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.271 REAR YARD.
   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet. For
accessory buildings, no rear yard shall be required on interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.272 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   No building shall be erected to a height of greater than 20 feet, and no
building shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade,
except as permitted under the provisions of §
156.030. Roofs above the square of the building, chimneys, flag poles,
television antennas, church towers and similar structures not used for human
occupancy are excluded in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.273 LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   Maximum lot coverage. Lot coverage, including all area under roofs and
paved or concrete surfaces, shall not exceed 80% of the total lot and parking
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall
be 65% for interior lots and 50% for corner lots. The remaining lot area shall
be landscaped.
   (B)   Lot coverage exemption. The landscaped area on a lot will be
considered to include such hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis
courts, basketball courts, shuffleboard courts and swimming pools, provided
that:
      (1)   The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than
40% of the required landscaped area; and
      (2)   Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the
development.
(Ord. passed - -)
R-2, RESIDENCE ZONE
§ 156.285 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The R-2 Residence Zone is established to provide a residential
environment characterized by smaller lots and a somewhat greater density of
population than the R-1 Residence Zone.
   (B)   Representative uses in this zone include single-family dwellings,
duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes and certain other public facilities which are
necessary to promote and maintain stable residential areas.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the R-2 Residence Zone, the regulations provided
in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.286 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Residence Zone:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the R-P Residence Park Zone and any use permitted
in the R-1 Residence Zone;
   (B)   Duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes, boarding houses and zero lot line
townhouses;
   (C)   Child daycare centers; and
   (D)   Parking lots in connection with permitted buildings, but not including
commercial parking lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.287 AREA.
   (A)   An area of not less than 6,000 square feet shall be provided and
maintained for each single-family dwelling; plus an additional 1,000 square
feet of lot area for each dwelling unit.
   (B)   For child daycare centers, a lot area of at least 8,000 square feet
shall be required.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.288 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any building site for a single-family dwelling shall be
60 feet. The building site for each two-family, three-family and four-family
dwellings and child daycare center shall be 80 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.289 FRONT YARD.
   A front yard of at least 30 feet shall be required except as provided in §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.290 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   For an interior lot, there shall be a side yard on each side of a main
building of not less than one and one-half inches for each foot of building
length or eight inches for each foot of building height, whichever is the
greater distance; provided, however, that no main building shall be set back
less than eight feet from the side property line. Side yard requirements for
accessory buildings shall be the same as for main buildings, except that no
side yards shall be required for accessory buildings which are located more
than 100 feet from the front lot line and at least 12 feet from the main
building.
   (B)   For a corner lot, there shall be a side yard of not less than 30 feet
on the street side. The side yard for the other side shall be the same as for
interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.291 REAR YARD.
   The rear yard requirements for the R-2 Residence Zone shall be the same as
those required for the R-P Residence Park Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.292 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   No building shall be erected to a height greater than two stories. Roofs
above the square of the building, chimneys, flag poles, television antennas,
church towers and other similar structures not used for human occupancy are
excluded in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.293 LOT COVERAGE AND LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Maximum lot coverage. Lot coverage, including all area under roofs and
paved or concrete surfaces, shall not exceed 80% of the total lot and parking
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall
be 65% for interior lots and 50% for corner lots. The remaining lot area shall
be landscaped.
   (B)   Lot coverage exemption. The landscaped area on a lot will be
considered to include such hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis
courts, basketball courts, shuffleboard courts and swimming pools, provided
that:
      (1)   The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than
40% of the required landscaped area; and
      (2)   Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the
development.
(Ord. passed - -)
R-3, RESIDENCE ZONE
§ 156.305 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The objective in establishing the R-3 Residence Zone is to designate
appropriate areas within the county where the residential density is limited to
eight families on any given lot.
   (B)   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter,
and to promote the essential characteristics of this zone, the following
regulations shall apply in the R-3 Residence Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.306 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 Residence Zone.
   (A)   Any use permitted in the RP, R-1; and R-2 Zones; and
   (B)   Residence courts containing not more than eight dwelling units.
Apartment buildings containing not more than eight dwelling units.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.307 AREA.
   The lot area for a single-family unit shall be 6,000 square feet, 1,000 per
unit up to four duplex, which shall be 9,000 square feet. If more than a
fourplex is used, 2,250 for additional units up to eightplexes, which shall be
18,000 square feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.308 WIDTH.
   The minimum width of any building site for dwellings shall be 65 feet
measured at the building setback line.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.309 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of 30 feet from any
public street, except as herein provided and required under the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.310 SIDE YARD.
   (A)   For main buildings, there shall be a side yard of not less than six
inches for each foot of building height, except that no side yard shall be less
than eight feet.
   (B)   Side yard requirements for accessory buildings shall be the same as
for main buildings, except that no side yard shall be required for accessory
buildings which are located more than 100 feet from the front lot line and at
least 12 feet from the main building.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.311 REAR YARD.
   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 feet on
both interior and corner lots. For accessory buildings, no rear lot shall be
required on interior lots.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.312 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   No building shall be erected to a height of greater than 25 feet. Roofs
above the square of the building, chimneys, flagpoles, television antennas,
church towers and similar structures not used for human occupancy are excluded
in determining height.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.313 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   No requirements.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.314 LOT COVERAGE AND LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Maximum lot coverage. Lot coverage, including all area under roofs and
paved or concrete surfaces, shall not exceed 80% of the total lot and parking
area. The maximum lot coverage of single-family attached dwelling units shall
be 65% for interior lots and 50% for corner lots. The remaining lot area shall
be landscaped.
   (B)   Lot coverage exemption. The landscaped area on a lot will be
considered to include such hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities as tennis
courts, basketball courts, shuffleboard courts; and swimming pools, provided
that:
      (1)   The hard-surface outdoor recreation facilities make up no more than
40% of the required landscaped area; and
      (2)   Those facilities are available for the use of all residents of the
development.
(Ord. passed - -)
MH, MANUFACTURED HOME ZONE AND REGULATIONS
§ 156.325 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   This subchapter’s purpose is to provide for placement of structures which do
not comply with the International Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical or
Fire Codes, but do comply with accepted H.U.D. manufactured home standards.
Conventional homes must comply with the International Codes.
   (A)   The MH Zone is established to provide a zone in which the primary use
of the land is for manufactured home parks and manufactured subdivisions and in
which conventional housing may also be built. This zone is characterized by
relatively level land situated adjacent to public roads. Parks which are
designed for manufactured home uses must be located in this zone.
   (B)   The objectives of the manufactured home zone are:
      (1)   To encourage the continued use and development of the land within
this zone for living;
      (2)   To provide space in pleasant surroundings where families can enjoy
favorable conditions for family living and for the raising of children;
      (3)   To safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
these developments; and
      (4)   To provide for proper traffic circulation and open space within
such developments.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.326 LOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   Mobile homes built prior to 1976 (which are identified as mobile
homes) on individual lots without permanent foundations may only be located in
A-1, MH and R-F Zones. Manufactured home subdivisions and courts are allowed
only in MH and R-F Zones.
      (2)   Travel trailer parks are allowed only in Commercial, MH and R-
F Zones.
   (B)   Manufactured homes built after 1976 may be located in all residential
zones subject to complying with the following criteria:
      (1)   Placed on a permanent foundation as identified in Idaho Code § 44-
2202(5);
      (2)   (a)   The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a
space of not less than 960 square feet;
         (b)   The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back
filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the home is similar
in elevation to conventional site built homes;
         (c)   The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof of at least one
foot in 12 feet;
         (d)   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing
which in color, material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and
roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or
which is comparable to the predominant materials used on the surrounding
dwellings as determined by Planning and Zoning Office;
         (e)   The manufactured home shall have a garage or carport constructed
of like materials. If the predominant construction in the area is attached or
detached garages then the same can be required; and
         (f)   The manufactured home must comply with all of the requirements
of the zone in which it is located the same as would be required of
conventional construction.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.327 MH ZONE.
   The MH Zone has been established primarily for the purpose of providing
areas for mobile home developments, especially parks and subdivisions.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.328 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the MH Zone:
   (A)   Single-family mobile home, manufactured homes, conventional built
homes, accessory buildings and structures such as private garages, carports,
private greenhouses, private swimming pools, arbors and other garden
structures;
   (B)   Signs not exceeding eight square feet to inform the public as to the
lease or sale of property and name plates attached to dwellings not exceeding
one and one-half square feet which are designed and maintained to harmonize
with the residential character of the zone;
   (C)   Fences, walls and hedges;
   (D)   A temporary office when used in connection with property within a
subdivision under construction, provided that such temporary office is located
on the same tract of land as the subdivision. A permit, therefore, shall be
valid for not more than two years at the expiration of which time said use
shall be discontinued;
   (E)   Customary household pets, such as dogs, cats and canaries, but not
including the breeding of any animals for sale;
   (F)   Planned unit developments;
   (G)   Manufactured home and mobile home courts;
   (H)   Travel trailer parks;
   (I)   Manufactured home subdivisions;
   (J)   Group daycare for up to 12 children operated in compliance with the
provisions of a home occupation;
   (K)   Home occupations as defined in §
156.146(9); and
   (L)   Exceptions to front setback requirements:
      (1)   Where lots comprising 40% or more of the frontage of any block on
any street are structurally developed, no building thereafter erected or
structurally altered in said block shall project beyond the average front yard
setback so established; and
      (2)   No setback requirement shall be greater than the setback
established for the subject zone, and it is further provided the front of no
building which is to be located between two existing buildings, not exceeding
150 feet apart, will be required to set back further than the average of the
two existing buildings.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.329 LOT COVERAGE.
   The total area of structures on a lot shall not exceed 40%.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.330 MOBILE HOME COURT REGULATIONS; STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The court shall conform to the following standards and requirements.
   (A)   Ownership. The area shall be in one ownership and shall remain in one
ownership, and the same shall not be subdivided.
   (B)   Development plan. The final development plan must be prepared by a
professional surveyor licensed to practice in the state and recorded as a
record of survey or development plan with all road rights-of-way dedicated.
Road standards shall be the same as those required in standard subdivision
plats.
   (C)   Initial site. The initial site for a manufactured home and/or mobile
home park shall be five acres or more and such additional area as may be
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Setback from internal roadways. Each home or accessory buildings shall
be set back 30 feet from property line or road right-of-way.
   (E)   Side yard. Each home or accessory building shall be located so as to
provide one side yard of at least eight feet in width and the front door side
yard of at least 12 feet in width.
   (F)   Rear Yard. Each home or accessory building shall be located so as to
provide an eight-foot rear yard for each unit.
   (G)   Parking spaces and driveways. All off-street parking spaces and
driveways shall be hard surfaced within one year from date of approval of the
court or as agreed in a development agreement.
   (H)   Lot width and depth. Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet or larger with
50% of the lots being 65 feet or larger in the development. The minimum lot
depth shall be capable of fitting a 60-foot home with 50% of the lots being
capable of fitting an 80-foot home.
   (I)   Buffer. Courts shall have a 20-foot wide landscaped sight-obscuring
strip installed and maintained around the entire property. The planting strip
may be counted in the setback requirements from public streets and may be
deleted along boundaries abutting similar land uses and the required eight-foot
buffer will suffice. As an option, a sight-obscuring fence not less than six
feet in height set on the right-of-way line of any public street may be put in.
   (J)   Setbacks from public streets. Same as in the A-1 Zone.
   (K)   Property line setback. No manufactured home or mobile home or add-on
shall be located closer than eight feet to a property line.
   (L)   Width of roadways. Roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate
anticipated traffic as determined and approved by the County Engineer, and all
streets shall be bordered by a sidewalk and shall be hard surfaced or
constructed as specified by County Engineering standards. All streets must be
inspected and approved by the County Engineer. The following utilities must
also be installed and approved by the County Engineer:
      (1)   Street lights;
      (2)   Fire hydrants;
      (3)   Community sewer system;
      (4)   Stormwater system; and
      (5)   Community water system.
   (M)   Entrances. All courts shall have entrances as required depending on
traffic loading.
   (N)   Access to home space. Access shall be provided to each home space by
means of an access way reserved for maneuvering the homes into position and
shall be kept free from trees and other immovable obstructions. Paving the
access way will not be required. Use of planks, steel mats or other means
during placement of the home will be allowed so long as the same are removed
immediately after placement.
   (O)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate
of two 10/20 parking spaces per home space contained within the court or
subdivision. In no case shall the parking space be located greater than 100
feet away from the home space it is designed to serve.
   (P)   State Health Department regulations.
      (1)   In addition to meeting the above requirements and other laws of the
county, all manufactured and mobile home courts shall also conform to
requirements of the State Health Department.
      (2)   In the event of a conflict between other regulations or codes with
this section, the more restrictive provision shall apply. Courts may include a
launderette for convenience of the occupants of the court, but not for the
general public.
   (Q)   Storage space. An area ten feet by 20 feet shall be provided to serve
as the storage space for the renters boats, trailers, campers and other items
that cannot be stored adjacent to the home. Each home site shall be provided
with an individual space to accommodate some storage behind the building
setback lines, or in a separate off-street storage area.
   (R)   Drainage. The site of any court shall be graded and/or filled and
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or waste of any kind. A
court shall not be permitted where there is inadequate drainage. Adequate
drainage shall be provided and maintained for all patios, manufactured and
mobile home stands, buildings, sidewalks, streets and other improvements.
   (S)   Streets and traffic control signs. Streets and traffic control signs
as required by the County Engineer shall be placed in all courts.
   (T)   Drain systems. All streets, water, sanitary sewer and storm drain
systems shall meet county or state standards and shall be inspected by and meet
the approval of the County Engineer or appropriate agency.
   (U)   Dwelling types. Only mobile homes, manufactured homes and a court
manager’s conventional site built home shall be allowed to occupy a space in a
court.
   (V)   Review and approvals.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review the plan and proposed
documents to determine compliance with all portions of this chapter. If
approved, the Commission shall express its approval and state the conditions of
approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and reason
therefor.
      (2)   Approval of the preliminary plan shall be good for one year.
Thereafter, approval of the preliminary plan will have expired unless a final
plan has been submitted to the County Commissioners accepted and recorded, or a
mutually agreed upon extension has been granted by the County Commissioners.
Whenever a final plan is submitted for less than the entire area covered by the
preliminary plan, approval of the preliminary plan for the remaining unplatted
area shall be automatically extended for an additional one year.
   (W)   Prepare preliminary plan. The preliminary plan and documents shall be
prepared and submitted as follows: eight copies of the preliminary plan must be
submitted to the County Planning Office at least 30 days prior to the meeting
of the Planning Commission at which the plan will be considered. It should be
drawn to a scale not smaller than one-inch equals 100 feet and show the
following information:
      (1)   The proposed street and lot layout;
      (2)   Size and character of recreation buildings and other structures
associated with land and facilities to be used by the occupants;
      (3)   Layout of typical space;
      (4)   Tabulations showing:
         (a)   The area of land within the manufactured/mobile home court;
         (b)   The number of spaces provided for in the court; and
         (c)   The number of off-street parking spaces.
      (5)   Proposed location of off-street parking spaces;
      (6)   Generalized landscape planting plan;
      (7)   Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements,
water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, storm drains and facilities, curbs,
sidewalks, street lights and other improvements;
      (8)   Typical street sections, if any variations from normal county
standards are proposed, and required dedications for additional public road
right-of-way;
      (9)   Draft of proposed documents, including:
         (a)   Management policies, setting forth the responsibilities and
duties of the renters or occupants and owners within the manufactured/mobile
home court; and
         (b)   Maintenance agreement between the developers and the county
stating, among other things:
            1.   The developer will construct the project in accordance with
approved plans; and
            2.   In the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners,
successors or assigns to maintain the common areas, landscaping and other
improvements in good condition it shall be deemed a public nuisance endangering
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, in which case the county may
perform the necessary work and for that purpose may enter in upon the land and
do said work and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorneys’ fees,
against the owners or their successors or assignees.
      (10)   Insert showing location of development; and
      (11)   North point, scale and date.
   (X)   Final site plan. Upon approval of the preliminary plan and documents
by the Planning Commission, the developer shall submit to the County
Commissioners copies of a final site plan of either the entire court or the
first stage of such development that is to be constructed, and final copies of
all required documents. Such plan shall be drawn to scale not smaller than one
inch equals 100 feet and shall provide, in detail, the information required in
this chapter. This shall include detailed and complete plans of the alignment,
location and grade of all streets and utilities. No building permit shall be
issued for said court until final plans have been approved by the County
Commissioners and the required documents filed in the Planning and Zoning
Office and until the development agreement has been signed and recorded, and a
copy of the court plan is recorded.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.331 TRAVEL TRAILER PARK; STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The development of a travel trailer park shall conform to
the following standards and requirements.
   (B)   Ownership. Each travel trailer park shall be held in one ownership and
shall contain at least two and one-half acres of land.
   (C)   Setback from county roads. Same as in the A-1 Zone.
   (D)   Roadway system. The roadway system shall provide convenient
circulation through the travel trailer park and provide access to each travel
trailer space. No travel trailer space will be permitted direct access to a
public street, road or highway other than by means of the travel trailer park
roadway system. All entrances and exits from the travel trailer parks shall be
forward motion only. No exit or entrance from a travel trailer park shall be
through a residential zone, and no entrance or exit shall be located closer
than 70 feet to the intersection of two streets.
   (E)   Buffer yard. Same as in §
156.330(I).
   (F)   Width and length of space. Each travel trailer space shall be at least
20 feet in width and at least 50 feet in length. All trailers and or vehicles
will be parked clear of any interior roadway.
   (G)   Water and sewage. All travel trailer parks shall be served by an
approved water and sewage disposal system. In addition, the travel trailer park
shall have a sewage dump for self-contained trailer units. The park shall also
have a public restroom, shower and laundry facility.
   (H)   State and district health regulations. In addition to meeting the
above requirements, all travel trailer parks shall conform to the requirements
of the State and District Health Department relating to travel trailer parks.
   (I)   Drainage. See §
156.330(R).
   (J)   Traffic signs. See §
156.330(S).
   (K)   Occupancy of spaces. Both dependent and independent travel trailers
shall be allowed to occupy travel trailer spaces in a travel trailer park.
   (L)   Improvements. All improvements, including utilities, streets, paved
areas and landscaping, must be completed before start of operation.
   (M)   Property line setback. No travel trailer shall be located closer than
eight feet to a property line.
   (N)   Reviews and approvals. Same as §
156.330(V).
   (O)   Prepare preliminary plan. Same as §
156.330(W).
   (P)   Final site plan. Same as §
156.330(X).
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.332 MANUFACTURED HOME AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION; STANDARDS AND
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. All manufactured and mobile home subdivisions shall follow
the regular requirements and procedures as outlined in the subdivision
regulations of the county with the following stipulations.
   (B)   Width and depth. The minimum width of any building site for a
manufactured home or mobile home lot shall be 65 feet. The minimum lot depth
shall be capable of fitting a 60-foot home with 50% of the lots being capable
of fitting an 80-foot home.
   (C)   Side yard. Same as §
156.330(E).
   (D)   Street setback. Shall be the same as in the A-1 Zone.
   (E)   Rear yard. No home or add-on shall be closer than eight feet from the
rear lot line, or from any accessory structure behind the home or add-on.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
LNC, LIMITED NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
§ 156.345 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The LNC Zone is designed to permit carefully regulated development of
a limited range of commercial uses on small parcels in appropriate locations
for the convenience of persons living in residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter,
and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following regulations
shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.346 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the LNC Zone:
   (A)   Grocery stores, including convenience stores;
   (B)   Gasoline pumps as an accessory use;
   (C)   Self-service laundries;
   (D)   Daycare centers and group daycare facilities;
   (E)   Beauty and barber shops; and
   (F)   Accessory buildings or public utilities used in conjunction with the
permitted uses listed above.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.347 STANDARDS.
   All uses of property in an LNC Zone shall comply with the following
performance standards.
   (A)   Location of LNC Zones. LNC Zones shall be located at the intersection
of an arterial with a collector street in an area zoned residential or
designated as such on the comprehensive plan. Only one LNC Zone shall be
located at any one intersection. LNC Zones shall be designated on the
preliminary and final plats of the subdivision served by such centers.
   (B)   Maximum size of LNC Zones parcels. The maximum size of any LNC parcel
shall be two acres.
   (C)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage permitted in the LNC Zone shall
be 70%. Lot coverage includes driveways, parking, loading and service or
storage areas or rooftops.
   (D)   Access to LNC Zones. LNC uses shall be served by the adjacent
collector street and shall have no direct access to the arterial street.
   (E)   Signs. Revolving, animated, roof, off-premises, portable or pole signs
shall not be permitted in an LNC Zone. Signs shall be limited to two 32-square
foot wall mounted signs.
   (F)   Landscape. A ten-foot buffer on all sides of the lot consisting of
fences, shrubs, trees or berms or a combination thereof.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.348 LOCATION.
   Front yard, see §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.349 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   Buildings may be a maximum of 20 feet to the square.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.350 OTHER STANDARDS.
   No noise allowed above 70 dBa; no offensive dust or odors shall be allowed;
all lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties and shielded to
avoid any direct glare; illumination on adjacent properties will not be
increased by more than 0.5 foot-candles; building heights will not exceed
maximum in adjacent zone; setbacks shall match those of the adjacent zone.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
SC-1, NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
§ 156.365 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The SC-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone is established to provide
an area where the primary use is for retail stores and shops selling the kind
of goods and services required to fill the need for household goods and
personal services of the people living in the surrounding neighborhood. The SC-
1 Zone shall be located not less than one-half mile and preferably one mile or
more from each other or from other zones in which business is permitted and
shall normally be not more than 20 acres in area.
   (B)   The SC-1 Zone shall be characterized by a harmonious grouping of a
variety of stores, shops and other permitted uses into an architectural unit.
Other characteristics of the zone include clean, well-lighted parking lots and
attractive, properly maintained business buildings and landscaping. Because
this zone will usually be surrounded by residential development, the lawn,
trees and shrubbery should be planted and maintained in harmony with the
surrounding area. Traffic congestion shall be reduced to a minimum and
residential amenities shall be reserved and protected insofar as possible. The
area selected for the SC-1 Zone should be developed to provide retail service
to the surrounding residential area as the area grows. Assurance that
development will proceed as planned shall be required.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the SC-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone, the
regulations provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.366 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Before any territory is added to the SC-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center
Zone, and before any building or structure is erected within the zone, a
preliminary development plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Commission. Such plan shall show the location of existing and proposed
buildings and structures, location of entrances, loading points, waste disposal
facilities, curbs, driveways, driving lanes, parking lanes, fences, walls,
malls and open spaces and the location and size of any detached signs. The plan
may be amended from time to time in harmony with the provisions of this
section, but only after approval by the Planning Commission. Planning
Commission review and approval of the development plan shall furnish guidance
to achieve a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development designed to meet
existing and anticipated future needs and to further the objectives and
characteristics of this zone. In granting approval of a development plan, the
Planning Commission shall consider among other things, protection of property
values, preservation of residential amenities in the surrounding area,
characteristics of the surrounding zones, present and future requirements for
off-street parking, traffic circulation and the relation of off-street parking
to exits and entrances to streets and buildings.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as are
necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter and promote the
characteristics of the zone. In approving a development plan the Planning
Commission may act on plans submitted to it or may act on its own initiative in
preparing and approving a development plan.
   (C)   If a developer desires to develop only a part of the SC-1 Zone at any
one time, such information shall be down on the development plan.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.367 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Uses permitted in the SC-1 Zone shall be limited to those which shall
harmonize with the objectives and characteristics of the zone.
   (B)   Accordingly, only the following uses shall be permitted in the SC-
1 Zone in accordance with a development plan which has been approved by the
Planning Commission:
      (1)   Florist shops;
      (2)   Garden supply stores;
      (3)   Pet shops, hobby supply stores;
      (4)   Barber shops;
      (5)   Beauty parlors;
      (6)   Dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up agencies, and dry-cleaning
establishments which do not clean clothes from other cleaners or pick-up
agencies;
      (7)   Pressing, altering and repairing of wearing apparel;
      (8)   Ice pick-up stations;
      (9)   Music studios, record shops, radio and television repair shops;
      (10)   Book and stationery stores, gift shops;
      (11)   Camera and photo supply shops;
      (12)   Confectionery stores;
      (13)   Dairy product stores;
      (14)   Delicatessens;
      (15)   Grocery stores;
      (16)   Super markets;
      (17)   Food catering services;
      (18)   Bakeries: on-site retail only;
      (19)   Restaurants, cafés, tea rooms;
      (20)   Drug stores;
      (21)   Variety stores;
      (22)   Dry goods stores;
      (23)   Department stores;
      (24)   Clothing stores;
      (25)   Shoe stores and repair shops;
      (26)   Jewelry stores, including sale and repair of jewelry, watches and
small appliances;
      (27)   Sporting goods stores;
      (28)   Hardware stores;
      (29)   Fix-it shops;
      (30)   Wallpaper and paint stores;
      (31)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (32)   Office buildings, professional buildings;
      (33)   Bowling alley, pool and billiard rooms;
      (34)   Public and private parking lots;
      (35)   Clinics, dental and medical office buildings;
      (36)   Service stations;
      (37)   Public service buildings;
      (38)   Stores selling a combination of items provided only those items
are sold which are commonly sold in the establishments above listed;
      (39)   Accessory uses and buildings ordinarily pertinent to any of the
aforementioned uses;
      (40)   Daycare centers and group daycare facilities;
      (41)   Non-flashing signs advertising services, merchandise or products
offered for sale in the building on which the sign is located, provided such
signs are attached to and do not protrude more than four feet beyond the wall
of the building to which the sign is attached;
      (42)   Traffic direction signs not to exceed four square feet in area,
also one shopping center identification sign may be constructed which need not
be attached to a building;
      (43)   Other uses approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission which
are similar to the above listed uses and in harmony with the objectives and
characteristics of this zone; and
      (44)   Manufacturing, processing and/or fabrication shall be limited to
products sold at retail on the premises.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.368 AREA.
   Each single SC-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone shall contain at least
one acre, but not more than 20 acres. There shall be no maximum or minimum area
requirements for any individual lot contained within the SC-1 Zone except for
area required for setback and for off-street parking space.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.369 WIDTH.
   Each single SC-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone shall have a width of at
least 200 feet along an abutting street. There shall be no maximum or minimum
width requirements for any individual building or lot contained within an SC-
1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.370 LOCATION.
   All buildings and structures shall be located within the zone in compliance
with the development plan approved by the Planning Commission; provided,
however, that all buildings shall be set back at least 30 feet from all
streets, except as required under the provisions of §
156.044, and at least 15 feet from the exterior boundaries of the SC-1 Zone,
except those boundaries formed by streets.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.371 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   The maximum height of any building measured from the grade to the square of
the building shall be 35 feet. Chimneys, flag poles, television antennas and
similar structures shall be excluded in determining the height of a building.
No minimum height shall be required for buildings.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.372 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no size requirements for buildings in this zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.373 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The improvements shown on the development plan shall be started within
a period of 12 months and shall be completed and ready for occupancy within a
period of 30 months from the date of zone designation by the Board of County
Commissioners. The Board of County Commissioners may reclassify any or all of
the territory covered by the development plan into another zone, if actual
development does not occur within the time herein specified. Satisfactory
assurance that the improvements shown on the plan will be made within the time
specified must be furnished to the Planning Commission before an SC-1 Zone can
be established or expanded.
   (B)   A landscaped strip of lawn, shrubbery and/or trees at least 30 feet in
width shall be provided and maintained along the entire length of any street
within or abutting upon the zone except for permitted driveways and in
accordance with the development.
   (C)   All storage and activities, except loading and unloading and
automobile parking and refueling shall be conducted within the building.
   (D)   No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare or noise,
which is discernible beyond the premises, shall be permitted.
   (E)   All off-street parking space shall be hard surfaced. No off-street
parking space shall be located between a street and a building unless the
building is located at least 60 feet from the street. Bumper guards shall also
be provided to protect the landscaping as required by the Planning Commission.
   (F)   Residential buildings, industrial uses and buildings shall not be
permitted in any SC-1 Zone.
   (G)   (1)   All buildings shall be constructed so as to be architecturally
harmonious, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, with the characteristics
of the surrounding area. Only types of materials approved by the Planning
Commission shall be used.
      (2)   A plan showing architectural design and specifications of materials
to be used on the exterior of all buildings to be constructed shall be
submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission before issuance of any
building permit.
      (3)   Where parking area abuts adjacent private property, a masonry wall,
ornamental fence or planter strip, as the Planning Commission shall determine
to be most suitable, shall be erected. Additional landscaping may be required
to further protect abutting land use or zone.
   (H)   All lighting shall be indirect or shielded and so designed as to
reflect away from adjoining residences.
   (I)   No driveway shall be located closer than 150 feet to the point of
intersection of the front property line with the side property line which abuts
upon a street, except that the Planning Commission may authorize a lesser
distance along a minor street when it can be shown that traffic congestion or
hazards will not be increased thereby.
(Ord. passed - -)
C-1, LIMITED COMMERCIAL ZONE
§ 156.385 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   (1)   The C-1 Limited Commercial Zone is established to provide an
area where the primary use is for retail stores and service establishments
selling the kind of goods and services required to fill the need for daily
household goods and personal services of the people living in the surrounding
area.
      (2)   This zone is usually located at specific locations along highways
or other major streets and is characterized by buildings having a wide variety
of architectural forms and shapes.
   (B)   The objectives of this zone are:
      (1)   To encourage the development and continued use of the land within
the zone for commercial purposes;
      (2)   To promote the development of adequate and convenient retail and
service facilities;
      (3)   To provide suitable areas for commercial development within the
county and to prevent the scattering of commercial uses into surrounding zones;
and
      (4)   To prohibit industrial development within the zone and to
discourage any other uses which tend to discourage the continued use and
development of the land within the zone for its primary purpose.
   (C)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the C-1 Limited Commercial Zone, the regulations
provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.386 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 Limited Commercial Zone:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the SC-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center Zone;
   (B)   Appliance shops and appliance service establishments;
   (C)   Bakeries;
   (D)   Drive-in restaurants;
   (E)   Customary home occupations;
   (F)   Office buildings, motels, radio and television studios and antennas
and enclosed rental storage facilities;
   (G)   Commercial garages, but not including the storage of wrecked or
dismantled automobiles;
   (H)   Caretaker dwellings;
   (I)   Glass cutting and installation;
   (J)   Plumbing, carpenter shops and similar craft shops;
   (K)   Public buildings and public utility buildings and structures;
   (L)   Signs identifying the buildings and signs advertising products sold on
the premises; and
   (M)   Other uses approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission which are
similar to the above listed uses and in harmony with the objectives and
characteristics of this zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.387 AREA, WIDTH, LOCATION, HEIGHT AND SIZE.
   There shall be no area, width, location, height and size requirements for
commercial buildings and structures constructed in accordance with the building
code of the county, except that setbacks from public streets shall be in
accordance with the provisions of §
156.044 and have frontage on an approved county road or an approved subdivided
commercial park access road.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.388 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in this chapter and
shall be hard surfaced.
   (B)   All merchandise, equipment and other materials, except seasonal
merchandise such as nursery stock, fruits and vegetables and vehicles in
running order, shall be stored within an enclosed building.
   (C)   No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare or noise
which is discernible beyond the premises shall be permitted.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
HC-1, LIMITED BUSINESS ZONE
§ 156.400 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The HC-1 Limited Business Zone has been established as a district in
which the primary use of the land is for retail stores and service
establishments to serve the traveling public. This Zone is usually located at
specific locations along highways leading into the county, and is characterized
by buildings set back from the right-of-way line and having a wide variety of
architectural forms and shapes.
   (B)   The objectives in establishing this zone are to:
      (1)   Encourage the development and continued use of the land within the
zone for business purposes;
      (2)   To promote safety on the highway;
      (3)   To maintain maximum use of highway right-of-way for travel
purposes; and
      (4)   To prohibit uses which tend to thwart or militate against the
continued use and development of the land within the zone for its primary
purpose.
   (C)   In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter,
and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following regulations
shall apply in the HC-1 Limited Business Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.401 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the HC-1 Limited Business Zone: any
use permitted in the SC-1 Residential Shopping Center Zone and in the C-
1 Limited Commercial Zone, except that a dwelling shall not be permitted unless
such dwelling is a custodial or caretaker dwelling incidental to the use of the
land for commercial purposes:
   (A)   Super service stations;
   (B)   Automobile sales lots;
   (C)   Drive-in eating establishments;
   (D)   Machinery sales establishments and billboards;
   (E)   Amusement enterprises, such as merry-go-rounds, penny arcades and the
like;
   (F)   Retail establishments with incidental wholesaling, but excluding
establishments, the principal activity of which is storage warehouse;
   (G)   Auto body repair shops;
   (H)   Beer parlors, taverns and cocktail lounges;
   (I)   All outside storage except for vehicles in running order shall be
enclosed within a site-obscuring fence; and
   (J)   Other uses ruled by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be similar
to the above listed uses and in harmony with the objectives and characteristics
of this zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.402 AREA, WIDTH, LOCATION, HEIGHT AND SIZE.
   No requirements, except for front yards, see §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.403 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   No dust, odor, smoke, vibration or intermittent light, glare or noise shall
be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises, except for normal movement
of automobile traffic.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
C-2, GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
§ 156.415 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The C-2 General Commercial Zone is established to provide an area
where the primary use is for heavy commercial establishments and for
industries, which do not constitute a nuisance. The objectives of this zone
are:
      (1)   To designate the most appropriate use of land within the county for
retail and wholesale establishments and to prevent the scattering of commercial
uses along the highways and into surrounding zones;
      (2)   To encourage the construction of and continued use of the land for
commercial and industrial purposes; and
      (3)   To discourage the use of the land for dwellings and for nuisance
industries or any other use which would discourage the use of the land for its
primary purpose.
   (B)   This zone is characterized by a mixture of businesses, warehouses,
craft shops and manufacturing and industrial enterprises which are incidental
to retail and wholesale establishments.
   (C)   Representative uses within this zone include retail and wholesale
establishments, plumbing, carpentry and other craft shops, warehousing,
equipment yards and equipment sales yards.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the C-2 General Commercial Zone, the regulations
provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.416 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 General Commercial Zone:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the C-1 Limited Commercial Zone;
   (B)   Wholesale distributing houses and warehouses;
   (C)   Service establishments such as dyeing, cleaning or laundry; electrical
and plumbing shops, printing plants, machine shops, blacksmith shops;
   (D)   Bakeries, confectionery plants, dehydrating plants and other food
preparation plants, the operation of which is not obnoxious by reason of
emission of odors, smoke or noise;
   (E)   Milk distribution stations, creameries, bottling works and similar
businesses;
   (F)   Caretakers’ dwellings when located on the same lot as a use permitted
in this zone;
   (G)   Assembly and sale of farm, mining and similar equipment, machinery and
vehicles, but excluding junk and salvage yards and auto wrecking yards;
   (H)   Public garages and public parking lots;
   (I)   Veterinary hospitals;
   (J)   Hatcheries;
   (K)   Hauling and storage, including railroad trackage at stations;
   (L)   Building materials storage yards;
   (M)   Stone cutting and monument works;
   (N)   Coal, lumber and timber yards;
   (O)   Manufacturing, mixing, processing and selling of hay, grain and other
livestock feed;
   (P)   Wholesale and bulk gasoline;
   (Q)   Oil and gas storage or sales;
   (R)   Service stations; and
   (S)   Other uses approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission which are
similar to the foregoing uses; provided, that such other uses are not
inconsistent with the objectives and characteristics of this zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.417 AREA.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.418 WIDTH.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.419 LOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   There shall be no location requirements except that all buildings abutting
upon major county roads and state and federally designated highways shall be
set back in accordance with the provisions of §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.420 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no height requirements within the C-2 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.421 SIZE.
   There shall be no size requirements within the C-2 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.422 LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   Lot coverage, including all area under roofs and paved surfaces,
including driveways, walks and parking areas, shall not exceed 80% of the total
lot area.
   (B)   The remaining lot area (at least 20% of the total lot area) shall be
landscaped.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.423 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   All outside storage space except for vehicles in running order shall be
enclosed within a sight-obscuring fence.
(Ord. passed - -)
P-B, PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS OFFICE ZONE
§ 156.435 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   The objective in establishing the P-B Professional Business Office Zone is
to provide for business and professional offices, governmental and cultural
facilities and certain other uses of semi-commercial nature. This zone is
characterized by relatively high traffic volumes and a wide variety of office
type buildings. In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this
chapter, and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following
regulations shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.436 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the P-B Zone:
   (A)   Business and professional offices, including incidental storage, but
excluding wholesale and retail stores, shops or markets;
   (B)   Medical and dental clinics;
   (C)   Government offices, excluding storage except for incidental use;
   (D)   Non-flashing pole signs identifying the business not to exceed 100
feet in size or exceed 15 feet in height. Wall signs are limited to 10% of the
area of the buildings front surface area; and
   (E)   Other uses, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, which
are similar.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.437 AREA AND WIDTH.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.438 LOCATION.
   (A)   Front yard, see §
156.044.
   (B)   Side yard and rear yard: 20-foot minimum.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.439 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   Buildings may be a maximum of two stories in height.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.440 BUFFERING.
   Landscape a ten-foot buffer on all sides of the lot consisting of fences,
shrubs, trees or berms or a combination thereof.
(Ord. passed - -)
M-1, MANUFACTURING ZONE
§ 156.455 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The M-1 Manufacturing Zone is established to provide an area where the
primary use of the land is for manufacturing.
   (B)   This zone is characterized by relatively flat, open land, located
close to transportation, public utilities and other facilities required for
manufacturing operations. This zone is also characterized by buildings and off-
street parking lots situated among spacious lawns, trees, shrubs and other
attractive landscaping and by attractively designed buildings, situated in
grounds, which have the appearance of a park.
   (C)   Representative uses within this zone include manufacturing
establishments, office buildings, educational buildings and research
laboratories.
   (D)   To encourage the location of manufacturing establishments in this
zone, regulations shall be designed to achieve an attractive park-type
development. Dwellings and other uses which tend to discourage the use of the
land for manufacturing purposes are excluded. The objectives of the M-1 Zone
are:
      (1)   To provide for certain types of manufacturing establishments which
require a large area attractively landscaped and free from smoke, noise, fumes
and vibration;
      (2)   To broaden the tax base; and
      (3)   To encourage new industry to locate within the county to promote
the economic and social well-being of the county and its residents.
   (E)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the M-1 Manufacturing Zone, the regulations
provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.456 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the M-1 Zone:
   (A)   Manufacturing, processing and fabricating establishments except those
in which explosives or other dangerous materials are used;
   (B)   Assembling of material from previously prepared parts;
   (C)   Research laboratories, excluding activities, which are hazardous
because of the danger of explosion or fire;
   (D)   Office buildings and parking lots incidental to uses otherwise
permitted in the zone;
   (E)   Public buildings, public recreational buildings, public utilities
buildings;
   (F)   Parking lots;
   (G)   Educational institutions;
   (H)   Identifying signs attached to buildings;
   (I)   Buildings, accessory to and incidental to uses permitted in the zone;
and
   (J)   Other uses similar to the foregoing uses which are determined by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to be in harmony with the character of this
zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.457 AREA.
   No single M-1 Zone shall contain less than 30 acres, However, there shall be
no requirements for individual buildings or lots, except that the area shall be
sufficient to provide for required setbacks, landscaping and off-street
parking.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.458 WIDTH.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.459 LOCATION.
   All buildings shall be set back a distance of at least 30 feet from any
public street, except as required under §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.460 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no height requirements within the M-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.461 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no requirements for the size of buildings in the M-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.462 LOT COVERAGE.
   (A)   All buildings on any lot shall not occupy more than 30% of the total
area of any lot. Lot coverage, including all area under roofs and paved
surfaces, including driveways, walks and parking areas, shall not exceed 80% of
the total lot area.
   (B)   The remaining lot area (at least 20% of the total lot area) shall be
landscaped.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.463 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The entire lot shall be kept free from refuse, debris and waste
material and all such refuse, debris and waste material shall be kept in
approved containers and stored so that the containers cannot be seen from any
public street. Dust, odors, smoke, vibration, intermittent lights, glare,
noise, fumes, ash or sound which is discernible beyond the premises shall be
prohibited except that which results from normal traffic movements.
   (B)   All storage and activities except loading and unloading and automobile
parking shall be conducted within a building.
   (C)   All areas not covered by buildings or by off-street parking space
shall be planted into lawn, trees and shrubs and otherwise landscaped and
maintained in accordance with good landscaped practice.
   (D)   The required setback space shall not be used for automobile parking,
but shall be landscaped and maintained with lawns and trees and shrubs except
for permitted driveways.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
M-1A, MANUFACTURING ZONE
§ 156.475 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The M-1A Manufacturing Zone is established to provide an area where
the primary use of the land is for manufacturing.
   (B)   This zone is characterized by relatively flat, open land, located
close to transportation, public utilities and other facilities required for
manufacturing operations. This zone is also characterized by buildings and off-
street parking lots situated among spacious lawns, trees, shrubs and other
attractive landscaping and by attractively designed buildings.
   (C)   Representative uses within this zone include manufacturing
establishments, office buildings, wholesale businesses, limited retail sales,
warehousing, educational buildings and research laboratories.
   (D)   To encourage the location of manufacturing establishments in this
zone, regulations shall be designed to achieve an attractive development.
Dwellings and other uses, which tend to discourage the use of the land for
manufacturing purposes are excluded. The objectives of the M-1A Zone are:
      (1)   To provide for certain types of manufacturing establishments which
require a large area that are landscaped and free from smoke, noise, fumes and
vibration;
      (2)   To broaden the tax base; and
      (3)   To encourage new commercial and industrial uses to locate within
the county to promote the economic and social well-being of the county and its
residents.
   (E)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the M-1A Manufacturing Zone, the regulations
provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.476 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the M-1A Zone:
   (A)   Manufacturing, processing and fabricating establishments except those
in which explosives or other dangerous materials are used;
   (B)   Assembling of material from previously prepared parts;
   (C)   Research laboratories, excluding activities, which are hazardous
because of the danger of explosion or fire;
   (D)   Office buildings, wholesale businesses, limited retail sales and
warehousing;
   (E)   Public buildings, public recreational buildings and public utilities
buildings;
   (F)   Parking lots;
   (G)   Educational institutions;
   (H)   Identifying signs attached to buildings;
   (I)   Buildings, accessory to and incidental to uses permitted in the zone;
and
   (J)   Other uses similar to the foregoing uses, which are determined by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to be in harmony with the character of this
zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.477 AREA.
   No single M-1A Zone shall contain less than five acres; however, there shall
be no requirements for individual buildings or lots, except that the area shall
be sufficient to provide for required setbacks, landscaping and off-street
parking.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.478 WIDTH.
   There shall be no requirements for individual buildings.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.479 LOCATION.
   All buildings shall be set back a distance of at least 30 feet from any
public street, except as required under §
156.044 and have frontage on an approved county road or an approved subdivided
commercial park access road.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.480 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no height restrictions within the M-1A Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.481 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no requirements for the size of buildings in the M-1A Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.482 LOT COVERAGE.
   All buildings on any lot shall not occupy more than 50% of the total area of
any lot. Lot coverage, including all area under roofs and paved surfaces,
including driveways, walks and parking areas, shall not exceed 80% of the total
lot area. The remaining lot area (at least 20% of the total lot area) shall be
landscaped.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.483 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The entire lot shall be kept free from refuse, debris and waste
material, and all such refuse, debris and waste material shall be kept in
approved containers and stored so that the containers cannot be seen from any
public street. Dust, odors, smoke, vibration, intermittent lights, glare,
noise, fumes, ash or sound which is discernible beyond the premises shall be
prohibited except that which results from normal traffic movements.
   (B)   All storage and activities except loading and unloading and automobile
parking shall be conducted within a building or behind a sight-obscuring fence.
   (C)   All areas not covered by buildings or by off-street parking space
shall be planted into lawn, trees and shrubs and otherwise landscaped and
maintained in accordance with good landscaped practice.
   (D)   The required setback space may be used for automobile parking, but
shall be landscaped and maintained with lawns and trees and shrubs.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
I&M-1, INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE
§ 156.495 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone is established to provide
an area where the primary use of the land is for manufacturing, fabricating,
processing and warehousing. This zone is characterized by relatively flat land
suited for industrial uses because of its location near railroad tracks and
streets and availability of necessary utilities. While much of the land within
this zone may be devoted to agriculture and other open land uses, it is
intended that manufacturing and industrial uses shall be directed into this
zone as the need arises.
   (B)   Representative uses within this zone include manufacturing,
fabrication, processing, storage, warehousing and wholesale distribution and
railroad trackage, switch yards and terminal facilities. Uses which give rise
to excessive noise, vibration, smoke, odor or dust, fumes or danger of
explosion have been excluded from this zone. To attract manufacturing and
industrial establishments into this zone, regulations concerning the external
appearance of buildings and structures and the maintenance and use of land have
been adopted. Dwellings and other uses which discourage the use of the land for
its primary purposes have been excluded.
   (C)   The objectives in establishing the I&M-1 Zone are:
      (1)   To provide space for manufacturing and industrial uses within the
county in appropriate locations and to discourage uses which discourage the use
of land for industrial purposes;
      (2)   To encourage the expansion of industrial establishments already
existing within the zone;
      (3)   To encourage new industry to locate within the zone to promote the
economic well-being of the county and its residents;
      (4)   To prevent the encroachment of industrial uses into non-industrial
zones; and
      (5)   To prevent the commingling of incompatible uses which result in
depreciation of property values and unwholesome social conditions.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone, the
regulations provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.496 PERMITTED USES.
   Land within the I&M-1 Zone may be devoted to any use except that the
following uses shall be prohibited:
   (A)   All residential uses except the residence of a caretaker of an
industrial plant;
   (B)   Manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum, rock wool, plaster of paris,
acid, glue, organic fertilizer or rubber and the manufacture or storage of
explosives;
   (C)   Rendering of fat, distillation of bones, reduction of dead animals and
garbage dumps;
   (D)   Milling or smelting of ores;
   (E)   Amusement enterprises, bowling alleys, clubs and fraternal societies,
dance halls, nightclubs, pool and billiard halls, dancing and music schools,
gymnasium and physical culture establishments, hotels and hospitals for human
care;
   (F)   Auto wrecking and crushing;
   (G)   The storing of unused, discarded and partially dismantled automobiles;
and
   (H)   Dump grounds.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.497 AREA.
   There shall be no area requirements within the I&M-1 Zone, except that an
area sufficient to accommodate off-street parking, loading and unloading and
vehicular access shall be provided and maintained.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.498 WIDTH.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.499 LOCATION.
   All buildings shall be set back a distance of not less than 30 feet from any
public street, except as required under the provisions of §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.500 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no height requirements within the I&M-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.501 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no requirements for the size of buildings within the I&M-
1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.502 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   All outside storage except for vehicles in running order shall be enclosed
within an approved sight-obscuring fence.
(Ord. passed - -)
I&M-2, INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE
§ 156.515 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The I&M-2 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone is established to provide
an area where the primary use is for industrial, manufacturing and processing
establishments involving offensive odor, noise, smoke, vibration or other
objectionable features when located near residential and business districts.
   (B)   Representative uses within this zone include the pasturing of animals,
stockyards and animal by-products plants.
   (C)   The objectives of this zone are:
      (1)   To provide a suitable area for the location of industrial uses,
which result in the creation of dust, smoke, noise, odor, fumes or which are
otherwise offensive;
      (2)   To prevent the encroachment of such objectionable uses into non-
industrial zones; and
      (3)   To prevent the commingling of incompatible uses resulting in the
depreciation of property values and unwholesome social conditions.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the I&M-2 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone, the
regulations provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.516 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the I&M-2 Zone:
   (A)   Manufacturing of cement, lime, gypsum, rock wool or similar products;
   (B)   Manufacturing of acid, glue or similar products;
   (C)   Fat rendering, distillation of bones and manufacturing of organic
fertilizer;
   (D)   Refining of petroleum and other oil products;
   (E)   Milling or smelting of ores;
   (F)   Garbage or animal reduction;
   (G)   Stockyards, feeding yards or slaughter of animals;
   (H)   Asphalt mixing plants;
   (I)   House wrecking yards;
   (J)   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging and fabrication
establishments and incidental retailing in connection therewith;
   (K)   Storage yards, warehousing;
   (L)   Railroad tracks and facilities;
   (M)   Rock crusher;
   (N)   Saw mills;
   (O)   Service stations;
   (P)   Signs;
   (Q)   Craft shops;
   (R)   Plumbing and heating;
   (S)   The residence of a caretaker of an industrial plant permitted in the
zone; and
   (T)   Other uses determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be
similar to the foregoing uses and which are consistent with the objectives and
characteristics of this zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.517 AREA.
   There shall be no area requirements within the I&M-2 Zone except that an
area sufficient to accommodate off-street parking, loading and unloading and
vehicular access shall be provided and maintained.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.518 WIDTH.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.519 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no height requirements within the I&M-2 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.520 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no requirements for the size of buildings within the I&M-
2 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.521 LOCATION.
   All buildings shall be set back a distance of not less than 30 feet from any
public street, except as required under the provisions of §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
I&M-3, INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING ZONE
§ 156.535 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The I&M-3 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone is established to provide
an area where the primary use of the land is for wrecking, crushing and storing
of unused, discarded and partially dismantled automobiles and for the dumping
of domestic industrial waste products.
   (B)   Representative of the uses within the zone are: auto wrecking yards;
dump grounds; and the grazing of animals.
   (C)   The objective of this zone is to provide appropriate land within the
county where auto wrecking yards, salvage yards and dump yards may be
established and maintained under conditions which do not diminish surrounding
property values.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives of this chapter, and to promote the
characteristics of the I&M-3 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone, the regulations
provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.536 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the I&M-3 Zone:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the I&M-2 Zone;
   (B)   Auto wrecking and crushing;
   (C)   The storing of unused, discarded and partially dismantled automobiles;
   (D)   Dump grounds; and
   (E)   Grazing of animals and agriculture.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.537 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   All storage of discarded and partially dismantled automobiles and dump yards
shall be situated at least 400 feet from any public street.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.538 SITE BUFFERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   In lieu of the above 400-foot setback requirement, an alternate site
buffering system may be applied for. Approval of an appropriate buffering
system will allow for a significant reduction or elimination of this setback
requirement.
   (B)   Each application will be considered on a case by case basis to
determine the appropriateness of the design and its compliance with other
ordinance requirements, i.e., traffic safety, off-street parking, drainage,
public visibility and other factors. The plan must provide for a contract
commitment for the continued maintenance of the buffer in a satisfactory
condition.
   (C)   In as much as there has been varying levels of noncompliance with the
standards required for businesses operating in the I&M-3 Zone, the county is
implementing a sunset clause as part of this chapter. This will allow a period
of only two years for all businesses to fully come into compliance with this
chapter or face prosecution for the noncompliance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.539 WIDTH.
   See §
156.387.
(Ord. passed - -)
R-F, RECREATIONAL-FORESTRY ZONE
§ 156.550 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   The R-F, Recreational-Forestry Zone is established to provide an area
where the primary use of the land is for recreational, forestry and wildlife
purposes. In general, this zone includes the portion of the unincorporated area
of the county lying within boundary lines of natural forests and other portions
of the county characterized by mountains, lakes and forests.
   (B)   This zone is characterized by undeveloped land with mountains, forests
and lakes, including reservoirs and other human-made lakes, interspersed with
farms, ranches, recreational camps, resorts and outdoor recreational
facilities.
   (C)   The objectives of the R-F Recreational-Forestry Zone are:
      (1)   To promote the use of the land for forestry, fish, wildlife and
recreational purposes;
      (2)   To facilitate the conservation of water and other natural
resources;
      (3)   To reduce soil erosion;
      (4)   To reduce hazards from floods and fires and to reduce the cost of
police protection;
      (5)   To preserve, insofar as possible, natural scenic attractions,
natural vegetation and other natural features; and
      (6)   To promote sanitation and protect the water supply.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the R-F Recreational-Forestry Zone, the
regulations provided in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.551 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   The following uses shall be permitted in the R-F Recreational-Forestry
Zone:
      (1)   Production of forest products and other forest industries;
      (2)   Campgrounds and similar recreational facilities;
      (3)   Public parks and playgrounds, refreshment stands, rides and similar
concessions in connection with such public parks and playground;
      (4)   Hydro-electric dams, power plants, transmission lines and
substations, water pumping plants and reservoirs, pipe lines, broadcasting
facilities, public utility buildings and structures;
      (5)   The growing of crops and buildings related thereto;
      (6)   Grazing and pasturing of animals and buildings and structures
related thereto;
      (7)   Single-family dwellings containing not more than one kitchen and
used by not more than one family and accessory buildings used in connection
therewith;
      (8)   Private summer cottages and accessory buildings, hunting and
fishing cabins, recreational cottages and ranches and fisheries; provided, that
existing private recreational homes and platted lots shall not be required to
abut a public road, but must abut an approved private road on at least one side
for at least 90 feet. It is further provided that private roads leading to and
around private summer homes may have access limited to those persons authorized
to use said roads. Roads shall be constructed so as to prevent flooding and
erosion to provide for proper drainage and receive approval of the County
Engineer. Access to and across private roads must be granted to forest service
personnel, emergency vehicles and all public service personnel. All roads must
comply with the county road construction standard specifications;
      (9)   Recreational camps and resorts, golf courses and country clubs,
provided the development plans have been first approved by the Planning
Commission;
      (10)   Commercial tourist cabins, provided the property on which the
cabins are located is bounded on at least one side by a public road, and
trailer courts when constructed and maintained in accordance with §§
156.325 through
156.332;
      (11)   Grocery stores, cafés and service stations, when incidental to and
operated in connection with resorts, hunting and fishing cabins, trailer courts
and tourist cabins;
      (12)   Fences; and
      (13)   Signs advertising services, articles or products which are offered
for sale on the premises on which the sign is located.
   (B)   The following uses shall be considered in the R-F Recreational-
Forestry Zone, per the standards controlling use hearings in §
156.128:
      (1)   Gravel pits, clay pits, mines, rock quarries, oil and gas wells;
and
      (2)   Hot road mix plants on a temporary basis for not more than six
months.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.552 AREA.
   (A)   The minimum lot or building site area outside an approved subdivision
shall be one lot or parcel of land of not less than one acre in area for each
dwelling or cottage, except those dwellings and cottages which are a part of a
recreational camp or resort, tourist or trailer court or a hunting and fishing
camp.
   (B)   The minimum lot or building site area within a subdivision shall be at
least one acre.
   (C)   The minimum building site for a tourist or trailer court, recreational
camp or resort or hunting or fishing camp shall be not less than two and one-
half acres with an average of 3,000 square feet for each unit in such tourist
court or motel.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.553 WIDTH.
   (A)   (1)   The minimum width of a lot or parcel of land or building site
outside of an approved subdivision shall be 90 feet, except those dwelling
sites which are a part of a recreational camp or resort, hunting or fishing
camp, or tourist or trailer court.
      (2)   The minimum width of any lot within an approved subdivision shall
be 90 feet, except that not more than one-third of such lots may have a width
of 66 feet for each of said lots, provided the sum of the widths of all of the
lots within the subdivision is at least 90 times the total number of lots in
the subdivision.
   (B)   For individual cottages and other buildings, which are a part of a
recreational camp or resort, or hunting or fishing camp, there shall be no
width requirements except as may be required by the Planning Commission in
granting approval of the plans.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.554 FRONT YARD.
   (A)   Every lot on which a structure is situated shall have a front yard of
not less than 80 feet from the centerline, or at least 55 feet from the right-
of-way of state and federal highways and all county roads, whichever is
greater; except for lots in platted areas which shall be set back 30 feet from
the road right-of-way line.
   (B)   Gasoline fuel pumps shall have a setback of not less than 20 feet.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.555 SIDE YARD.
   The minimum side yard for any building shall be 20 feet, except that on
corner lots on which the side yard faces on a street, then §
156.554 shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.556 REAR YARD.
   Same as side yard.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.557 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall comply with State
Department of Health requirements.
   (B)   No building used for human habitation shall be constructed, nor shall
any permit be issued therefor, until such approval shall have been obtained
from the State Department of Health.
   (C)   All yard area shall be kept free of debris, refuse, weeds and other
inflammable material which may constitute a fire hazard.
   (D)   All buildings with walls which are made of materials having a fire
resistance rating of less than one hour shall not be located closer than 20
feet to a property line.
   (E)   No building shall be constructed within the boundaries of any natural
waterway or course. Where buildings are to be constructed within 75 feet of the
exterior boundaries of the high water mark of a flood channel existing at the
effective date of this chapter, adequate measures must be taken as determined
by the Board of County Commissioners, so as to protect the building or
structure from damage due to floods and so as not to increase the hazard to
surrounding lands and buildings.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.558 PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL.
   (A)   Development plans for all recreational camps, campgrounds, resorts,
golf courses, country clubs and similar facilities shall be submitted to and
must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of a permit
by the Zoning Administrator for the construction of such facilities.
   (B)   The purpose of the review and approval of such development plans by
the Planning Commission shall be to guide the Planning Commission and to
achieve a coordinated and harmonious development in keeping with present and
future needs and in conformity with the objectives and characteristics of the
zone.
   (C)   In granting approval of a development plan, the Planning Commission
shall give consideration to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, water table and
high and low water mark, flood protection, public utilities, fire hazards,
sanitation, water supply, police and fire protection and similar requirements.
   (D)   The Planning Commission may impose such reasonable conditions as are
deemed necessary to preserve and promote the objectives and characteristics of
the zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
G-1, GRAZING ZONE
§ 156.570 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   This zone is established to provide an area where the primary use is
for grazing and dry farming purposes.
   (B)   The G-1 Grazing Zone is characterized by large tracts of open land.
Representative uses in this zone include livestock grazing, gravel pits,
mineral extractions and the storage of explosives.
   (C)   The objectives in establishing the G-1 Grazing Zone are:
      (1)   To encourage and promote the raising of livestock and dry farming
operations;
      (2)   To promote the conservation of water, soils, minerals and other
natural resources;
      (3)   To reduce the hazards from floods and fire;
      (4)   To reduce the cost of governmental expenditures for excessive
roads, police and fire protection, school bus transportation and other public
services; and
      (5)   To allocate areas for certain uses and activities which should be
removed from the more densely populated areas of the county.
   (D)   To accomplish the objectives and purposes of this chapter, and to
promote the characteristics of the G-1 Grazing Zone, the regulations provided
in this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.571 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the G-1 Grazing Zone:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the A-1 Zone;
   (B)   Outdoor advertising signs;
   (C)   Manufacturing, testing and storage of explosive chemicals and other
materials or products generally considered to be of a hazardous nature,
provided such uses are located at least 300 feet from the outside boundary of
the owner’s property, at least 1,320 feet from any public road or highway and
at least 300 feet from any building used for human occupancy; and
   (D)   Sanitary landfill operations, when approved by the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.572 AREA.
   The area requirements in the G-1 Zone shall be the same as those provided
for the A-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.573 WIDTH.
   The width requirements in the G-1 Zone shall be the same as those provided
for the A-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.574 LOCATION.
   There shall be no location requirements in the G-1 Zone except as required
by §
156.044.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.575 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no height requirements in the G-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.576 SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no requirements for the size of buildings in the G-1 Zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
B-1, BUFFER ZONE
§ 156.590 GENERAL OBJECTIVES AND CHARACTERISTICS.
   (A)   (1)   This zone is established to provide a protective buffer around
public or private land areas where because of noise, smoke, unsightliness or
for other reasons as may be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Board of County Commissioners of uses within the zone be limited to
minimize conflicts between competing land uses.
      (2)   For example, if an area has been set aside as a public motorcycle
and snow machine track, it may be desirable to create a buffer zone surrounding
that track to prohibit further commercial, residential or other uses that would
conflict with the use made of the track by snowmobiles and motorcycles.
   (B)   A further characteristic of the zone is that the Zoning and Planning
Commission, with the concurrence of the Board of County Commissioners, and in
consultation with the affected property owner, will establish the permitted
uses within the buffer zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.591 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the buffer zone:
   (A)   Only those uses specifically permitted by the Zoning and Planning
Commission with the concurrence of the Board of County Commissioners, following
consultation with the affected property owner or owners; and
   (B)   Uses existing at the time of the creation of the buffer zone that are
in conflict with the uses specifically permitted within the buffer zone, as
specified above, will be deemed nonconforming uses and will be treated in all
respects as nonconforming uses, as hereinbefore provided.
(Ord. passed - -)
PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 156.605 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT. An application for approval of a planned unit
development for which approval may be required under this subchapter.
   BOARD. The Bonneville County Board of County Commissioners.
   COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission.
   COMMON OPEN SPACE. An open space within or related to a site designated as a
development and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development. COMMON OPEN SPACE may contain such complimentary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
   DEVELOPER. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land proposed
to be included in a planned unit development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
   FILING. Filing with the County Zoning Administrator unless a different
municipal official is designated by ordinance.
   GARDEN APARTMENT. Buildings consisting of three stories or less which have a
common entrance shared by all units with each unit having its own private
balcony and/or private patio.
   GROSS DENSITY. A figure computed on the basis of net land area plus area
devoted to street, alleys and other nonresidential uses and one half of
bounding streets (total number of dwelling units minus total acreage).
   NET DENSITY. A figure that represents the number of dwelling units per acre
of land within the site after deducting the area used for public streets and
other nonresidential uses (public parks, school sites and churches; total
dwelling units acreage devoted to residential uses).
   OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water improved or unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space. Such areas may be improved with only
those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other
improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the
land.
   PLAN. The provisions for development of a planned unit development,
including a plat or subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, private streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space
and public facilities. The phrase PROVISIONS OF THE PLAN, when used in this
subchapter shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this
definition.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area with specified minimum contiguous acreage
of five acres or more to be developed as a single entity according to a plan
containing one or more residential clusters, which may include appropriate
commercial, or public or quasi-public uses primarily for the benefit of the
residential development.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area with specified minimum
contiguous acreage of ten acres or more to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing one or more commercial clusters.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area with specified minimum
contiguous acreage to ten acres or more to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing one or more industrial clusters.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. An open space area conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a
municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state or county agency, or
other public body for recreational or conservation uses.
   RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER. An area to be developed as a single entity according to
a plan containing residential housing units in which the individual lots have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
   SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING. A residential dwelling which does not share a common
wall with any other dwelling but is attached to another dwelling or structure
by a common carport, garage, storage facility or similar device.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING. A dwelling constructed for the occupancy of
a single family which structure is not attached to any other dwelling and does
not otherwise share a common wall with any other building.
   SITE PLAN. A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
      (1)   The existing and proposed topography of the lots;
      (2)   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, landscaping,
structures and signs, lighting, screening devices; and
      (3)   Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination.
   STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A written statement of
the goals of proposed development with respect to land use for various
purposes, density of population, direction of growth, location and function of
streets and other public facilities, and common open space for recreation or
visual benefit, or both, and such other factors as the county may find relevant
in determining whether a planned unit development, or planned unit residential
development shall be authorized.
   SUBMISSION. Indicates a complete filing as prescribed by this subchapter.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The administrative officer of the county unless a
different municipal official or officials are designated by ordinance.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.606 PURPOSE.
   It shall be the policy to guide a major development of land and construction
by encouraging planned unit developments (PUD) to achieve the following:
   (A)   A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of
housing and building types and permitting an increased density per acre and
reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks and area requirements;
   (B)   A more useful pattern of open and recreation areas and, if permitted
as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory
commercial uses, industrial uses and services;
   (C)   A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography
and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation and prevents
the disruption of natural drainage patterns;
   (D)   A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through
conventional development resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets; and
   (E)   A development pattern in harmony with land use density, transportation
and community facilities objectives of the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.607 PRIORITY OF PUD.
   In all cases where there is a conflict with the language or requirements of
this subchapter dealing with the planned unit development and the language or
requirements of any other chapter or section of this subchapter the language or
requirements of this subchapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.608 DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   The person designated to receive plans under this subchapter shall be
the County Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   The municipal authority designated to act under this subchapter shall
be the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.609 PROVISIONS GOVERNING UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to a tract of land to
be developed of not less than five contiguous acres within a designated zone or
zones, which tract is under single ownership or unified control, and for which
an application for planned unit development is made as hereinafter provided.
Public roads shall not be deemed to divide acreage for this purpose.
   (B)   A PUD may be located within any zoning district.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.610 MINIMUM AREA.
   A PUD for the following principal uses shall contain an area of not less
than:
   (A)   Five acres for residential development;
   (B)   Ten acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or
industrial uses;
   (C)   Ten acres for commercial use or as allowed by zone; and
   (D)   Ten acres for industrial use or as allowed by zone.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.611 USES PERMITTED.
   All uses that may be allowed within the zone are permitted within a PUD.
Also, up to 10% of the gross land area may be directed to other commercial,
industrial, public and quasi-public uses that are not allowed within the zone,
provided; there is a favorable finding by the Commission:
   (A)   The uses are appropriate with the residential uses;
   (B)   The uses are intended to serve principally the residents of the PUD;
   (C)   The uses are planned as an integral part of the PUD;
   (D)   The uses be located and so designed as to provide direct access to a
collector or an arterial street without creating congestion or traffic hazards;
and
   (E)   A minimum of 50% of the residential development occur prior to the
development of the related commercial or industrial land uses.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.612 OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner
or a person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the
PUD. The PUD application shall be filed in the name or names of the recorded
owner or owners of property included in the development. However, the
application may be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such
property.
   (B)   Before approval is granted to the final development plan, the entire
project shall be under single ownership or control, and legal title must be
presented with the final development plan.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.613 COMMON OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   A minimum of 10% of the gross land area developed in any residential,
commercial and industrial PUD project shall be reserved for common open space
and recreational facilities for the residents and users of the area being
developed.
   (B)   The required amount of common open space land reserved under a PUD
shall either be held in corporate ownership by owners of the project area for
the use of each owner who buys property within the development or be dedicated
to the public and retained as common open space for parks, recreation and
related uses. Public utility and similar easements and rights-of-way for water
courses and other similar channels are not acceptable for common open space
dedication unless such land or right-of-way is usable as a trail or other
similar purpose and approved by the Commission.
   (C)   The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be
specified by the developer before approval of the final development plan.
   (D)   Every property developed under the PUD approach should be designed to
abut upon common open space or similar areas. A clustering of dwellings is
encouraged. In areas where townhouses are used, there shall be no more than
eight townhouse units in any contiguous group.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.614 UTILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems, are
required within the limits of all PUDs. Appurtenances to these systems, which
can be effectively screened, may be exempted from this requirement if the
Commission finds that such exemption will not violate the intent or character
of the proposed PUD.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.615 INCREASED RESIDENTIAL DENSITY.
   To provide for an incentive for quality PUD, the Commission may authorize an
increased residential density of up to 15% of the allowable number of dwelling
units. Character, identity and architectural and sighting variation
incorporated in a development shall be considered cause for density increases,
provided these factors make a substantial contribution to the objectives of the
PUD, which are as follows:
   (A)   Landscaping (a maximum increase of 5%), streetscape, open spaces and
plazas, use of existing landscaping, pedestrian-way treatment and recreational
areas;
   (B)   Siting (a maximum increase of 5%), visual focal points, use of
existing physical features such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation,
circulation pattern, physical environment, variation in building setbacks and
building grouping (such as clustering); and
   (C)   Design features (a maximum increase of 5%), street section,
architectural styles, harmonious use of materials, parking areas broken by
landscaping features and varied use of housing types.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.616 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR RESIDENTIAL USES.
   Site and structure regulations are as follows.
   (A)   Plot and lot sizes, dimensions and structure heights, and locations
thereon may be freely disposed and arranged in conformity to the overall
density standards herein and to the conditions of comprehensive plans therefor,
the general features and design of which shall be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Except as follows, other provisions of this chapter governing side and
rear yard sizes in residential areas shall not apply.
   (C)   A minimum setback distance or front yard of 30 feet shall be provided
on main roads or thoroughfares within the PUD.
   (D)   All setback regulations of residential districts adjacent to/or across
the streets from the planned unit development shall apply to the area of the
PUD which is adjacent or across the street from such residential districts.
   (E)   In a residential PUD, there shall be no minimum lot size. Setbacks and
yard requirements shall be as follows.
      (1)   No building shall be less than 25 feet apart in the rear yard.
      (2)   No setback shall be less than 15 feet.
      (3)   No building shall be less than 12 feet apart.
      (4)   Every single-family detached dwelling shall have access to a public
street, court, walkway or other area dedicated to public use or subject to an
easement for access. The boundaries and extent of the lot or plot upon which
any single-family detached dwelling is located shall be clearly defined and
monumented.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.617 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR COMMERCIAL USES.
   (A)   When PUDs include commercial uses, commercial buildings and
establishments shall be planned as groups having common parking areas and
common ingress points in order to reduce the number of potential accident
locations at intersections. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the
perimeter of the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
   (B)   The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and
harmonious design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged
facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other
features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and
efficient from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding non-commercial
areas.
   (C)   All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate
improvement or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a
neat and orderly manner.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.618 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR INDUSTRIAL AREAS.
   (A)   PUDs may include industrial uses if it can be shown that the
development results in a more efficient and desirable use of land.
   (B)   Industrial uses and parcels shall be developed in park-like
surroundings utilizing landscaping and existing woodlands as buffers to screen
lighting, parking areas, loading areas or docks and/or outdoor storage of raw
materials or products. A planned industrial area shall provide for the harmony
of buildings and compact grouping in order to economize in the provision of
such utility services as are required. Thoroughfares shall be kept to a minimum
throughout a planned industrial area in order to reduce through traffic.
   (C)   (1)   Project side yards of 40 feet and a rear yard of 50 feet shall
be required if the project is located adjacent to any residential uses.
      (2)   All intervening spaces between the right-of-way and project
building line and intervening spaces between buildings, drives, parking areas
and improved areas shall be landscaped with trees and plantings and properly
maintained at all times.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.619 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR ALL USES.
   (A)   All open spaces between structures shall be protected, where
necessary, by fully recorded covenants running with the land, conveyances or
dedications.
   (B)   The right-of-way and pavement widths for internal ways, roads and
alleys serving residential, commercial and industrial development shall be
determined from sound planning and engineering standards in conformity to the
estimated needs of the full development proposed and the traffic to be
generated thereby, and shall be adequate and sufficient in size, location and
design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and the
access of firefighting equipment and police vehicles, and shall be certified
thereto by the County Engineer or other person designated by the county.
   (C)   Dedicated streets or highways shall be subject to all other municipal
ordinances and the laws of the state.
   (D)   The following requirements apply to utilities and services.
      (1)   The developer shall furnish all necessary storm drainage, highway
access, service streets, parking facilities and off-street lighting.
      (2)   All domestic water and sanitary sewer facilities shall meet the
standards of and be approved by the State Department of Health and Welfare,
District Seven.
   (E)   Special requirements for ownership and recording are as follows.
      (1)   (a)   Every structure or group of structures of any kind and every
designated plot area or cluster unit having services, facilities or utilities
in common private usage and in common ownership or controlled by its occupants
or which functions as an independent corporate owner or agent of management
shall be located upon a lot or plot of land which shall be designated as
representing the area of responsibility and control of the individual or group
ownership or management. The ownership may be established in full or partial
fee or fee lease under deed covenant. A description or plan of each such lot or
plat shall be filed separately, or as part of the description maps of a planned
unit development, with the County Recorder.
         (b)   The developer shall provide for and establish an organization
for the ownership and maintenance of any open space for the benefit of
residents of the development. Such organizations shall not be dissolved and
shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the open spaces for
the benefit of such development, and thereafter offering to dedicate the same
to the municipality wherein the land is located.
         (c)   In the event that the organization shall fail to maintain the
open space in reasonable order and condition, the Board of County Commissioners
may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the residents and
owners of the development setting forth the manner in which the organization
has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said notice
shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 30
days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which
shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At such hearing, the Board of
Commissioners may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies
and may give an extension of time within which they shall be cured. If the
deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof
shall not be cured within said 30 days, or any extension thereof, the county,
in order to preserve the open space and maintain the same, for a period of one
year may enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and maintenance shall
not vest in the public any rights to use the open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the residents and owners. Before the
expiration of said year, the Board of Commissioners shall, upon its initiative
or upon the request of the organization heretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days’ notice to
such organization or to the residents and owners of the development, to be held
by the Board of County Commissioners shall determine that such organization is
ready and able to maintain such open space in reasonable condition, the county
shall cease to maintain said open space at the end of said year. If the Board
shall determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open
space in a reasonable condition, the county may, in its discretion, continue to
maintain said open space during the next succeeding year, subject to a similar
hearing and determination in each year thereafter. The decision of the Board in
any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to
judicial review.
         (d)   The cost of such maintenance by the county shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space, and shall become a tax lien on said properties.
The county, at the time of entering upon said open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the County Clerk
upon the properties affected by such lien within the development and the same
shall be discharged by the county upon payment as with other liens.
      (2)   Any planned unit development originally established under the
requirements of this chapter and completed, may be extended within the same
zone or into adjoining zones which also permit a PUD by later additions of
contiguous lands in parcels or units of not less than five acres each under the
conditions established for development of the original project, provided that
it shall be subject to the same procedure for approval and in conformity with
the standards herein set forth.
      (3)   All other ordinances dealing with subdivision control shall not
apply in planned unit development districts or extensions thereof.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.620 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   A subdivision plat must be filed with all PUD applications. A public hearing
shall be held to consider the PUD application and final development plan.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.621 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING.
   The developer shall meet with the Administrator prior to the submission of
the preliminary development plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss
early and informally the purpose and effect of this chapter and the criteria
and standards contained herein, and to familiarize the developer with the
comprehensive plan, this chapter and such other plans and ordinances as deemed
appropriate.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.622 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   An application for preliminary PUD shall be filed with the
Administrator by a property owner or person having existing interest in the
property for which the PUD is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information filled in triplicate:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      (2)   Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor, registered
engineer and/or urban planner assisting in the preparation of the preliminary
development plan;
      (3)   Legal description of property;
      (4)   Description of existing uses;
      (5)   Zoning districts;
      (6)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Commission, showing
property lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as
the Commission may require to show the relationship of the PUD to the
comprehensive plan and to existing schools and other community facilities and
services;
      (7)   A preliminary development plan at a scale approved by the
Commission showing topography at two-foot intervals; location and type of
residential, commercial and industrial land uses; layout dimensions and names
of existing and proposed streets; rights-of-way; utility easements; parks and
community spaces; layout and dimensions of lots and building setback lines;
preliminary improvement drawings showing water, sewer, drainage, electricity,
telephone and natural gas and such other characteristics as the Commission
deems necessary;
      (8)   Proposed schedule for the development of the site;
      (9)   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land in
question to initiate the proposed development plan within two years; and
      (10)   Such other information as may be reasonably required for the
Commission to make an informed judgment.
   (B)   The application for preliminary PUD shall be accompanied by a written
statement by the developer setting forth the reasons why, in his or her
opinion, the PUD would be in the public interest.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.623 PROCEDURE FOR PUBLIC NOTICE.
   The same provision for public hearing and legal notification as required per
Idaho Code § 67-6511(b) shall be followed.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.624 APPROVAL IN PRINCIPLE BY THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Commission shall review
the preliminary development plan to determine if it is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this chapter; whether the proposed development advances
the general welfare of the community and neighborhood and whether the benefits,
combination of various land uses and the interrelationship with the land uses
in the surrounding area justify the deviation from standard district
regulations. The Commission’s approval in principle of the preliminary
development plan shall be necessary before an applicant may submit a final
development plan. Approval in principle shall not be construed to endorse a
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
   (B)   The Commission shall consider the general standards of this chapter
prior to approving in principle a preliminary development plan.
   (C)   Following the consideration and within 15 days based upon the
foregoing evidence, the Planning Commission shall either:
      (1)   Grant preliminary approval of the plan as submitted;
      (2)   Grant preliminary approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the plan as submitted or modified;
      (3)   Deny preliminary approval to the plan; and
      (4)   Continue the consideration for further facts and information.
   (D)   The grant or denial of preliminary approval shall be by written
resolution, including the reason therefor.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.625 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Upon approval in principle of a preliminary development plan, an
application for approval of the final development plan may be filed with the
Administrator by at least one property owner or person having a presently
existing interest in the property for which the PUD is proposed. Each
application shall be signed by the owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and
exactness of all information supplied on the application for final development
plan. Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and
may be revoked if construction on the project has not begun within two years
from the date of issuance of the approval.
   (B)   At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Survey of the proposed development site, showing the dimensions and
bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography, existing features of
the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets,
easements, utility lines and land uses;
      (2)   All the information required on the preliminary development plan;
the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling
units, nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for
adjacent properties;
      (3)   A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in
progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and
streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated
residential population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population;
anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for
each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposed an exception from
standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing development;
      (4)   Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary,
water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations;
waste disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of earth
work required for site preparation and development;
      (5)   Site plan, showing building(s), various functional use areas,
circulation and their relationship;
      (6)   Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior
elevations;
      (7)   Landscaping plans; and
      (8)   Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements
or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be
commonly owned and maintained.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.626 RECOMMENDATION BY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 60 days after receipt of the final development plan, the
Commission shall recommend to the Board that the final development plan be
approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved.
The Commission shall then transmit all papers constituting the record and the
recommendations to the Board.
   (B)   The Commission shall find that the facts submitted with the
application and presented to them established that:
      (1)   The proposed development can be initiated within two years of the
date of approval;
      (2)   Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will
not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations;
      (3)   The street and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to
carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD;
      (4)   Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the
locations proposed;
      (5)   Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by
the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the PUD and the adopted policy of the Board;
      (6)   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development;
      (7)   The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan; and
      (8)   The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the
population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.627 ACTION BY THE BOARD.
   (A)   Within 60 days after receipt of the final recommendation of the
Commission, the Board shall either approve, approve with supplementary
conditions or disapprove the application as presented. Upon granting or denying
the application, the Board shall specify in writing:
      (1)   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      (2)   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      (3)   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
   (B)   If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the
Board shall direct the Administrator to issue zoning permits only in accordance
with the approved final development plan and the supplementary conditions
attached thereto.
      (1)   Validity of final approval. A plan, or any part thereof, which has
been given recommendation for final approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be so certified without delay by the Zoning Administrator to
the Board of County Commissioners for their final approval as provided by this
chapter. Upon the filing of record of the plan, all other ordinances and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in the plan
shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion of said planned unit
development or the part thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally
approved, no modification of the provisions of said plan or part thereof, as
finally approved, shall be made by the county, nor shall it be impaired except
with the consent of the landowner.
      (2)   Final plan. The final plan, as approved, shall be incorporated into
the county’s master plan, and the Zoning Administrator and the Building
Inspector shall be advised to issue the necessary permits in accordance
herewith.
      (3)   Petition for review. Following approval of development plans, the
issuance of permits and substantial progress in the completion of 20% of the
controlled density units thereof, measured as a percentage of the acreage or
anticipated population whichever shall be the greater, the developer may
petition for review in detail of the previously approved plans or units
awaiting development or completion stating his or her reasons therefor. Such
reasons may be based upon such considerations as changing social or economical
conditions, potential improvements in layout or design features, unforeseen
difficulties or advantages mutually affecting the interests of the municipality
and the developer such as technical causes, site conditions, state or federal
projects and installations and statutory revisions. The Planning and Zoning
Commission upon finding such reasons and petition to be reasonable and valid
may consider the redesign in whole or in part of any planned unit development
and shall follow in full the procedure and conditions herein required for
original submittal and review.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.628 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL PERIOD.
   (A)   The approval of a final development plan for PUD shall be for a period
not to exceed two years to allow for preparation and recording of the required
subdivision plat and the development of the project.
   (B)   If no construction has begun within two years after approval is
granted, the approved final development plan shall be void. An extension of the
time limit or modification of the approved final development plan may be
approved if the Commission finds that such extension or modification is not in
conflict with the public interest.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.629 FEES.
   The fee for a PUD application shall be $100. The fee for an application of
final approval for a PUD shall be $50.
(Ord. passed - -)
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 156.640 APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   The resubdividing of an existing subdivision plat will be permitted
only if the new lots created are at least as large as the smallest lot platted
in the original division from which the new plat was derived. Except upon
rezone of the property to a different zone, smaller lot sizes could be
appropriate and may be requested.
   (B)   No person shall subdivide land for any purpose thereof unless plans
for such have been submitted to and approved by the County Planning and Zoning
Commission and by the County Board of County Commissioners.
   (C)   The following are excluded from this section:
      (1)   An involuntary sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as
defined in and allowed by state law;
      (2)   The acquisition of a new or the widening of an existing street to
conform to the comprehensive plan or by authority of the county; and
      (3)   An exchange of land for the sole purpose of straightening property
boundaries or enlarging any existing lot or parcel, and which does not create
additional lots or parcels.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.641 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   These regulations provided in this chapter shall apply to the subdivision of
all land within the unincorporated territory of the county.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.642 APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   An application form issued and approved by the Commission shall be completed
by the subdivider, who shall furnish information required by the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.643 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Before filing an application for conditional approval of a preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall obtain from the Zoning Administrator information
relating to the master plan requirements for the area to be subdivided. The
subdivider shall then prepare and submit to the Administrator a sketch plan of
the subdivision using a scale not smaller than one inch to 200 feet, showing
the general location and layout of the streets, blocks and lots and the
relationship to the proposed streets within the subdivision to existing and
planned streets in the area. This step does not require formal application or
filing of plat with the Commission.
   (B)   Upon the filing of the sketch plan by the subdivider, the
Administrator shall submit the same to the County Engineer.
   (C)   Within ten days after the sketch plan has been submitted to him or
her, the County Engineer shall review and return the same to the Administrator
together with any comments or recommendations for modification.
   (D)   Within 15 days from the date on which the subdivider submits the
sketch plan to the Administrator, the Administrator shall advise the subdivider
whether the proposed plan and data as submitted or as modified meets the
requirements of this chapter and the applicable regulations. If the
Administrator finds the plans and data do not meet such requirements, he or she
shall submit a written report stating reasons supporting such findings.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.644 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   After the sketch plan has been approved by the County Engineer and the
Administrator, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat, together with
such engineering drawings as are required by the County Engineer. The
subdivider shall then file an application for approval of the preliminary plat
on forms furnished by the Administrator, and submit the same to the
Administrator together with the preliminary plat and other required material
and data.
   (B)   A minimum of ten copies of the preliminary plat and two copies of the
required supplementary materials shall be submitted to the Administrator
together with a written application for conditional approval at least 14 days
prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered.
   (C)   The Administrator shall refer one copy of the preliminary plat to the
County Engineer, and one copy may be referred to the County Engineer and/or
State Highway Department. If no written recommendations or objections are
received from the various officials or departments to whom the same have been
submitted within 14 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have been
approved by such officials or departments.
   (D)   The Commission shall review and take action on the preliminary plan
and other supplementary material within 30 days after the meeting at which the
application was submitted. If approved, the Commission shall express its
approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproval,
shall express its disapproval and its reason therefor in writing.
   (E)   The action of the Commission shall be noted on two copies of the
preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and one copy retained for the files of
the Commission.
   (F)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed only as an expression of
approval of the layout, as a guide to the preparation of the final plat.
   (G)   The Commission shall not approve a preliminary plat which does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.645 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved.
   (B)   Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in
writing to the Administrator at least ten days prior to the meeting at which it
is to be considered.
   (C)   The application shall include one tracing of the final plat, together
with such other exhibits as are required for approval, which have been prepared
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such tracing and exhibits
must be submitted to the Commission within 12 months after approval of the
preliminary plat; otherwise, such preliminary approval of the plat shall become
null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Commission; provided, however, that where development is made in successive
contiguous segments in an orderly and reasonable manner, without major changes
or departures from the preliminary plat, such segments, if submitted within
successive intervals of 12 months, may be considered for final approval without
the resubmission of a preliminary plat.
   (D)   Within 45 days of receipt of the final plat, the Commission shall act
upon the application and shall either approve or disapprove the same unless a
longer period is granted by the subdivider. If the plat is disapproved, the
Commission shall state in writing the reasons for disapproval. If the plat is
approved, the final plat shall be signed by an authorized agent of the
Commission.
   (E)   Approval of the final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
not be deemed as acceptance of the dedication of any street or grounds. Such
acceptance must be approved from the Board of County Commissioners.
   (F)   Final plat shall be filed with the County Recorder within three months
after written approval by the Commission, otherwise, such approval shall become
null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the
Commission.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.646 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   The application for approval of a preliminary plat of a subdivision
shall include the following:
      (1)   The sketch plan, as submitted to the Administrator;
      (2)   A preliminary plat drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet
(however, a larger scale may be used for a detailed drawing of the plat), on
which is shown:
         (a)   The name of the proposed plat, subdivision or dedication;
         (b)   The name(s) of the subdivider(s) and land surveyor or land
planner;
         (c)   The tract designation of the immediate adjacent plats,
subdivisions or dedications as shown in the files of the County Recorder, if
any;
         (d)   Monuments consisting of the section corner, the quarter-section
corner of the meander corner and such other markers of records as desired;
         (e)   Boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided;
         (f)   The location, width and names of all existing or platted streets
or other important features, such as the general outline of existing buildings,
water courses, power lines, telephone lines, railroad lines, municipal
boundaries and section lines;
         (g)   Contours when required by the County Engineer, with intervals of
five feet or less referenced to such datum acceptable to the County Engineer;
         (h)   All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily
reserved for public use or to be reserved in the deeds for the common use of
property owners of the subdivision with the purpose, condition or limitations
of such reservations clearly indicated; and
         (i)   The date, scale, true north point and section, township and
range.
   (B)   All mapped information shall be prepared in a neat and legible manner
in pencil or ink. All map data must be submitted in scale but need not be based
upon an actual ground survey, except that the exterior tract dimensions and
boundaries must be based on actual survey.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.647 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat, subdivision or dedication application shall contain
all the information specified in this section.
   (B)   The final plat shall be drawn as provided by applicable state law. The
plat, diagram or drawing shall be drawn at such scale and contain lettering of
such size, including reference to dedication and affidavit or survey as to
enable the same to be placed upon a single sheet of paper with no part thereof
nearer to the edge of said sheet than one inch. The reverse of the same shall
not be used for any portion of the drawing but may contain written matter as to
dedication and other information matters.
   (C)   The final plat, subdivision or dedication shall clearly show the
following information on one or more maps or drawings:
      (1)   Primary control points, approved by the County Engineer, or
description and “ties” to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. Such primary control
points must include either a section corner, quarter-section corner or meander
corner according to government survey;
      (2)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other right-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with
accurate dimension, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and center
angles or all curves;
      (3)   Name, centerline and right-of-way width at each street or other
right-of-way;
      (4)   Location, dimension and purpose of any easements;
      (5)   Minimum front yard setback lines from all public roads or road
easements;
      (6)   Location and description of monuments;
      (7)   Name and location of adjoining subdivisions;
      (8)   Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy of
survey and plat;
      (9)   Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and any sites
for public use;
      (10)   Statement of dedication of easements;
      (11)   Title, scale, north arrow and date; and
      (12)   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications
as may be required by the Commission in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (D)   The final plat shall be signed by the County Engineer and the
Chairperson of the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.648 VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Hardship. Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter it
may vary the regulations or standards in order to provide relief from hardship
if it finds that public interest is served by granting such variances, provided
that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of the comprehensive plan or portions thereof or this chapter.
   (B)   Large scale development. The standards and requirements of this
chapter may be modified by the Commission in the case of a plan and program for
a new town, a complete community, or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment
of the Commission provide adequate public spaces and improvements for the
circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the people when fully
developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal
provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the comprehensive
plan or portions thereof.
   (C)   Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the Commission
may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
   (D)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation may appeal in writing the decision
of the Commission relative to any matters hereunder decided to the Board within
ten days from such decisions, which time may be extended by the Board for a
period not to exceed 40 days in total upon a showing of good cause.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation may appeal the decision of the
Board to the district court in the same manner and within the same time as
other appeals may be taken from orders of Boards of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.649 EXPENSES FOR PROCESSING APPLICATION.
   All expenses necessary to provide the data required hereunder for processing
and/or qualifying an application for approval of a plat, subdivision or
dedication shall be paid by the applicant.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.650 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The following design standards shall be incorporated in any
plat, subdivision or dedication and each of the requirements hereinafter set
forth shall be considered mandatory unless the particular provision indicates
to the contrary.
      (1)   Land which the Commission has found to be unsuitable for
subdivision because of flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations or
other features likely to be harmful to the safety and general health of the
future residents and which the Commission considers inappropriate for
subdivision shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods approved by the
County Engineer are planned for overcoming these conditions.
      (2)   The proposed subdivision shall be prepared in harmony with the
official comprehensive plan or portions thereof of the county.
   (B)   Blocks. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to the following.
      (1)   Provision shall be made for adequate building sites suitable to the
special needs of the type of use contemplated, including the zone requirements
as to lot sizes and dimensions.
      (2)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
lots.
      (3)   Convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic shall be provided. The number of intersecting streets with arterials of
all class shall be held to a minimum.
      (4)   Consideration shall be given to the limitations and advantages of
topography.
      (5)   Residential block lengths shall be between 400 and 1,300 feet,
provided block length may be a greater length upon showing of cause.
      (6)   Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping center, transportation and other community facilities.
   (C)   Lots.
      (1)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation and minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for
the type of development and use contemplated. Every lot shall abut upon an
approved street, except in Forest-Recreation Zones. Corner lots for residential
use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from
orientation to both streets. Residential lots adjoining arterial streets shall
have a lot depth of at least 150 feet except where the use of berms, vegetation
or structures can be demonstrated to constitute an effective buffer for a
dwelling on a lot less than 150 feet in depth. Whenever practical, existing
roadside trees shall be saved and used in arterial buffers. Development
agreements shall include provisions for installation and continued maintenance
of arterial buffers.
      (2)   Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, should be avoided
except where essential to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A screening easement of at least ten feet, and across which there
shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting
such traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. Direct access from a
subdivision lot to an arterial road is specifically prohibited.
      (3)   Side lot lines shall be as nearly at right angles to street lines
as possible.
   (D)   Streets.
      (1)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of
all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan, or portions thereof, and
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets.
      (2)   Where such is not shown in the comprehensive plan or portions
thereof, the arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall either:
         (a)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
         (b)   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by
the Commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing street impracticable.
      (3)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse
frontage streets or similar treatment necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties.
      (4)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way
or limited access highway rights-of-way, the Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each of such right-of-way, at a distance
adequate to provide for the appropriate use of the intervening land.
      (5)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where control is definitely placed in the county under conditions
approved by the Commission.
      (6)   Street layout shall conform to the most advantageous development of
adjoining areas and the entire neighborhood, and shall provide for the
following:
         (a)   Streets shall provide adequate access to adjoining lands.
         (b)   Streets shall intersect at right angles or as near right angles
as possible with no intersection with an angle of less than 80 degrees or
greater than 100 degrees.
         (c)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of this chapter and where the Planning Commission finds it will be
practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. In all other instances where a half street is adjacent
to an undeveloped tract, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.
         (d)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets in any town in the county area.
Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
         (e)   Minor streets shall be so laid out in a manner as will
discourage their use by through traffic.
         (f)   Curbs at street intersections shall be rounded with curves
having a minimum radius of 25 feet.
         (g)   Permanent dead-end streets shall be no longer than 400 feet with
the exception of those that can be connected to an existing or future street on
an adjacent parcel or for terrain conditions. All such streets shall have a
closed end with a turn-around having a street property line diameter of at
least 130 feet.
         (h)   Minimum street grades of 0.2% shall be required with maximum
grade being 7% for secondary and major streets and 10% for local and minor
streets. Other grades may be allowed if the terrain warrants an exception.
Within the Idaho Falls Impact Area, minimum grade will be 0.4% for all
developments with lots of less than one-half acre.
         (i)   Where street lines within a block deflect from each other at any
point more than ten degrees, there shall be a connecting curve. The radius of
the curve for the inner street line shall be not less than 700 feet for a major
street, 250 feet for a collector street and 50 feet for local or minor streets.
   (E)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the Commission may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate to the uses proposed.
      (2)   The width of an alley shall not be less than 25 feet. Lengths of
alleys and turnarounds shall be the same as for roads.
      (3)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall not be
permitted, but, where necessary, corners will be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movement.
   (F)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements shall be provided for the utilities upon and across lots,
or centered on the side lot lines when considered necessary by the Commission
having a minimum width of eight feet and utility easement on front yards shall
be 15 feet.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, stream or drainage right-of-way, an easement conforming substantially
with the lines of such watercourse shall be provided.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.651 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Monuments. Monuments shall be placed in accordance with applicable
state law relating to municipal plats. The monuments shall be made of such
material, size and length as the County Engineer may require.
   (B)   Streets and utility improvements.
      (1)   Streets and utilities shall be installed in accordance with the
minimum standards set forth below, and in compliance with the adopted
standards, and as established in the development agreement entered into between
the county and the subdivider. Before the Board of County Commissioners shall
accept the dedication of any of the public rights-of-way or easements shown on
any plat, a certificate attesting to such compliance by a registered engineer
shall be given to the Board of County Commissioners. The County Recorder shall
note on the face of the plat prior to filing that the same have not been
accepted as public or private right-of-way or public or private easements.
Thereafter, the county shall not perform any maintenance, improvement, paving,
grading or lighting thereon; provided, however, that, if, after the filing of
the plat, said minimum standards of improvement, as set forth below, are
installed at the expense of the subdivider or the abutting property owners the
Board shall accept such right-of-way and easements as public or private
dedications, and in such event shall note on the face of the filed plat that
the dedications have been accepted. Any subdivider of a parcel of land in any
subdivision wherein the utility and street improvements have not met the
standards prescribed by this chapter, and the subdivider or seller are hereby
required to give notice to any purchasers of property in said subdivision
before sale that said utility and street improvements have not been accepted by
the county for maintenance or improvement.
      (2)   The standards and specifications for each general type of
improvements shall be as follows.
         (a)   Water systems shall meet the requirements of the National Board
of Fire Underwriters and the State Department of Public Health and shall be in
accordance with sound engineering practice. The system will also comply with
adopted county standards.
         (b)   Public sewer or sewage disposal system shall meet the
requirements of the State Department of Public Health.
         (c)   Arterial streets, cross-sections and specifications shall
conform to the county standards as determined by the county and set forth in
the development agreement entered into between the county and the subdivider.
The system will also comply with adopted county standards. All streets shall be
constructed to the road standards adopted by the County Commissioners for the
specific areas in which they are built.
         (d)   All electrical distribution systems within any subdivision shall
be installed underground. All streets, alleys, curbs, gutters, pavement,
driveways, sidewalks, street name signs, culverts, street lights, mailboxes and
other improvements required on streets shall conform to the standards adopted
for the county by the Board of County Commissioners.
         (e)   Grading and centerline gradients must be in compliance with
plans and profiles approved by the County Engineer. Where the county accepts a
subdivision containing a half street only the portion of the street within the
subdivision must be graded.
      (3)   Street pavement centerline shall coincide with the right-of-way
centerline except as may be approved by the County Engineer.
      (4)   The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of
improvements as agreed upon in the development agreement executed between the
county and the subdivider. The development agreement will establish a lien
against the subdivision to ensure the completion of said improvements in cases
where the bonding proves insufficient. In addition to the development
agreement, the subdivider shall deposit with the County Auditor, a surety bond,
cash deposit, negotiable bond, irrevocable bank letter of credit or certified
check equal to 150% of the estimated cost of such improvements as certified by
the developers engineer and approved by the county as a guarantee that within
two years after the recording of the final plat the required improvements will
be installed without cost to the county.
(Ord. passed - -)
MOVING OF BUILDINGS
§ 156.665 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   No person shall move any residential, commercial or industrial building,
from one site to another within the county, or from a site outside of the
county, to a site within the county without first obtaining a permit from the
Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.666 APPLICATION.
   An application for a permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and
shall include the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   Location and address of the old and new site;
   (C)   Plot plan of the new location, also showing adjacent lots on all sides
of the property and indicating all structures and improvements on said lots;
   (D)   Plans and specifications for the proposed improvement of the new
location;
   (E)   Certification by the Building Inspector and a structural engineer that
the structure is sound enough to be moved, and that the location and use of the
building will conform to this chapter; and
   (F)   Satisfactory written assurances that:
      (1)   Improvements required by the permit will be carried out; and
      (2)   The area of the site to be vacated, if the same is within the
county, will be cleaned and restored to a safe and orderly condition.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.667 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Approval. An application to move a building shall only be approved
upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the move will not result in an
appreciable detriment to the living environment and property values in the area
where the structure is to be moved.
   (B)   Findings. Before issuing the permit the Zoning Administrator must
find:
      (1)   The building is in conformity with the quality of buildings
existing in the area into which it is proposed to be moved;
      (2)   Said building and lot on which the building is to be located
conform to the requirements of this chapter and the county’s building code;
      (3)   Its location on the lot does not in any substantial way adversely
affect buildings or uses on abutting properties; and
      (4)   All dedication and improvements as required for streets and
facilities and buildings shall be provided in conformity with the standards of
this chapter.
   (C)   Bond required. Before a permit to move a building is granted, the
applicant and the property owner shall sign an agreement and shall post a bond
in an amount equal to twice the estimated cost of bringing the buildings and
grounds up to current codes and to restore the vacated site in such amount as
approved by a licensed engineer. In the event of failure to bring the building
or grounds up to current codes, the bond shall be forfeited. Notwithstanding
the forfeiture of the bond, the applicant and the property owner shall be
responsible for all costs and expenses to bring the building and grounds up to
current codes and to restore the vacated site.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.668 REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY.
   Prior to occupancy, the building which has been moved must conform to
standards of the adopted building codes.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee
or otherwise, who shall erect, alter or reconstruct any building which is not
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to the extent of $100 or more in
value in any zone within the unincorporated area of the county, without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the county Zoning Administrator, or who shall
change the use of any building or other structure or use of any land within the
unincorporated territory of the county, who is found guilty of violation of
this section is guilty of an infraction. A conviction for violation of this
section is punishable by a fine of $100 and no imprisonment. The judge may also
enter a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order or such other
relief, as the court deems appropriate. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who is found guilty of violation of §
156.066 is guilty of an infraction. A conviction for violation of §
156.066 is punishable by a fine of $100 and no imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person who is found guilty of violation of §
156.591 is guilty of an infraction. A conviction for violation of §
156.591 is punishable by a fine of $100 and no imprisonment. The judge may also
enter a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order or such other
relief, as the court deems appropriate. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Any person who is found guilty of violation of §§
156.640 through 156.652 is guilty of an infraction. A conviction for violation
of §§
156.640 through 156.652 is punishable by a fine of $100 and no imprisonment.
The judge may also enter a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order
or such other relief, as the court deems appropriate. Each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed - -)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   AREAS OF IMPACT DECLARED
      
III.   INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
      
IV.   MORATORIUMS DECLARED
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        11-14-1969  Granting franchise to Upper Valley Telecable Company to
                     build and maintain antenna television services.
198-00   2-29-2000   Renewing cable franchise with Upper Valley Telecable Co.
220-10   3-4-2010    Renewing cable franchise with Cable One, Inc.
                    
 
TABLE II: AREAS OF IMPACT DECLARED
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
118-80   - -         Identifying and zoning area of impact for the City of
                     Ammon.
256-23   - -         Identifying and zoning area of impact for City of Iona.
199-00   3-15-2000   Identifying and zoning area of impact around City of Ucon.
200-00   3-15-2000   Identifying and zoning area of impact around Swan Valley.
201-00   3-15-2000   Identifying and zoning area of impact around City of
                     Irwin.
202-00   3-15-2000   Identifying and zoning area of impact around City of
                     Ririe.
203-01   2-13-2001   Identifying and zoning area of impact around Idaho Falls.
205-01   2-13-2001   Identifying and zoning area of impact for City of Ammon.
206-01   2-13-2001   Identifying and zoning area of impact for City of Iona.
257-23   11-8-2023   Identifying and zoning area of impact for City of Ammon.
264-24   10-16-2024  Identifying and zoning area of impact within Idaho Falls.
 
TABLE III: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
 
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
161-93   10-13-1993  Intention to exchange property with Idaho Falls.
213-03   9-30-2003   Establish urban renewal area in Idaho Falls.
222-10   9-29-2010   Interlocal agreement relating to flow control/deposit of
                     solid waste.
226-14   12-1-2014   Adopt urban renewal area in Idaho Falls.
270-25   10-16-2025  Interlocal agreement for the Riverside Urban Renewal
                     Project.
                    
 
TABLE IV: MORATORIUMS DECLARED
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
266-25   4-7-2025    Emergency moratorium for 180 days; mining operations.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Idaho Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IDAHO CODE
Idaho Code Cite Code Section
Idaho Code Cite     Code Section
6-924               153.07
6-926               153.07
15-5-104            131.02
16-1601 et seq.     113.09
18-111              10.12
18-113              70.99;
                    111.999
                    92.02;
18-113A             92.04;
                    92.06;
                    92.99
18-303              113.99
18-305              113.99
18-4101             114.29
18-4113             114.29
18-7036             91.30
itle 19, Chapter 51 31.01
19-5117             31.01
19-5118             31.01
20-516              131.08
21-513              155.01
itle 22, Chapter 24 91.01
                    111.021;
                    111.024;
                    111.046;
                    111.051;
itle 23             111.071;
                    111.073;
                    111.076;
                    111.079;
                    114.02
23-312              111.024;
                    111.079
itle 23, Chapter 9  111.018
23-913              111.026
23-927              111.029
23-934A             111.031
23-943              111.024;
                    111.079
23-944              111.024;
                    111.079
23-947              111.999
23-949              111.024;
                    111.079
23-1010             111.048
23-1011B            111.056
23-1012             111.059
23-1013             111.054
23-1016             111.048
23-1016(4)          111.049
23-1020             111.999
23-1307A            111.081
23-1317             111.080
itle 25, Chapter 28 92.09
25-2801             92.02
25-2802             92.03
25-2803             92.04;
                    92.07
25-2804             92.07
25-2805             92.06
25-2806             92.12;
                    92.99
                    92.01;
25-2810             92.11;
                    92.99
25-2810(3)          92.01
25-2811             92.11
25-3504             92.10;
                    92.99
30-21-801 et seq.   114.09
31-112              32.23
31-710(4)           32.27
31-804              30.06
31-3201A            70.99
itle 31, Chapter 44 51.03
31-4401             51.03
31-4404             51.03
31-4406             51.03
itle 31, Chapter 48 32.20
31-4803             32.21;
                    32.27
31-4902(8)          51.02
itle 39, Chapter 26 93.04
39-2604             93.03
39-4401             50.02;
                    50.17
39-4414             50.17
itle 39, Chapter 44 51.13
                    51.25;
itle 39, Chapter 65 51.29;
                    51.99
40-2319             153.19
itle 41, Chapter 18 114.29
44-2201(2)          154.46
44-2202(5)          156.326
46-1020             154.01
46-1021             154.46
46-1022             154.46
46-1023             154.01
46-1024             154.01
itle 49             70.04
49-117(7)(b)        71.01
49-221(2)           153.18
49-410              71.01
50-313              153.18
50-314              153.18
itle 50, Chapter 9  10.03
itle 50, Chapter 27 33.01;
                    33.02
50-2706             33.03
52-202              91.25;
                    91.29
52-205              91.25;
                    91.29
55-1613             153.17
56-1016             112.29
63-602NN            34.01
63-602NN(2)(g)      34.01
63-604              150.01
itle 66, Chapter 3  113.09
66-317              113.09
itle 67, Chapter 23 32.28
                    10.12;
itle 67, Chapter 52 92.09;
                    114.17
67-5222             32.27
67-5905             32.08
67-6509             156.128
67-6511(b)          156.623
67-6535             154.30
67-7101             Ch. 73, Sched. I
                    
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        6-20-1988   70.04
                     91.25;
223-11   5-31-2011   91.30;
                     91.99
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     155.01 
                     155.18;
                     155.99;
                     156.001 
                     156.014;
                     156.025 
                     156.071;
                     156.085 
                     156.097;
                     156.110 
                     156.113;
                     156.125 
                     156.134;
                     156.145 
                     156.153;
                     156.165 
                     156.173;
                     156.185 
                     156.193;
                     156.205 
                     156.213;
                     156.225 
                     156.233;
                     156.245 
                     156.253;
                     156.265 
                     156.273;
                     156.285 
                     156.293;
                     156.305 
                     156.314;
                     156.325 
                     156.332;
-        - -         156.345 
                     156.350;
                     156.365 
                     156.373;
                     156.385 
                     156.388;
                     156.400 
                     156.403;
                     156.415 
                     156.423;
                     156.435 
                     156.440;
                     156.455 
                     156.463;
                     156.475 
                     156.483;
                     156.495 
                     156.502;
                     156.515 
                     156.521;
                     156.535 
                     156.539;
                     156.550 
                     156.558;
                     156.570 
                     156.576;
                     156.590;
                     156.591;
                     156.605 
                     156.629;
                     156.640 
                     156.651;
                     156.665 
                     156.668;
                     156.999
                     110.01 
110-78   - -         110.06;
                     110.99
118-80   - -         TSO Table II
                     112.25 
130-83   - -         112.35;
                     112.99
237-19   - -         34.01
256-23   - -         TSO Table II
                     50.01 
                     50.04;
                     50.15 
                     50.19;
-        - -1968     50.30 
                     50.33;
                     50.45;
                     50.46;
                     50.99
-        11-14-1969  TSO Table I
                     112.01 
-        7-9-1970    112.11;
                     112.99
-        2-9-1971    31.01
-        4-13-1971   130.01;
                     130.99
-        3-20-1972   31.02
-        9-1-1972    130.02;
                     130.99
105-76   6-21-1976   71.01;
                     71.99
115-79   10-29-1979  30.01 
                     30.06
                     94.01 
117-80   1-2-1980    94.07;
                     94.99
123-81   6-23-1981   10.99
                     93.01 
134-83   10-12-1983  93.04;
                     93.99
135-83   11-2-1983   70.01 
                     70.05
                     151.01 
138-85   9-30-1985   151.07;
                     151.99
                     113.01 
139-85   11-4-1985   113.11;
                     113.99
-        6-20-1988   70.04
150-89   8-31-1989   130.03;
                     130.99
                     32.01 
160-93   9-7-1993    32.09;
                     32.99
161-93   10-13-1993  TSO Table III
                     91.01 
163-94   5-4-1994    91.09;
                     91.99
                     51.25 
167-94   10-26-1994  51.31;
                     51.99
172-95   8-21-1995   150.02;
                     150.99
                     131.01 
174-95   10-31-1995  131.10;
                     131.99
                     70.20 
176-96   2-23-1996   70.25;
                     70.99
177-96   4-30-1996   90.01;
                     90.99
                     131.01 
189-97   12-16-1997  131.10;
                     131.99
194-99   2-25-1999   33.01 
                     33.07
198-00   2-29-2000   TSO Table I
199-00   3-15-2000   TSO Table II
200-00   3-15-2000   TSO Table II
201-00   3-15-2000   TSO Table II
202-00   3-15-2000   TSO Table II
203-01   2-13-2001   TSO Table II
205-01   2-13-2001   TSO Table II
206-01   2-13-2001   TSO Table II
                     114.01 
207-02   1-14-2002   114.29;
                     114.99
211-03   7-28-2003   32.20 
                     32.32
213-03   9-30-2003   TSO Table III
220-10   3-4-2010    TSO Table I
219-10   3-5-2010    Ch. 73, Sched. I
222-10   9-29-2010   TSO Table III
224-12   10-17-2012  71.01;
                     71.99
226-14   12-1-2014   TSO Table III
                     72.01 
229-17   2-10-2017   72.05;
                     72.99
                     153.01 
231-17   9-6-2017    153.20;
                     153.99
                     92.01 
232-17   12-15-2017  92.13;
                     92.99
234-19   1-22-2019   91.10;
                     91.99
                     111.001;
                     111.015 
                     111.031;
236-19   2-12-2019   111.045 
                     111.059;
                     111.070 
                     111.085;
                     111.999
239-21   6-23-2021   150.01
241-22   2-9-2022    90.02;
                     90.99
                     154.01 
                     154.11;
                     154.25 
251-23   1-5-2023    154.31;
                     154.45 
                     154.51;
                     154.99
                     152.01 
254-23   6-21-2023   152.32;
                     152.99
                     51.01 
255-23   8-16-2023   51.14;
                     51.99
257-23   11-8-2023   TSO Table II
258-23   11-8-2023   153.21
                     70.40;
263-24   8-7-2024    70.41;
                     70.99
264-24   10-16-2024  TSO Table II
266-25   4-7-2025    TSO Table IV
267-25   4-30-2025   71.02
                     72.20 
268-25   5-7-2025    72.22;
                     72.99
270-25   10-16-2025  TSO Table III
                    
 
 
