CITY CODE
of
BONNERS FERRY, IDAHO
2003
Code current through:
Ord. 622, passed 6-3-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Bonners Ferry, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 622, passed 6-3-2025. Ordinances of
the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ORDINANCE NO. 624
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BONNERS FERRY, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE
OF IDAHO AMENDING TITLE ONE, CHAPTER SIX, SECTION THREE INCREASING THE SALARIES
OF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS; PROVIDING SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING THAT
THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2026,
AFTER ITS PASSAGE, APPROVAL AND PUBLICATION ACCORDING TO LAW.
Be it ordained by the Mayor and the Council of the City of Bonners Ferry,
Idaho, as follows:
SECTION 1: MAYOR AND COUNCIL COMPENSATION: That Bonners Ferry City Code, Title
One, Chapter Six, Section Three, is hereby amended as follows with an effective
date of January 1, 2026:
 
A. Mayor: The mayor shall receive a salary each calendar month which shall be
in the sum of six nine hundred dollars ($900.00).
B. Council Members: Each council member shall receive a salary each calendar
month in the sum of three four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
C. The Mayor and Council members shall receive insurance benefits in the same
manner as a full-time employee, but shall not accrue paid time off.
 
SECTION 2: PROVISIONS SEVERABLE: The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby
declared to be severable and if any provision of this Ordinance or application
of such provision to any person or circumstance is declared invalid for any
reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of
this Ordinance.
SECTION 3: EFFECTIVE DATE: This ordinance shall be effective on January 1,
2026, following its passage and publication in the manner provided by law.
APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho this
_5th____day of_August__________, 2025.
This ordinance passed under suspension of rules and duly enacted as an
ordinance of the City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho on this _____day of___________,
2025, upon the following roll call vote:
ROLL CALL:
Council President Arthur      _____
Council Member Poston      _____
Council Member Thompson      _____
Council Member Smith       _____
CITY OF BONNERS FERRY, IDAHO
                  BY:                      
                   Mayor Rick Alonzo
Attest:
   
                  
Deborah Garcia, Clerk,
City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 474
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE BONNERS FERRY, IDAHO CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Bonners Ferry,
Idaho, as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Bonners Ferry, Idaho prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances through ordinance #472 of a
general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the
direction of the governing body of the city, shall be accepted in all courts
without question as the official code and law of the city as enacted by the
mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/88f8ee6f1e33f671fb7f9cd8491a56be5d90ca57/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1154.png] 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official Bonners Ferry City Code. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the BONNERS FERRY CITY CODE and is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal document. (1959 Code § 1-1-1; amd. 2003 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2003 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its
proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2003 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every effort to
maintain such code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city
clerk. Such code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the
city council. (2003 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-5: State Law References
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
A.   Existing Ordinances: The ordinances contained in this code, so far as the
provisions are the same in effect as those of previously existing ordinances,
shall be construed as continuations thereof; but subject to the limitations and
provisions of this code. (1959 Code § 1-1-1; amd. 2003 Code)
B.   Effect: The repeal of ordinances as provided herein shall not affect any
right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action
or proceeding as commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed, nor
the tenure of office of any person holding office at the time when they take
effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance thereby have the effect of
reviving any ordinance therefor repealed or superseded. (1959 Code § 1-1-2)
C.   Repeal; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the
adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this
code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
city; and all special ordinances. (1959 Code § 1-1-1; amd. 2003 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2003 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C.   Currently Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2003 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1959 Code § 1-1-3D; amd.
2003 Code)
1-2-5: STATE LAW REFERENCES:
Whenever in this code reference is made to the laws of the state of Idaho, and
adopting such laws as ordinances of the city, or for providing definitions in
the terms of the ordinance of the city, such ordinances shall survive any
statutory repeal by the state of Idaho. (1959 Code § 1-1-4)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Additional Definition Or Interpretation
1-3-3: Definitions, General
1-3-4: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
B.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1959 Code § 1-1-3E;
amd. 2003 Code)
C.   Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license
or permit or authority from a board or officers, shall be construed as giving
such board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be
done. (1959 Code § 1-1-3E)
1-3-2: ADDITIONAL DEFINITION OR INTERPRETATION:
The definition or interpretation of any word or phrase as used in this code
shall include, in addition to the definitions in this code (ordinance of the
city), the definition of words and phrases as established and defined in the
Idaho Code and the published civil and criminal jury instructions approved by
the Idaho supreme court. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-3-3: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meanings
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
   CITY: The city of Bonners Ferry, county of Boundary, state of Idaho.
   CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Bonners Ferry.
   CODE: The city code of the city of Bonners Ferry.
   COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of Bonners
Ferry.
   COUNTY: The county of Boundary, state of Idaho.
   DAY: Any twenty four (24) hour period from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
   EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
city of Bonners Ferry".
   GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
   KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act
or omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omissions.
   LAND, REAL ESTATE, REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements, hereditaments,
water rights, possessory rights and claims.
   LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
   MONTH: A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   MUNICIPALITY: The city of Bonners Ferry, Idaho.
   NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT, NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
   NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or
any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
   OATH; AFFIRM; SWEAR: Includes affirmation and the word "swear" includes the
word "affirm". Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is
embraced in the term "testify" and every written one in the term "depose".
   OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
   OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
   OFFICERS: Includes officers and boards in charge of departments and the
member of such boards. Whenever reference is made in this code to a city
officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
"of the city of Bonners Ferry".
   OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or
profession.
   OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
   PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods,
chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created,
acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and
every right or interest therein.
   PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
   QUARTER: Any three (3) month period ending with March 31, June 30, September
30 or December 31.
   RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
   SIGNATURE: Includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to
authenticate any instrument or writing.
   STATE: The state of Idaho.
   STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   TREASURER: The city treasurer of the city of Bonners Ferry.
   WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
   WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for
the purpose of resale.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
   YEAR: Any one calendar year. (1959 Code § 1-1-3E; amd. 2003 Code)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1959 Code § 1-1-3C; amd. 2003 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-4: Liability Of Employers And Agents
1-4-5: Intent To Defraud
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A.   Misdemeanor: Except as otherwise specified herein, any person convicted of
a violation of any provision of this code that is designated as a misdemeanor
may be fined and/or imprisoned as provided by Idaho Code regarding general
punishment for misdemeanors.
B.   Infraction: Except as otherwise specified herein, any person convicted of
a violation of any provision of this code that is designated as an infraction
may be fined in an amount not exceeding the maximum dollar amount authorized by
the state under Idaho Code and no incarceration may be imposed. Prosecution of
infractions shall be in accordance with the procedures required for the
prosecution of infractions as established under state law and rules. (Ord. 548,
4-7-2015)
C.   Federal Programs: In any federal program in which the city is
participating, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are required or
mandated by the terms of participation in the program, penalties shall be in
accordance with such penalties as shall be required by such federal program, to
include criminal or civil monetary penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal offenses not to exceed six (6) months
or to include both a fine and imprisonment for such criminal offenses. (Ord.
498, 4-4-2006)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A.   Application Of Penalty Provisions: The penalty provided in this chapter
shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a
part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of
any section of this code where grade of offense is not specifically designated
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues unless otherwise specifically provided in this code. (Ord. 548, 4-7-
2015)
B.   One Recovery For Same Offense: In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2003 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2003
Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF EMPLOYERS AND AGENTS:
When the provisions of this code prohibit the commission or omission of an act,
not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing or omitting the
directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned or aiding
or abetting the person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to
the penalty set forth in this code. (1959 Code § 1-1-3B; amd. 2003 Code)
1-4-5: INTENT TO DEFRAUD:
Whenever, by any of the provisions of this code, an intent to defraud is
required in order to constitute an offense, it is sufficient if an intent
appears to defraud any person, association or body politic or any combination
of persons. (1959 Code § 1-1-3A)
CHAPTER 5
CORPORATE AND OFFICIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Seal
1-5-2: Official Newspaper
1-5-3: Official Time
1-5-4: City Fees
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
A.   Design; Use: The corporate seal in circular form, with the words, "Seal of
Bonners Ferry, State of Idaho", on the outer circle, with the representation of
a steamboat on the interior and center of said circle, shall be and the same is
hereby made the corporate seal of the city of Bonners Ferry, Idaho, to be used
in all cases which by the laws of Idaho and the customs of nations it is
necessary to use a seal by a corporation.
B.   Custodian: The seal shall be and remain in the custody of the city clerk
to be used by the clerk as prescribed herein. (1959 Code § 1-4-1; amd. 2003
Code)
1-5-2: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
"The Bonners Ferry Herald", a newspaper published and generally circulated
within the geographical limits of the city, is hereby designated as the
official newspaper of the city commencing January 1, 1997, as provided for by
Idaho Code section 50-213 and title 60, Idaho Code. (Ord. 432, 12-17-1996)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL TIME:
A.   Established: Pacific Standard Time shall be the official time within the
city for the transaction of all city business, except that from two o'clock (2:
00) A.M., on the last Sunday in April in each year, official time for the city
shall be advanced one hour. At two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the last Sunday in
October in each year, such official time shall, by the retarding of one hour,
be returned to Pacific Standard Time. (1959 Code § 1-25-1; amd. 2003 Code)
B.   City Proceedings Governed: All legal or official proceedings of the city
council and all official business of the city shall be regulated as to time in
accordance with the provisions of this section. When, by ordinance, resolution,
or action of any municipal officer or body, an act must be performed at or
within a prescribed time, it shall be performed according to the official time
as herein prescribed. When the words "daylight saving" or "daylight saving
time" are used in any official document or contract, it shall be understood to
have reference to the time herein fixed for the period from the last Sunday in
April to the last Sunday in October. (1959 Code § 1-25-2; amd. 2003 Code)
C.   Public Clocks To Use Official Time: All clocks or other timepieces in or
upon public buildings or other premises maintained at the expense of the city
shall be set and run according to the official time as provided in this
section. It is hereby made the duty of the officer or other person having
control and charge of such building and premises to see that said clocks or
other timepieces are set and run in accordance with official time. (1959 Code §
1-25-3; amd. 2003 Code)
1-5-4: CITY FEES:
All licenses, permits, fees, assessments, rates, and charges heretofore
established by the various ordinances and resolutions of the city of Bonners
Ferry and its mayor and city council shall be, by resolution of the mayor and
city council, organized into a single list. Said list shall be separated into
categories with charges for each license, permit, fee, assessment, rate or
charge described and stated, and where appropriate, referencing the ordinance
or resolution establishing such or the authority by which such is established.
Only by resolution of the city council shall such list of licenses, permits,
fees, assessments, rates and charges be hereafter added to or deleted from,
increased or decreased, superseded or replaced.
The city clerk shall, at all times, post a copy of the most current list as
adopted by resolution of the mayor and city council in a conspicuous place in
the city hall and shall make copies of said list available upon request
thereof.
The mayor and city council shall review the list not less than once each year
and the amounts of fees stated therein may be amended to or abolished by
resolution of the city council after notice and public hearing as required by
law.
Excepted from this schedule are such fees, charges and assessments as are
established by contract or agreement for goods and/or services to be provided
by the city which are not generally available to or in demand by the general
public, franchise fees or fees charged in lieu of franchise fees, criminal and/
or punitive fines, or penalties, taxes or assessments upon real property that
are paid to and collected by the Boundary County treasurer. (Ord. 477, 5-6-
2003)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Mayor
1-6-2: City Council
1-6-3: Compensation
1-6-4: Appointments
1-6-5: Council President
1-6-6: Committees
1-6-7: Meetings
1-6-8: Public Hearings; Rules Of Procedure
1-6-1: MAYOR:
A.   Chief Administrative Official: The mayor is the chief administrative
official of the city and shall preside over the meetings of the city council
and determine the order of business subject to such rules as the council may
prescribe.
B.   Vote: The mayor shall have a vote only when the council is equally
divided.
C.   Superintending Control: The mayor shall have the superintending control
over all officers and department heads and the affairs of the city.
D.   Appointment Of Officers And Committees: Subject to the advice and consent
of the council, the mayor shall appoint such officers and committees as shall
be provided for by law, ordinances, or resolutions of the council.
E.   Duties: The mayor shall have and exercise such powers and authority and
perform such duties as are provided by law and the ordinances and resolutions
of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
F.   Jurisdiction:
   1.   The mayor shall have jurisdiction over all places within five (5) miles
of the corporate limits of the city for the enforcement of any health or
quarantine ordinance, and for the regulation thereof.
   2.   The mayor shall have jurisdiction within one mile of the corporate
limits of the city over all powers vested in him by the statutes of Idaho for
use within the city except taxation.
   3.   The mayor shall have jurisdiction over all properties owned by the city
outside the corporate limits for all powers given him by the statutes of the
state of Idaho for use within the city limits of the city. (Ord. 387, 4-3-1990)
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL:
The council shall consist of four (4) members and shall constitute the
legislative authority of the city. The council shall have, and exercise such
powers and duties, as shall be provided by the laws of the state and the
ordinances and resolutions of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-6-3: COMPENSATION:
A.   Mayor: The mayor shall receive a salary each calendar month which shall be
in the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00).
B.   Council Members: Each council member shall receive a salary each calendar
month in the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 547, 2-17-2015)
1-6-4: APPOINTMENTS 1 :
All appointments shall be made by the mayor, subject to the consent of the city
council, at the first meeting of each year. Such officers, when appointed,
shall qualify by taking an oath and giving bond, where required, within ten
(10) days after the notice of such appointment or shall be deemed to have
refused to accept and another officer may be appointed, who shall in a like
manner be required to qualify. (1959 Code § 1-9-2; amd. 2003 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-204.
1-6-5: COUNCIL PRESIDENT:
In case of absence of the Mayor from any meeting, the City Council shall have
power to appoint a Council President, who shall, for the time being, exercise
and have the powers and perform the same duties as the regular Mayor. (1959
Code § 1-9-3)
1-6-6: COMMITTEES:
Committees may be appointed by the Mayor, subject to consent of City Council,
for any specific need. (2003 Code)
1-6-7: MEETINGS:
A.   Time And Place:
   1.   Regular Meetings: The City Council, until further order, shall convene
in the City regularly at a place designated by the Council, on the first and
third Tuesdays of each month at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 576, 3-20-2018)
   2.   Special Meetings 1 : Special meetings of the City Council may be called
by the Mayor or any three (3) Council members by notice, in writing, from the
Clerk served upon the other members of the Council. (1959 Code § 1-9-5)
B.   Consent Agenda:
   1.   Use Allowed: To ensure that City Council meetings are conducted in an
orderly and efficient manner, the City Council may use a consent agenda wherein
certain administerial items will be placed on the agenda and be passed by
motion in its entirety or any part thereof.
   2.   Contents: The contents of the consent agenda may include, but are not
limited to, minutes from regular meetings, special meetings, and workshops of
the Council, the Treasurer's report, updates from pending City business which
needs no current action, and any other matters regularly set before the
Council.
      a.   Modified, Limited, Or Expended: This agenda list may be modified,
limited or expended by resolution of the Council.
      b.   Deletion Of Agenda Item: Any item on the agenda shall be deleted
from the consent agenda upon the request of the Mayor or any member of the
Council without motion or the concurrence of the Council. Any item so removed
from the consent agenda shall be automatically transferred to the general
agenda for consideration.
      c.   Approved Items: Those items so approved under the heading "consent
agenda" will appear in the Council minutes in their proper form as if acted
upon separately.
   3.   Approval: A motion for approval or adoption of all consent agenda items
shall pass on affirmative vote of a majority of those Council members
constituting a quorum. (Ord. 449, 1-4-2000)
C.   Order Of Business: Whenever the Council shall have convened, the roll
shall be called and all absentees shall be noted in the minutes of the Council
and the regular order of business shall be as follows:
   1.   Reading, amending and approving the minutes of the previous meeting;
   2.   Reports of officers;
   3.   Report of committees;
   4.   Presentation of petitions, remonstrances, communications and bills;
   5.   Unfinished business;
   6.   New business. (1959 Code § 1-9-4)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 50-706.
1-6-8: PUBLIC HEARINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The following rules are hereby established, shall be observed in the conduct of
any public hearing before the City Council and shall be known as the "Council
Rules of Procedure":
A.   Witness Or Speaker:
   1.   Sign Up Sheet: No person shall be permitted to testify or speak before
the City Council at a public hearing, unless such person has signed his name
and written his residential address thereafter on sign up sheets to be provided
by the City. This rule shall not apply to staff or technical witnesses directed
by the mayor to give evidence or information to the city council.
   2.   Recognition By Mayor: No person shall be permitted to speak before the
city council at a public hearing until such person has been recognized by the
mayor.
   3.   Record Of Proceedings: All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded
electronically or stenographically and all persons speaking at such public
hearings shall speak before a microphone in such a manner as will assure that
the recorded testimony or remarks will be accurate and trustworthy.
   4.   Time Limit: At the commencement of the public hearing, the city council
shall establish a time limit to be observed by all speakers. The time limit
shall be established, depending on the number of speakers who sign up for each
public hearing and shall apply only to the speaker's comments.
   5.   Interruption: The speaker shall not be interrupted by members of the
city council until his time limit has been expended or until he has finished
his statement.
   6.   Questions: At the conclusion of a speaker's comments, each city council
member, when recognized by the mayor, shall be allowed to question the speaker
and the speaker shall be limited to answers to the questions asked. The
question and answer period shall not be included in the speaker's time limit as
established.
   7.   Oath Or Affirmation Required: When the public hearing is quasi-judicial
in nature or one after which the city council is required by law to make
findings of fact, each speaker must swear or affirm that his testimony will be
true and correct.
   8.   Nonconformance: Any person not conforming to any of the above rules may
be prohibited from speaking during the public hearing. Should any person refuse
to comply with such prohibition, he may be removed from the room by order of
the mayor.
B.   Suspension Or Amendment Of Rules: The city council may suspend or amend
any one or more of those rules by vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the full
city council.
C.   Interpretation Of Rules: The mayor shall have the authority to interpret
and apply the foregoing rules, subject to an appeal to the city council, whose
decision shall be determined by a majority vote of the council members present.
(1959 Code § 1-9-6)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment
1-7-2: Term Of Office
1-7-3: Removal
1-7-4: Bonds
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor with the advice and consent of the council shall appoint a clerk,
treasurer, or where both offices are held by the same person shall be
designated as the office of clerk-treasurer, attorney and such other officers
as may be deemed advisable for the efficient operation of the city and as shall
be established by the ordinances or resolutions of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-
2002)
1-7-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
All appointive officers shall hold office for the term for which they were
appointed and qualified. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-7-3: REMOVAL:
Any appointed officers may be removed by the mayor for any cause by him deemed
sufficient; but such removal shall be with the affirmative vote of one-half (1/
2), plus one, of the members of the full council; provided, that the city
council by unanimous vote of all its members, may upon their own initiative
remove any appointed officer. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-7-4: BONDS:
The city clerk, city treasurer, city clerk-treasurer, and such other officers
as are designated by the council shall, before entering upon the duties
thereof, execute a bond to the city in such penal sum as the city council may
by ordinance determine conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her
duties. All official bonds shall be approved by the city council and when so
approved shall be filed with the city clerk except the bond of the city clerk
or city clerk-treasurer which shall be filed with the mayor.
The bonds shall be as follows:
 
City clerk                         $500,000.00
City treasurer                     500,000.00
                                   500,000.00
City clerk-treasurer               (where the 2 preceding offices are combined
(where the 2 preceding offices are and held by 1 officer) (where the 2
combined and held by 1 officer)    preceding offices are combined and held by
                                   1 officer)
 
(Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Offices Combined
1-7A-3: Duties
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The clerk shall be appointed in the manner provided by law and the ordinances
of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-7A-2: OFFICES COMBINED 1 :
The same person may be appointed to hold both the offices of clerk and
treasurer. Such person shall be designated as clerk-treasurer and perform all
of the duties of both such offices as are required by law of both the office of
clerk and the office of treasurer and as may be assigned by the ordinances or
resolutions of the council. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-7B-2 of this chapter.
1-7A-3: DUTIES:
The city clerk or the city clerk-treasurer shall perform all duties and have
all powers of a city clerk as provided by law and the ordinances and
resolutions of the city council. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-2: Offices Combined
1-7B-3: Duties
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city treasurer shall be appointed in the manner provided by law and the
ordinances of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-7B-2: OFFICES COMBINED 1 :
The same person may be appointed to hold both the office of clerk and
treasurer. Such person shall be designated as clerk-treasurer and perform all
of the duties of both such offices as are required by law or may be assigned by
the ordinances or resolutions of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-7A-2 of this chapter.
1-7B-3: DUTIES:
The city treasurer shall perform all duties and have all powers provided by law
and shall be assigned by the ordinances and resolutions of the council. (Ord.
466, 2-19-2002)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment
1-7C-2: Duties
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city attorney shall be appointed in the manner provided by law and the
ordinances of the city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
1-7C-2: DUTIES:
The city attorney shall perform all of the duties of such office as are
required by law or may be assigned by the ordinances or resolutions of the
city. (Ord. 466, 2-19-2002)
ARTICLE D. ENGINEER
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Appointment
1-7D-2: Qualifications
1-7D-3: Duties
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor shall appoint, with approval of the City Council, a City Engineer who
shall hold office for the duration of his/her appointment or until such time as
he/she may be removed as provided in section
1-7-3 of this chapter. (1959 Code § 1-23-1; amd. 2003 Code)
1-7D-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The engineer must be an engineer licensed to practice his/her occupation within
the State of Idaho as a registered professional engineer. (1959 Code § 1-23-2)
1-7D-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the engineer to perform or oversee all surveying and
engineering services for the City. (Ord. 573, 2-20-2018)
ARTICLE E. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Appointment
1-7E-2: Duties
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor shall appoint, with approval of the City Council, a City
Administrator who shall hold office for the duration of his/her appointment or
until such time as he/she may be removed as provided in section
1-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 577, 5- -2018)
1-7E-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to provide leadership and
administration of all operations of the city under the direction of the Mayor
and City Council and in accordance with the job description and duties adopted
by the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 577, 5- -2018)
CHAPTER 8
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-8-1: Number Of Petitioners Required
1-8-2: Form Of Petition
1-8-3: Time For Filing Petitions
1-8-4: Examination And Certification Of Signatures
1-8-5: Sufficiency Of Petition; Notification; Effect Of Council; Action;
Election
1-8-6: Form Of Ballot
1-8-7: Conduct Of Election
1-8-8: Costs Of Election
1-8-9: Canvass Of Returns
1-8-10: Prohibited Acts; Penalty
1-8-1: NUMBER OF PETITIONERS REQUIRED:
To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum,
there shall be attached or appended to the petition the signatures of the legal
voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number
of electors who cast votes at the last general election in the city. (1959 Code
§ 1-27-1; amd. 2003 Code)
1-8-2: FORM OF PETITION:
The initiative petition shall be in substantially the following form:
Initiative Petition to the Mayor and Council of the City of Bonners Ferry,
Idaho: "We the undersigned citizens and legal voters of the City of Bonners
Ferry, respectfully demand that the following proposed ordinance, to-wit:
(setting out full text of measure proposed) shall be submitted to the legal
voters of the city of Bonners Ferry, for their approval or rejection at an
election to be called in accordance with Idaho Code Section 50-501 (3), and
each for himself says: I have personally signed this petition; I am a legal
voter of the City of Bonners Ferry; my residence and post office are correctly
written after my name.
Name                 Street and Number             Post Office             
   (Here follow numbered lines for signatures)
(The petition for referendum on any ordinance passed by the city council shall
be in substantially the same form with appropriate title and changes, setting
out in full the text of the ordinance to be referred to the people for their
approval or rejection.)
(1959 Code § 1-27-2)
1-8-3: TIME FOR FILING PETITIONS:
Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures attached shall be
filed with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days following final
adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (1959 Code § 1-27-3)
1-8-4: EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF SIGNATURES:
A.   All petitions with attached signature sheets shall be presented on the
same day to the city clerk, who shall make examination of them to determine
whether the petitions contain the necessary number of signatures.
   1.   If the total number of signatures on the petitions is not sufficient to
satisfy the number required by section
1-8-1 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the city clerk who shall notify, in writing, the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered, if within the time limit of section
1-8-3 of this chapter.
   2.   If the examination of the signature sheets reveals:
      a.   Erasures on a signature;
      b.   Illegible or undecipherable signatures;
      c.   Signatures not properly identified by all of the information
required on the sheet;
      d.   Duplicate signatures;
      e.   Signatures of persons who have requested, in writing, to have their
names removed from the petition;
The city clerk shall summarily reject such signatures and they shall not be
counted. Each rejected signature shall be drawn through with ink and initialed
by the clerk. If the total number of signatures not rejected is not sufficient
to satisfy the number required by section
 1-8-1 of this chapter, all petitions with attached signature sheets shall be
retained by the clerk who shall notify, in writing, the person filing the
petition of the number of signatures needed, and further signatures may be
gathered, if done prior to the next city general election.
B.   The city clerk shall total the number of certified signatures, and if
found to total the number of signatures required by section
1-8-1 of this chapter shall proceed as provided in section
1-8-5 of this chapter. (1959 Code § 1-27-4)
1-8-5: SUFFICIENCY OF PETITION; NOTIFICATION; EFFECT OF COUNCIL; ACTION;
ELECTION:
In the event that a petition filed with a city clerk is found by the city clerk
to contain the required number of certified signatures, the city clerk shall
promptly, by certified mail, inform the person so designated by petitioners to
receive such notice, and shall also notify the city council at its next meeting
that the initiative or referendum petition is in proper form.
A.   Referendum: If the petition is for a referendum, the city council shall
have thirty (30) days from the date of certification of the petition to repeal
the ordinance being referred to the voters. In the event council repeals the
ordinance, the referendum petition shall be declared null and void.
B.   Initiative: If the petition is an initiative petition, the city council
shall have thirty (30) days to pass an ordinance substantially as proposed by
the petition. In the event the council passes such an ordinance, the initiative
petition shall be null and void. (1959 Code § 1-27-5)
1-8-6: FORM OF BALLOT:
The city council shall prepare a ballot for an initiative or referendum
election in one of the following ways:
A.   Fifty Words Or Less: If the full text of the ordinance or proposed
ordinance to be voted upon does not exceed fifty (50) words in length, it may
be set out in full on the election ballot; or
B.   More Than Fifty Words: If the full text of the ordinance or proposed
ordinance to be voted upon exceeds fifty (50) words in length, and the council
votes not to have it printed at length on the election ballot, it shall, with
the assistance of the city attorney, prepare a short title and description of
the ordinance or proposed ordinance which shall clearly and impartially state
its purpose and effect, which short title and description shall be printed on
the election ballot. (1959 Code § 1-27-6)
1-8-7: CONDUCT OF ELECTION:
Initiative or referendum elections, whether special or general, shall be
conducted and the results thereof canvassed and certified in all respects as
near as practicable, in like manner as city general elections, except as
otherwise provided. (1959 Code § 1-27-7)
1-8-8: COSTS OF ELECTION:
Upon the filing of any initiative or referendum petition with the city clerk,
petitioners shall post bond with the clerk in an amount sufficient to offset
the estimated expense of conducting the election, unless such election is to be
held at the time of a regular general municipal election. As near as
practicable after the election, the total actual expenses of the election shall
be tabulated by the city clerk. The petitioners shall be jointly and severally
liable for payment into the city treasury of the whole amount of the expenses
of such election. (1959 Code § 1-27-8)
1-8-9: CANVASS OF RETURNS:
The mayor and council shall meet within five (5) days after said election to
canvass the votes cast at such election, and the city clerk shall immediately
announce the results. Any initiative measure approved by a majority of the
votes cast shall be in full force and effect from the date of such
announcement. Any ordinance which is the subject of a referendum receiving less
than a majority of the votes cast shall be repealed, effective on the date of
such announcement. (1959 Code § 1-27-9)
1-8-10: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTY:
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
A.   Signs any name other than his own to any initiative or referendum
petition;
B.   Knowingly signs his name more than once on the same initiative or
referendum petition;
C.   Knowingly signs his name to any initiative or referendum petition if he is
not a registered city elector;
D.   Presents to any officer for filing any initiative or referendum petition
to which is attached, appended or subscribed any signature which the person so
filing such petition knows to be false or fraudulent, or not the genuine
signature of the person purporting to sign such petition;
E.   Circulates or causes to circulate any initiative or referendum petition
knowing the same to contain false, forged or fictitious names;
F.   Offers or proposes for any pecuniary reward or consideration:
   1.   To threaten or attempt to hinder or delay any initiative or referendum
petition or any part thereof or the placing of any signatures thereon;
   2.   To threaten others to desist from beginning, promoting or circulating
any initiative or referendum petition. (1959 Code § 1-27-10)
CHAPTER 9
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Legislative Purpose
1-9-2: Geographic Area Of City Impact
1-9-3: Comprehensive Plan
1-9-4: Subdivision Ordinance
1-9-5: Zoning Ordinance
1-9-6: Code And Ordinance Administration
1-9-7: Enforcement
1-9-8: Renegotiation
1-9-1: LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE:
The purpose for establishing an area of city impact is to identify a logical
urban fringe area adjoining the city of Bonners Ferry, Idaho. The urban fringe
area is realizing, or will realize, growth and development that must be planned
and managed in an orderly fashion. The area of city impact recognizes trade
area, geographic factors, and the potential delivery of public services as
being associated with the city of Bonners Ferry and comprised of areas that may
reasonably be annexed to the city in the near and distant future. (Ord. 499, 5-
23-2006)
1-9-2: GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
The officially adopted and agreed upon "area of city impact for Bonners Ferry,
Idaho" is established by this chapter and is set forth herein on the map
entitled "Area Of City Impact Map For The City Of Bonners Ferry, Idaho" dated
May 23, 2006, and marked exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 499, 5-23-2006)
1-9-3: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The comprehensive plan and subsequent amendments thereto as officially adopted
by the county of Boundary, Idaho, shall apply to the area of city impact within
the unincorporated area of Boundary County, Idaho. Upon the adoption hereof,
both the city of Bonners Ferry and Boundary County shall amend their
comprehensive plans to be consistent with this agreement, if required. (Ord.
499, 5-23-2006)
1-9-4: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
The subdivision ordinance and subsequent amendments thereto as officially
adopted by Boundary County, Idaho, shall apply to the area of city impact
within the unincorporated area of Boundary County, Idaho. The subdivision
ordinance of Boundary County shall also prevail over any city of Bonners Ferry
ordinances pertaining to the division of original parcels of record, plat
amendments, lot line adjustments, minor subdivisions, short plats or
administrative lot splits. (Ord. 499, 5-23-2006)
1-9-5: ZONING ORDINANCE:
The zoning ordinance, zoning map and subsequent amendments thereto as
officially adopted by Boundary County shall apply to the area of city impact
within the unincorporated area of Boundary County, Idaho. (Ord. 499, 5-23-2006)
1-9-6: CODE AND ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION:
A.   Boundary County shall be responsible for the administration of the
county's ordinances listed in sections
1-9-3, 
1-9-4 and
1-9-5 of this chapter, and shall receive all permit fees for inspection
performed to recapture direct costs for inspections, administration, legal
publications and other costs arising from the process. Appeal and hearing
procedures shall follow those adopted by Boundary County presently and in the
future.
B.   Amendments to the Boundary County comprehensive plan, requests for
preliminary and final plats or the vacation thereof, and requests for zone
changes, special use permits, and/or conditional use permits involving property
located in the area of city impact within the unincorporated area of Boundary
County being proposed for nonagricultural development of any type shall be
submitted to the city of Bonners Ferry for review and recommendation by the
city council. Review and recommendation by the city council shall be in
addition to county approval and shall be based upon standards for review as set
forth in titles 67 and 50, Idaho Code. In granting a recommendation of
approval, the city council shall have the right to suggest terms and conditions
pertinent to the permit under consideration.
C.   The authority to enter into and execute development agreements with a
subdivider and to accept required bonding or other forms of security to
guarantee construction of required street and/or utility improvements involving
plats located within the area of city impact within the unincorporated area of
Boundary County shall rest with Boundary County.
D.   Unless otherwise stipulated by written agreement, the maintenance of
public streets, law enforcement, and fire services within the area of city
impact within the unincorporated area of Boundary County shall be the
responsibility of Boundary County until such time as they are annexed by the
city of Bonners Ferry pursuant to law. (Ord. 499, 5-23-2006)
1-9-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of the comprehensive plan and land use ordinances within the area
of city impact shall be as defined by ordinance. (Ord. 499, 5-23-2006)
1-9-8: RENEGOTIATION:
The area of city impact agreement shall be reviewed by the city of Bonners
Ferry and Boundary County at least once every ten (10) years, and shall be
renegotiated at any time upon the request of either party hereto. Renegotiation
shall begin sixty (60) days after written request by either the city or county
and shall follow procedures for the original negotiations, as set forth in
Idaho Code section 67-6526. (Ord. 499, 5-23-2006)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
2-1-1: Created
2-1-2: Membership; Vacancies; Compensation
2-1-3: Qualifications; Term
2-1-4: Organization; Rules; Meetings
2-1-5: Duties
2-1-6: Time Limitations
2-1-7: County Cooperation
 
Notes
1 1. IC §§ 67-601 - 67-6529.
2-1-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission for Bonners Ferry,
Idaho, hereafter "commission". (1959 Code § 2-2-1)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION:
A.   Appointment: The commission shall consist of a minimum of five (5) and not
more than seven (7) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
council. (Ord. 544, 11-4-2014)
B.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment.
C.   Political Affiliation: Members shall be selected without respect to
political affiliation.
D.   Compensation: Members may receive mileage and per diem compensation as
determined by the council. (1959 Code § 2-2-1)
E.   Advisory Members: The mayor, with the consent of the council, may from
time to time appoint advisory members as deemed necessary who shall have the
right to speak but no right to vote. (1959 Code § 2-2-2)
2-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
A.   Qualifications: As required by Idaho Code 67-6504(a), the commission and
the appointed members of the commission must comply with the qualification and
composition requirements as established from time to time by the legislature.
B.   Term: Term of office for the first appointed members shall be four (4)
members serving for four (4) years, and three (3) members serving for three (3)
years. Thereafter, the term of office for each appointed member shall be four
(4) years.
C.   Consecutive Terms: No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive
terms without specific concurrence by two-thirds (2/3) of the city council
adopted by motion and recorded in the minutes.
D.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of
terms shall be filled by the mayor and confirmed by the council.
E.   Removal: Members may be removed after a majority recommendation vote of
the commission or by majority vote of the city council. Removal of a member
shall be for good cause, as outlined below:
   1.   Failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings or six (6) of the nine
(9) monthly scheduled meetings within the calendar year, without cause or
dismissal by the chair,
   2.   Blatant violations of this code, procedural due process or Idaho Code,
or
   3.   Violations of conflicts of interest. (Ord. 544, 11-4-2014; amd. Ord.
601, 1-4-2022)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION; RULES; MEETINGS:
A.   Officers: At the first meeting, the commission shall elect a chairman and
create and fill such other offices as may be deemed necessary.
   1.   The commission, shall at a regular meeting elect a chairman and create
and fill such other offices as may be deemed necessary. The commission shall
elect a chairman yearly, or within twelve (12) months of the previously elected
chair.
   2.   A commission may establish subcommittees, advisory committees or
neighborhood groups to advise and assist in carrying out the responsibilities
under this chapter. A commission may appoint nonvoting ex officio advisors as
may be deemed necessary.
B.   Procedural Regulations: Written procedural regulations consistent with the
laws of the state for transaction of business and hearings shall be adopted by
the commission.
C.   Meetings:
   1.   Regular Meetings: At least one regular meeting shall be held each month
for not less than nine (9) months in a year.
   2.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chairman or two
(2) members of the commission as determined necessary pursuant to giving notice
in the manner provided by law.
   3.   Open Meetings: All meetings shall be open to the public.
   4.   Quorum: A majority of resident members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.
   5.   Record: A record of all meetings shall be kept and maintained.
D.   Expectations; Removal Of A Member: It is expected that a member of the
planning and zoning commission attend monthly meetings and special meetings as
set by the commission. At least one regular meeting shall be held each month
for not less than nine (9) months in a year. Failure to attend monthly meetings
and special meetings as set by the commission may result in removal of the
commission member by a majority vote pursuant to subsection
2-1-3E of this chapter. (Ord. 544, 11-4-2014)
2-1-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to:
A.   Conduct a planning process designed to prepare, implement, review and
update a comprehensive plan that includes all lands within the governing
board's jurisdiction;
B.   Hold public hearings prior to recommending the comprehensive plan, changes
to the plan and ordinances in the manner provided by law and ordinance;
C.   Provide ways and means to obtain citizen participation in the planning
process;
D.   Recommend subdivisions and zoning ordinances;
E.   Recommend changes to a comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance when
requested by the council;
F.   Recommend a map, a governing plan and ordinances for an area of city
impact that is within the unincorporated area of a county;
G.   Prepare a procedure for processing zoning permits, namely: special use
permits, rezone applications, planned unit development proposals and variance
applications;
H.   Hear all requests for amendment to the zoning ordinance, hold at least one
public hearing and make its recommendation to the council;
I.   Recommend changes to the zoning ordinance (if needed) to the council;
J.   Review and make recommendations on all subdivision plats to the council;
K.   Recommend modifications to zoning districts;
L.   Recommend the laying out, widening, extending and locating streets for the
relief of traffic; and
M.   Perform all other duties prescribed by law and ordinance. (1959 Code § 2-
2-4)
2-1-6: TIME LIMITATIONS:
When the council directs a problem to the planning and zoning commission for
action, the commission shall submit its reply to the council within forty five
(45) days of the date it received the request from the council. (Ord. 544, 11-
4-2014)
2-1-7: COUNTY COOPERATION:
The planning and zoning commission is hereby granted all authority to cooperate
with any planning and zoning commission formed or to be formed for Boundary
County and to join with said planning and zoning commission of Boundary County
in the setting up or establishing of such coordinating commission or overall
commission as the two (2) planning and zoning commissions may determine. (1959
Code § 2-2-6)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-2-1: Created
2-2-2: Membership; Term
2-2-3: Ex Officio Members
2-2-4: Officers
2-2-5: Meetings
2-2-6: Expenditures
2-2-7: Duties
2-2-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created, in accordance with section 50-210, Idaho Code, a
special advisory committee to be known as the Traffic Safety Committee, with
the powers and duties as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
2-2-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERM:
A.   Appointment: The Traffic Safety Committee shall consist of no fewer than
five (5) and up to seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Council.
B.   Term: Members shall serve terms of two (2) years; provided, however, that,
of the first five (5) members thus appointed, three (3) shall serve a term of
one (1) year, which positions shall, in the following year, be appointed for
two (2) year terms, the intent being that approximately one-half (1/2) of the
committee shall be appointed each year. Members may be reappointed for
successive terms. The membership shall represent a cross section of the
traveling public.
C.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the
consent of the Council. (Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
2-2-3: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
The following persons may serve as ex officio members of the Traffic Safety
Committee, with the right to advise the committee but without a vote on the
committee: one (1) member of the City Council, the Director of Water Department
of the City or his designee, the City Engineer or Surveyor, one (1) member of
the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Police Chief or his designee, and the
Fire Chief or his designee. (Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
2-2-4: OFFICERS:
The officers shall consist of the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary. The
Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be elected at the first meeting of the year
for a term of one (1) year. The Secretary shall be appointed by the City Clerk
or his/her designee. (Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
2-2-5: MEETINGS:
A.   Regular Meetings: The meetings of the Traffic Safety Committee shall be
held not less than four (4) times a year, or more often as the membership
decides.
B.   Special Meetings: The Chairman or two (2) members of the committee may
call a special meeting as the need arises.
C.   Quorum: The business of the Traffic Safety Committee may be conducted when
a quorum is present. A "quorum" is defined as a majority of the voting
membership. (Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
2-2-6: EXPENDITURES:
The members of the committee shall make no expenditure or incur any
indebtedness except as may be authorized and appropriated by the City Council.
(Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
2-2-7: DUTIES:
The duties of the Traffic Safety Committee shall be as follows:
A.   To review the impact of commercial and industrial developments on the
City's transportation system.
B.   To review major subdivisions' traffic generation characteristics and the
possible impact on the street system.
C.   To review the design and timing of new signal installations.
D.   To review and make recommendations to City staff on all aspects of
pedestrian and bicycle safety and appurtenant projects.
E.   To review any other items which come to the attention of the staff or the
committee which relate to traffic and public safety.
F.   To recommend to the staff and the City Council any and all changes or
improvements which could or should be effected to improve traffic and
pedestrian safety for the citizens of the City. (Ord. 565, 5-16-2017)
CHAPTER 3
GOLF COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Created
2-3-2: Membership; Qualifications; Term
2-3-3: Organization; Rules; Meetings
2-3-4: Authority
2-3-5: Reports To Council
2-3-6: Duties
2-3-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a golf committee. (1959 Code § 2-4-1)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
A.   Appointment: The committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed by
the mayor and confirmed by the council.
B.   Qualifications: Any resident of Boundary County is qualified to serve on
the committee.
C.   Term: The term of office of the original appointees shall be one year for
three (3) members and two (2) years for two (2) members, with a specific term
to be stated by the mayor at the time of appointment. After the initial
appointment, the term of office for each appointee shall be two (2) years. A
person filling a vacancy created during a term shall serve for the balance of
the original term only. (1959 Code § 2-4-2)
D.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall likewise be filled by the mayor with
confirmation from the council. (1959 Code § 2-4-1)
E.   Removal: A committee member may be removed by majority vote of the city
council, with or without cause.
F.   Advisory Members: The mayor, with the consent of the council, may from
time to time appoint advisory members who shall have the right to speak, but no
right to vote. (1959 Code § 2-4-2)
2-3-3: ORGANIZATION; RULES; MEETINGS:
A.   Officers: At the first meeting of each year, the committee shall elect a
chairperson and create and fill such other offices as the committee deems
necessary.
B.   Procedural Regulations: Written procedural regulations for the transaction
of business and hearings shall be adopted by the committee.
C.   Meetings:
   1.   Regular Meetings: At least four (4) meetings a year shall be conducted
from April through September, or as the committee deems necessary. The
committee shall establish a regular meeting time and place. (1959 Code § 2-4-3;
amd. 2003 Code)
   2.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or
any two (2) members. At least three (3) hours' notice shall be given of any
special meeting unless all committee members waive this requirement.
   3.   Quorum: A quorum shall consist of the chairperson and two (2) committee
members; however, the chairperson shall only be entitled to vote in the case of
ties.
   4.   Minutes: A record of all minutes of meetings shall be kept and
maintained in the office of the city clerk. (1959 Code § 2-4-3)
2-3-4: AUTHORITY:
The committee is to function as a citizen advisory committee in the affairs of
the Bonners Ferry municipal golf course. The committee authority is as a
recommending body in the affairs and operations of the golf course. The
committee shall submit their recommendations to the city council and such
recommendations shall not be implemented without approval by the city council.
(1959 Code § 2-4-4; amd. 2003 Code)
2-3-5: REPORTS TO COUNCIL:
When the council directs a problem to the golf committee for action, the
committee shall submit a reply to the council within thirty (30) days of the
date the council mails the request to the committee. (1959 Code § 2-4-5)
2-3-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the golf committee to make recommendation to the city
council on the following matters:
A.   Prior to November 1 of a calendar year, the committee shall make a
recommendation to the council for fees for the following calendar year;
B.   In the general and overall maintenance of the fairways, greens and
boundary markers;
C.   For the promotion of and for the improvement of the golf course;
D.   As to the maintenance and operation of the clubhouse;
E.   Prior to July 31 of each calendar year, as to the amount of recommended
budget for the ensuing fiscal year;
F.   As to procedures and methods of making the golf course self-supporting;
G.   As to guidelines that provide for the use of the course and its facilities
to its fullest potential;
H.   As to guidelines that provide for and encourage use by all individuals,
groups and organizations of the city. (1959 Code § 2-4-6)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS PERMITS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Applicability
3-1-2: Purpose
3-1-3: Permit Required
3-1-3-1: Exemptions
3-1-4: Application
3-1-5: Forms
3-1-6: Signatures
3-1-7: Fees
3-1-8: Posting
3-1-9: Change Of Location Or Nature Of Business
3-1-10: Penalties For Noncompliance
3-1-1: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all wholesale and retail
businesses and all activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits or
professions that conduct business from or at a location or locations within the
city of Bonners Ferry, or engage in any business, trade, or profession within
the geographic boundaries of the city of Bonners Ferry, with the object of
gain, profit, benefit or advantage. Each business location shall be deemed a
separate business unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the
business. The permit is not intended to repeal any permit, license or franchise
provisions of any other ordinance of the city of Bonners Ferry, nor is the
permit to be considered a waiver of any other requirements of compliance with
any federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 541, 5-20-2014)
3-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to assist in providing the city information as
to congestion, zoning, planning, street construction and utility distribution.
(1959 Code § 5-1-7I)
3-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A permit is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business.
Any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or
through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged
in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or
passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or
occupation in the city. (1959 Code § 5-1-7B)
3-1-3-1: EXEMPTIONS:
A.   The permit provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   1.   Persons qualifying as a charity within the meaning of section 501(c)(3)
of the United States internal revenue code. Possession of a certificate,
letter, or other proof of such status from the internal revenue service shall
be required to qualify for this exemption.
   2.   Any agency of the United States government and any political
subdivision of the state of Idaho.
   3.   Persons who occupy space at a flea market or other similar type of
temporary bazaar. However, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
operator of the flea market or bazaar.
B.   In addition, neither the fee nor the permit provisions of this chapter
shall apply to:
   1.   Persons who make occasional sales of their own household property,
including garage sales or yard sales, not more than twice each calendar year
and children's lemonade stands or similar endeavors operated by children on an
occasional and temporary basis;
   2.   Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual laborers not included
as employees of a regularly conducted business;
   3.   Professionals, such as architects and lawyers, who are working in the
city temporarily and have offices elsewhere;
   4.   Lessors of residential property who lease two (2) or fewer family units
or properties. However, the provisions of this title shall apply to any
commercial property lessor and any lessor who leases more than two (2) family
units or properties within the city limits. (Ord. 541, 5-20-2014)
3-1-4: APPLICATION:
Application for the business permit shall be made, in writing, to the clerk.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit desired, the
location to be used and the nature of the business. (1959 Code § 5-1-7A)
3-1-5: FORMS:
Forms for all permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on
file by the clerk. (1959 Code § 5-1-7C)
3-1-6: SIGNATURES:
Each permit issued shall bear the signatures of the mayor and the clerk in the
absence of any provision to the contrary. (1959 Code § 5-1-7D)
3-1-7: FEES:
In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the clerk. All permit fees shall be deposited to the general fund. The fees,
established by resolution of the mayor and city council, shall be an initial
charge for each new business established, and an annual renewal fee for each
now existing and hereafter established business, except that any business
required to have a permit under another ordinance of the city is exempt from
the requirement of having a permit under this chapter. Any change in name,
location or status (e.g., without limitation, individual, partnership,
corporation, trust) shall constitute a new business as does any newly created
or established business. The permit fee levied hereunder is not intended to
repeal any other permit fee provision of any ordinance of the city. (Ord. 538,
10-1-2013)
3-1-8: POSTING:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a business in the municipality to
keep his permit posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (1959 Code § 5-1-7G)
3-1-9: CHANGE OF LOCATION OR NATURE OF BUSINESS:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location or nature of any
permittee's business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed
provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the clerk, subject to
compliance with the other provisions of this code. (1959 Code § 5-1-7F)
3-1-10: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
A.   Infraction: Unless otherwise provided, any person who shall commence or
continue to carry on or transact any business or calling for which a permit is
required by any provision of this title without first procuring the same or,
once procured, fails to maintain the standards required to retain the permit or
license shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00). A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
B.   Violation: The operating or conducting of any business or occupation for
which a license is required by this chapter without having a valid permit as
provided herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition to any
penalty provided by this chapter, the city may bring an action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to obtain an order enjoining any person from operating
or conducting any business or occupation in violation of this chapter.
C.   Revocation Or Suspension: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may
be revoked or suspended by the city council for violation of any law of the
city, the state of Idaho, or of the United States Of America applicable to the
business for which the permit was issued. Such revocation must be preceded by
notice in writing to the permittee from the city clerk, informing the permittee
that the council has ordered the holding of a hearing at a date and time
certain, not less than forty five (45) days from the date of such notice, at
which hearing the permittee will be required to appear personally and show
cause why the permit should not be revoked. At such hearing the permittee may
be represented by counsel, may testify personally, may call witnesses, and may
cross examine any witnesses called by the city. Should the council determine
that such permit should be revoked or suspended, it shall pass a motion to that
effect, and such permit shall thereupon be revoked, provided however, that no
such motion shall be deemed passed without the affirmative vote of one-half (1/
2) plus one of the members of the full council. (Ord. 541, 5-20-2014)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-2A-1: License Required
3-2A-2: Application
3-2A-3: License Requirements
3-2A-4: Fees
3-2A-5: Premises Requirements
3-2A-6: Hours Of Sale
3-2A-7: Access To Premises
3-2A-8: Prohibited Sales; Conduct
3-2A-9: Transferability
3-2A-10: Revocation
3-2A-11: Authorized Sale Without License
3-2A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful to sell liquor by the drink as provided in title 23, chapter
9, Idaho Code, as amended, provided a license shall first be obtained as
provided in this article and the rules and regulations and provisions
concerning the licensing and operation of a place of business for the sale of
liquor are adhered to as provided. (1959 Code § 5-11-1)
3-2A-2: APPLICATION:
A.   Form: Before there shall be any lawful sale of liquor by the drink, an
application by the proposed licensee must be made for such license and filed
with the clerk in form and manner herein provided.
B.   Required Information: Such application shall provide for the name of the
applicant, the location of the proposed business, and such other information as
may be prescribed and required by the mayor and city council.
C.   State License Required: At the time said application is filed, the
applicant shall also present a copy of an application for a state license and
also the license issued by the state for the sale of liquor by the drink at
retail. No license will be issued until a license is first obtained from the
state.
D.   Approval: All applications filed with the clerk shall be referred to the
mayor and city council for final approval. The clerk shall receive the license
fee hereinafter provided at the time of filing of the application. Upon
approval of the application by the mayor and council, the license will be
issued and delivered to the applicant. (1959 Code § 5-11-2; amd. 2003 Code)
3-2A-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor by the drink to any person
not qualified for a license under title 23, chapter 9, Idaho Code, as amended,
nor upon any premises in any neighborhood which is predominantly residential
nor within three hundred feet (300') of any school, church or other place of
public worship. (1959 Code § 5-11-3)
3-2A-4: FEES:
The license fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council,
required of an applicant for the sale of liquor by the drink shall be payable
in advance. The first payment shall be made with said application for the
calendar year in which the license is issued. All licenses issued shall expire
at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 in each year. Renewals may be
granted upon application, if the record of the applicant is satisfactory to the
council and in accordance with the provisions of the law and this article and
upon payment of the license fee for the ensuing year. Any operation under an
expired license shall constitute a misdemeanor for each day of operation. (1959
Code § 5-11-4; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 477, 5-6-2003)
3-2A-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
Every licensee must conform to all regulations and laws of the state of Idaho
and the provisions of this article. Liquor by the drink shall not be sold by
any person except one duly licensed. All premises shall be adequately lighted
and subject to periodic sanitary inspection. No gambling of any kind or
character shall be operated upon said premises and no gambling devices shall be
maintained thereon. (1959 Code § 5-11-8)
3-2A-6: HOURS OF SALE:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale or given away upon any licensed
premises during the following hours:
   On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. (1959 Code § 5-11-10) (Ord. 582, 11-6-2018)
3-2A-7: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All peace officers appointed by the state, the city, or the county shall have
free access at all times to the licensed premises. Any information touching the
manner and method of the operation of said premises or the sale of liquor may
be submitted to the council upon any investigation made of said licensee. (1959
Code § 5-11-7)
3-2A-8: PROHIBITED SALES; CONDUCT:
No sale of liquor shall be made to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years nor to any intoxicated person or persons who may engage in disorderly or
improper conduct. No disorderly or improper entertainment shall be permitted
upon such premises. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be
considered as a misdemeanor and shall likewise be grounds for the cancellation
of the license. (1959 Code § 5-11-9)
3-2A-9: TRANSFERABILITY:
Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable,
provided the transferee must be qualified to hold such a license as such
"qualifications" are defined by the other sections of this article. Any
licensee may, at any time, move from the place of business to some other place
which may meet the requirements of this article; provided application therefor
be made to the council and permitted by it. There shall be no additional
license fee, but there will be a transfer fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the city council. (1959 Code § 5-11-5)
3-2A-10: REVOCATION:
A.   Authority To Revoke: If any licensee, or employee, of a liquor by the
drink establishment violates any of the provisions of this article or is
convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of title 23, chapter 9,
Idaho Code, as amended, the mayor and council are hereby authorized and
empowered to revoke the license issued to said licensee.
B.   Notice Required: Provided, however, that in the event it is brought to the
attention of the council that a violation has taken place, before revoking such
license, the mayor and council shall cause notice to be served upon the
licensee, setting forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to
have been committed.
C.   Hearing: Such notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the mayor
and council which date of hearing shall be not less than five (5) days nor more
than ten (10) days from the date of the service of said notice.
D.   Council Decision: Upon or following said hearing, the mayor and council,
if they shall find that the provisions of this article or the provisions of the
laws of the state of Idaho have been violated, shall revoke such license
theretofore issued, and no refund of any unused portion of the license fee
shall be made to the licensee.
E.   Revocation Of State License: A revocation by the director of law
enforcement of the state of Idaho of any license theretofore issued, said
licensee shall automatically revoke the license issued by the city, and no
refund of any fee therefor paid shall be made. (1959 Code § 5-11-6)
3-2A-11: AUTHORIZED SALE WITHOUT LICENSE:
An applicant that has complied with all provisions of section
3-2A-2 of this article except for presenting a license, may lawfully sell
liquor by the drink under this article for so long as the applicant has a valid
authorization to so serve liquor by the drink from the Idaho department of law
enforcement. It shall be prima facie evidence of such authorization to present
to the council a written statement signed by the issuing investigator of the
department of law enforcement. (1959 Code § 5-11-11)
ARTICLE B. BEER
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Definitions
3-2B-2: License Required
3-2B-3: Application
3-2B-4: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2B-5: Fees
3-2B-6: Location Restriction (Rep. by Ord. 581, 10-16-2018)
3-2B-7: Term
3-2B-8: Hours Of Sale
3-2B-9: Regulations
3-2B-10: Transferability
3-2B-11: Revocation
3-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water.
   RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the
consumer. (1959 Code § 5-8-1; amd. Ord. 424, 2-6-1996)
3-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of beer without first obtaining
a proper license. (1959 Code § 5-8-2)
3-2B-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made, under oath, to the clerk
and the application shall show that the applicant possesses all of the
qualifications required by this code. Each application shall be forwarded,
after proper and adequate investigation by the chief of police, to the
governing body for approval or disapproval. The mayor and city council shall
grant or deny the application within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed
with the city clerk. (1959 Code § 5-8-3; amd. 2003 Code)
3-2B-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
A.   Owner; Residency: Is not the bona fide owner of such business, or
   1.   Individual: Is not a citizen of the United States, or has not been a
bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a period of one year prior to the
date of application;
   2.   Partnership: If the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be
such citizens, and at least one thereof, or the actual active manager therefor,
shall have been such resident;
   3.   Corporation: If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall
be qualified to do business within the state of Idaho, and the manager of such
business place shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident;
B.   Violation Of Liquor Law: Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer
or employee, or spouse of which, has been convicted of a violation of any law
of the state, or of the United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the
sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years
forfeited, or suffered the forfeiture of, a bond for his appearance to answer
charges of any such violation;
C.   Felony Conviction: Has, or any partner or actual active manager or officer
of which has, been convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid
any fine or completed any sentence of confinement therefor within five (5)
years.
A retailer licensee must continue throughout the license period to have all of
the foregoing qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications, and
for failure therein, upon proof thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer
shall revoke the license issued; and, in writing, sent by United States
registered mail, notify each of the other issuers of a retailer's license to
such license (licensee) stating sufficient facts for identification of the
licensee and the grounds and date of revocation. (1959 Code § 5-8-4)
3-2B-5: FEES:
The fees for the sale of beer shall be as follows:
A.   Consumption Off Premises: Where the retailer sells only bottled or canned
beer, none of which is consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee
shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council.
B.   Consumption On Premises: Where the retailer sells only bottled or canned
beer to be consumed on the premises where it is sold, the license fee shall be
established by resolution of the mayor and city council.
C.   Draught, Bottled Or Canned: Where the retailer sells draught and bottled
and canned beer, or draught only, the license fee shall be established by
resolution of the mayor and city council. (1959 Code § 5-8-6; amd. Ord. 477, 5-
6-2003)
3-2B-6: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 581, 10-16-2018)
3-2B-7: TERM:
Each license issued shall expire on December 31 of the year following the date
of issuance. (1959 Code § 5-8-6)
3-2B-8: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (1959 Code § 5-8-5)
3-2B-9: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer beer to any person under twenty
one (21) years of age and it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to frequent, loiter in or about or patronize any beer
dispensary, excepting that any person who is nineteen (19) years of age or
older may sell, serve, possess or dispense beer in the course of his/her
employment. (Ord. 468, 7-2-2002)
3-2B-10: TRANSFERABILITY:
Any license issued under the provisions of this article, and article C of this
chapter, shall be transferable, provided the transferee must be qualified to
hold such a license as such "qualifications" are defined by the other sections
of these articles. Any licensee may, at any time, move from the place of
business to some other place which may meet the requirements of these articles;
provided application therefor be made to the council and permitted by it. There
shall be no additional license fee, but there will be a transfer fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 476, 5-6-2003)
3-2B-11: REVOCATION:
The governing body of the municipality shall retain the right at all times to
revoke and cancel any license for just cause. When any license is revoked the
licensee shall have the privilege of appearing before the governing body to
appeal such revocation. Any conduct or act on the part of the licensee which
may be sufficient cause for revocation of the license must be brought to the
attention of the governing body. (1959 Code § 5-8-8)
ARTICLE C. WINE
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Definitions
3-2C-2: License Required
3-2C-3: Application
3-2C-4: Qualifications
3-2C-5: Fee; Term
3-2C-6: Issuance
3-2C-7: License Restrictions
3-2C-8: Consumption On Premises
3-2C-9: Possession
3-2C-10: Misrepresentation Of Age
3-2C-11: Revocation Of License
3-2C-12: Penalty
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this article are hereby defined as follows:
   DIRECTOR: The director of law enforcement of the state of Idaho.
   PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation or any group or combination acting as a unit and includes the
plural as well as the singular unless the intent to give a more limited meaning
is disclosed by the context in which it is used.
   RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license to sell wine at retail for consumption off
the licensed premises.
   RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
   WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than sixteen percent (16%)
alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of
fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar whether or not
ingredients are added.
   WINE BY THE DRINK LICENSE: A license to sell wine by the individual glass or
opened bottle at retail, for consumption on premises only. (1959 Code § 5-14-1;
amd. 2003 Code)
3-2C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person to sell wine at retail or by the drink within
the corporate limits of the city after having first procured a license
therefor. (1959 Code § 5-14-2)
3-2C-3: APPLICATION:
Application for license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the
applicant upon application forms furnished by the clerk. Such application shall
be filed by the clerk and presented to the mayor and council at the next
meeting of the council for their approval, rejection or further consideration.
(1959 Code § 5-14-3)
3-2C-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary
to obtain a license from the director of law enforcement of the state as
prescribed by the laws of the state, and maintain such qualifications
throughout the period for which such license is issued. The possession of
licenses regularly issued by the department of law enforcement and the county
in addition to a city beer license shall be prima facie evidence of the
applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder. (1959 Code § 5-14-4;
amd. 2003 Code)
3-2C-5: FEE; TERM:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be established by resolution of the
mayor and city council. Such license year shall be from one minute past twelve
o'clock (12:01) A.M. January 1 through December 31, provided, however, should a
license be issued for less than a full calendar year, the license fee shall be
prorated in accordance with the actual months of issuance. Separate licenses
are required for retail sale of wine and for sale of wine by the drink. (1959
Code § 5-14-5; amd. Ord. 477, 5-6-2003)
3-2C-6: ISSUANCE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence as
required by section
3-2C-4 of this article as to the qualifications of the applicant and by the
payment of the required license fee, the clerk shall, upon approval of the
mayor and city council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail
within the municipality for such calendar year or the remainder thereof. (1959
Code § 5-14-6; amd. 2003 Code)
3-2C-7: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
The assignment or transfer of a wine license shall be the same as provided by
article B of this chapter for the assignment or transfer of a beer license.
(1959 Code § 5-14-7)
3-2C-8: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
Persons who do not possess a valid license shall neither sell wine at retail or
by the drink. Wine sold for consumption on the retailer's premises may be sold
only during hours that liquor by the drink may be sold pursuant to the laws of
this state. Wine sold by the retailer for consumption off the premises of the
retailer may be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to
the laws of this state. (1959 Code § 5-14-8)
3-2C-9: POSSESSION:
No person may, while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a
public highway of this state, have in his possession any wine in an open or
unsealed container of any kind. (1959 Code § 5-14-9)
3-2C-10: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
A.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may purchase, consume or
possess wine.
B.   No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years.
C.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall by any means
represent to any retailer or distributor or to any agent or employee of such
retailer or distributor that he or she is twenty one (21) years or more of age
for the purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor, or his agent or
employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
D.   No person shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or distributor or
the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor, that any other person is
twenty one (21) years or more of age, when in fact such other person is under
the age of twenty one (21) years, for the purpose of inducing such retailer or
distributor, or the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor, to sell,
serve or dispense wine to such other person. (1959 Code § 5-14-10)
3-2C-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A.   Power To Revoke: The right shall be and remain at all times vested in the
mayor and council, and the mayor and council may, as hereinafter provided,
revoke or cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement,
for a violation of any of the provisions of this article, for any conduct or
act of the licensee or his employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or
them on the premises where such business is conducted, or in connection
therewith or adjacent thereto, tending to render such business or such premises
where the same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health,
peace, safety or general welfare of the city.
B.   Revocation Of State License: The revocation or suspension of the state
license by the director of law enforcement shall be deemed prima facie evidence
for revocation or suspension of the license issued herein. (1959 Code § 5-14-
11; amd. 2003 Code)
3-2C-12: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to
comply with any of the terms and conditions of this article shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor. (1959 Code § 5-14-12)
CHAPTER 3
ADVERTISING AND BILLPOSTING
SECTION:
3-3-1: Billposting, License Required
3-3-2: License; Term
3-3-3: Littering Streets And Alleys
3-3-4: Posting On Fences, Telegraph Poles
3-3-1: BILLPOSTING, LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the distribution, posting,
painting, pasting or tacking of signs, bills, pictures or advertising matter
announcing the business or place or meeting of any entertainment, opera,
theater, menagerie or other exhibition of whatsoever nature or kind, or any
other advertising matter in any manner in the city except as hereinafter
specified, unless the said person shall first have been licensed as hereinafter
provided. (1959 Code § 5-2-1)
3-3-2: LICENSE; TERM:
Any person desiring a license shall be licensed by the clerk to engage in the
business of billposting, handbill and sign advertising for the term of one year
from the date of said license upon the payment of the sum, established by
resolution of the mayor and city council, to the treasurer; provided, that such
person shall perform such duties in a good, lawful and proper manner in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (1959 Code § 5-2-2; amd. Ord.
477, 5-6-2003)
3-3-3: LITTERING STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the streets,
sidewalks or alleys, handbills, posters, advertisement or papers. Nothing
herein shall be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public
thoroughfares or create any nuisance therein. (1959 Code § 5-2-3)
3-3-4: POSTING ON FENCES, TELEGRAPH POLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach
any notice or other advertising matter to any fences, walls, buildings or other
property, without first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property or
his authorized agent or tenant. It shall be unlawful for any person to post,
paint, tack or otherwise attach any notice or advertising matter to any of the
telegraph, telephone, electric or other poles in the public thoroughfares.
(1959 Code § 5-2-4)
CHAPTER 4
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-4-1: Authorization
3-4-2: Purpose
3-4-3: Registration Required
3-4-4: Registration Fee
3-4-5: Required Information
3-4-6: Required Background Check
3-4-7: Term And Updating Product Information
3-4-8: Identification And Display Of Registration
3-4-9: Prohibited Conduct
3-4-10: Exemptions
3-4-11: Violations And Penalties
3-4-1: AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the City's general police power and the
authority granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution
and Idaho Code section 50-302. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the activities of door to door
solicitors in order to protect against criminal activity, including fraud and
burglary, to minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption
of privacy, and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety and welfare of
citizens of the City.
This chapter is not intended to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by
the First Amendment but merely to regulate specific activities which are
commercial in nature. As such, the registration and background check provisions
of this chapter do not apply to political or religious activities. (Ord. 571,
11-7-2017)
3-4-3: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to solicit door to door without first registering
with the City of Bonners Ferry and passing a background check, unless exempt by
State or Federal law.
For the purposes of this chapter, "door to door solicitation" means any
unsolicited contact by a person with any person at a residence or dwelling in
the City of Bonners Ferry for the purpose of selling any product or service, or
soliciting orders for any product or service. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
A registration fee and background check fee in the amounts set by resolution of
the City Council must be paid at the time the registration application is
submitted. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-5: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Applicants for registration must present a current government issued photo
identification to the City Clerk, allow the Clerk to take a photograph of the
applicant, and fill out a registration application to be provided by the City
Clerk, including the following information:
A.   Name and permanent home address of the applicant;
B.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or
services to be sold or provided;
C.   Name and address of the person's employer, together with an explanation of
the exact relationship between the person and the employer;
D.   Length of time for which the door to door solicitation will occur;
E.   A statement as to whether or not the person has been convicted of any
crime or violation of any Municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and
where the offense was committed. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-6: REQUIRED BACKGROUND CHECK:
Persons convicted of a felony within five (5) years prior to the date of
application are prohibited from door to door soliciting within the City limits
of Bonners Ferry.
To determine eligibility, each applicant for registration must provide
information and fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal history information
from the Idaho State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Pursuant
to Idaho Code section 67-3008, the City of Bonners Ferry will submit a set of
fingerprints obtained from the applicant and the required fees to the Idaho
State Police, Bureau of Criminal Identification, for a criminal records check
of State and national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information
required by this section will be on forms prescribed by the Idaho State Police.
The City of Bonners Ferry is authorized to receive criminal history information
from the Idaho State Police and from the Federal Bureau of Investigation for
the purpose of evaluating the fitness of applicants for licensing. As required
by State and Federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal
history information is prohibited. Fees required for the criminal history check
must be tendered at such time as the application is made. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-7: TERM AND UPDATING PRODUCT INFORMATION:
A.   A new registration must be filed with the City Clerk annually.
B.   Each registrant must submit a revised product and/or services description,
on a form provided by the City Clerk, before selling door to door any products
or services not listed on the original registration application. (Ord. 571, 11-
7-2017)
3-4-8: IDENTIFICATION AND DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION:
All registrants must visibly display the City issued proof of registration on
the outside of their clothing any time they are soliciting within the City
limits of Bonners Ferry. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-9: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A.   No person, registered or not, shall solicit business at any home or
business when such location has clearly posted any sign indicating that
solicitation or peddling is prohibited.
B.   No person, registered or not, shall continue with door to door
solicitation at any home or business when requested to leave by the owner,
authorized agent of the owner, or any other person that resides or works on the
premises.
C.   No person may provide false information on a registration or background
check application.
D.   No person, registered or not, may conduct door to door solicitations
before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
E.   No person, registered or not, may misrepresent the purpose of or
affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation, or make misrepresentations or
false statements when conducting the solicitation.
F.   No person, registered or not, may represent that the City of Bonners Ferry
endorses the solicitation. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-10: EXEMPTIONS:
A.   The fee and background check provisions of this chapter do not apply to
persons qualifying as a nonprofit business, including charitable activities,
within the meaning of United States Internal Revenue Code. Possession of a
certificate of such status from the Internal Revenue Service is required to
qualify for this exemption.
B.   Further, this chapter shall not apply to occasional sales or fundraisers
conducted by local schools, local youth groups, and local service
organizations. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
3-4-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the mandatory provisions or requirements of this
chapter is guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as follows:
A.   Initial violations of any provision are an infraction subject to a fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B.   Second and third violations of the same section are an infraction subject
to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
C.   Any additional violations of the same section are a misdemeanor punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 571, 11-7-2017)
CHAPTER 5
SECONDHAND STORES, JUNK SHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: Place Of Business Designated
3-5-4: Purchases From Minors
3-5-5: Inspections
3-5-6: Record Of Purchases
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   PAWNBROKERS: Every person who makes a business of lending money on the
security of personal property deposited or pledged in his keeping.
   SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS: Every person who shall deal in secondhand
furniture or secondhand household goods or who shall engage in the purchase of
any used, old or discarded articles or things shall be termed a secondhand
dealer and his place of business shall be known as a secondhand store or junk
shop. (1959 Code §§ 5-9-1, 5-9-2)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person who shall engage in the business of running and operating a
secondhand store or junk shop or pawnbroker shall pay a license fee as set from
time to time by council resolution. (1959 Code § 5-9-3; amd. 2003 Code)
3-5-3: PLACE OF BUSINESS DESIGNATED:
Every license granted to any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall designate
the house or place, together with the street and number in which the person
receiving such license shall be authorized to carry on such business; in case
any licensee licensed as such shall desire to remove his store or place of
business from the place designated in his license to another location he shall
give notice to the clerk who will endorse on the license held by the licensee
the designation of the new location in any other place than that designated in
the license unless the new location shall have been endorsed upon his license
by said clerk. (1959 Code § 5-9-4)
3-5-4: PURCHASES FROM MINORS:
No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall purchase any goods or articles
whatsoever from any minor without first advising the chief of police and giving
him an opportunity to inspect the goods offered for sale before the purchase.
(1959 Code § 5-9-5)
3-5-5: INSPECTIONS:
Every secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall, during reasonable hours, and upon
request of any police or peace officer permit such officer to examine and
inspect any merchandise, article or thing in stock in his place of business.
(1959 Code § 5-9-6)
3-5-6: RECORD OF PURCHASES:
Every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be
written in the English language the time of the purchase of any article or
thing, a description of the article or thing, and the name and address or the
name and description of the person from whom such purchase was made, and such
book, as well as every article or thing, shall, at all reasonable hours, be
open for police inspection. (1959 Code § 5-9-7)
CHAPTER 6
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Licenses Required
3-6-3: Authorized Operators/Drivers
3-6-4: Insurance Required
3-6-5: License Fees And Card
3-6-6: Transfer Of Licenses
3-6-7: Suspension And Revocation Of Licenses
3-6-8: Vehicle Inspection
3-6-9: Operating Rules
3-6-10: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CARRIAGE: Any horse or other animal drawn cart, wagon, vehicle or attached
apparatus used for the purpose of transporting persons for compensation.
   LICENSING AUTHORITY: The City Council or its designee, herein referred to as
the City.
   LIMOUSINE: Any luxury motor vehicle driven by a chauffeur used for the
purpose of transporting persons for hire.
   OPERATION: The conducting of a general taxicab, limousine, pedicab or
carriage business including, but not limited to, owning the business,
contracting or leasing the business or an individual vehicle.
   OPERATOR OR DRIVER: An individual, including a taxicab or limousine owner,
authorized to operate, drive, or staff a taxicab or limousine upon and through
the streets, avenues and alleys of the City.
   PEDICAB: Any human powered vehicle that is able to be pedaled without any
motor assistance, used for the purpose of transporting persons. A motor assist
may be permitted so long as it does not replace or become the primary source of
power in moving the unit and is seven hundred fifty (750) watts or less, is one
(1) horsepower or less, and cannot exceed twenty (20) miles per hour.
   TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of transporting persons for
hire, providing the "taxicab", as herein stated and defined, shall not include
school buses or other motor vehicles used exclusively for the transportation of
children to and from school, nor a motor bus with a seating capacity of over
seven (7) passengers operated on a regular schedule over regularly designated
streets, nor companies operating for the purpose of carrying United States mail
or other United States property.
   TAXICAB, LIMOUSINE, PEDICAB OR CARRIAGE OWNER: The person, firm, copartner,
corporation, individual or association securing a license to operate a taxicab
(s), limousine(s), pedicab(s) or carriage(s) upon and through the streets,
avenues and alleys of the City. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A.   Application For Taxicab, Limousine, Carriage, Or Pedicab Business License:
No person shall engage in the business of operating a limousine, taxicab or
taxicabs, carriage or pedicab within the corporate limits of the City without
first complying with all of the provisions of this chapter. Verified
applications for a license for taxicabs and limousines shall be made by owner
thereof upon forms to be furnished by the City Clerk. Such application shall
contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, model, vehicle
identification number (VIN) of the motor vehicle and the Idaho license number,
if applicable, for the current year. All rules and regulations in this chapter
pertaining to taxicabs shall likewise pertain to limousine, carriage and
pedicab services unless otherwise stated.
B.   Authority To License And Control: The City Council or its designee,
hereinafter the "City" is hereby vested with complete authority to issue
licenses for the operation of taxicabs and to alter, revoke or amend or suspend
the said licenses in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and to
regulate and limit the method of operation of taxicabs in accordance with this
chapter, and to regulate taxicab operators, and is further vested with complete
and full authority and responsibility to carry into effect all of the
provisions of this chapter relative to the operation of taxicabs. The City
reserves the right to do a complete background check on all owners and
operators. The City shall have the authority to implement the requirements and
restrictions of this chapter. Any license now issued, and which may be
hereafter issued to engage in the business of operating taxicabs on or over the
streets and public ways, shall mean and be construed to be only a license or
privilege to use the streets and public ways for the business of operating
taxicabs thereon. The Council or its designee may, where appropriate, reduce
the conditions or limits established in this chapter if the license applicant
is only operating a pedicab or carriage; otherwise, all requirements for a
taxicab may apply.
C.   Applicant; Conditions: No person shall be issued a license to engage in
the business of owning and maintaining a taxicab, nor shall the owner authorize
any person to operate a taxicab when that person:
   1.   Does not possess a valid U.S. driver's license;
   2.   Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
   3.   Is not a bona fide owner of such business, if applying for taxicab
owner license;
   4.   Has been convicted of a felony involving injury or threatened injury to
another person or who is a registered sex offender;
   5.   Has been, within three (3) years prior to the date of making
application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on
probation, received a deferred sentence, received any withheld judgment,
suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear or completed any
sentence for confinement for any felony or any misdemeanor or infraction which
involves a moving traffic violation, except that the City may in its discretion
waive the disqualification provided in this subsection upon finding that the
nature of the crime committed by the applicant and the extent of the
rehabilitation of the applicant does not pose a threat to the safety and health
of the taxi passengers;
   6.   Has ever been convicted of, or pled guilty to, a felony case of driving
under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs;
   7.   Has, at the time of such application, an outstanding warrant;
   8.   Has had a similar license revoked by the City or any other city of this
State or of the United States.
D.   Mayor And Council To Approve Application; Renewal: Before the City Clerk
shall issue a license for any taxicab, the application must first be presented
to the City Council for approval and upon such approval and the payment of the
necessary fees and compliance with all other sections of this chapter, the City
Clerk shall issue a license in such form as may be prescribed by the City
Clerk. The Clerk is authorized to renew such licenses annually so long as the
applicant complies with all provisions of this section.
E.   License Card: Each taxicab shall carry a card issued by the Clerk
verifying the license. Each card shall contain the name of the licensee, the
date of its issuance, the date of its expiration, the official license number
of the motor vehicle and the make and model thereof. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-3: AUTHORIZED OPERATORS/DRIVERS:
Before any owner/licensee authorizes a person to drive a taxicab, the owner/
licensee shall submit the completed application for taxicab driver form
containing required information on the driver to the Chief of Police. All
drivers must comply with the following standards and rules:
A.   Applicant Conditions: All requirements of subsection
3-6-2C of this chapter.
B.   Mandatory Drug Testing: Every person authorized to drive a taxicab under
this chapter who is involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of
any person, or damage to the property of any one (1) person in excess of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) while providing taxicab service shall submit to
one (1) or more tests as may be required to determine the amount of alcohol,
narcotics, and prescription and nonprescription drugs present in such person.
Any such required test(s) shall be at such authorized person's own expense.
C.   Revocation; Denial: If any required test shows the presence of illegal
drugs, alcohol in excess of the legal limit established in Idaho Code title 18,
chapter 80, prescription drugs used other than as prescribed, or evidence of
intoxicants, such person's authorization to drive a taxicab shall be
immediately revoked. Refusal to submit to any test required shall result in the
immediate revocation of the authorization to drive a taxicab. Following
revocation under this subsection, no authorization to drive a taxicab shall be
granted to that person until three (3) years immediately following the last
violation of this subsection.
D.   Dangerous Driving: No authorization to drive a taxicab shall be granted to
any person where satisfactory proof is submitted that such person operates
motor vehicles in an unskillful, dangerous or reckless manner, or who
repeatedly violates the laws of the City relating to traffic or this chapter.
E.   Medical Certificate: Every two (2) years each taxicab driver shall submit
with the application a medical certificate from a licensed physician
specifically stating that the applicant has good hearing, vision, and general
health such that the person has no known physical conditions or disabilities
which would impair the safe operation of a taxicab. The City's medical
certificate form shall be completed and returned with the application for
taxicab driver form.
F.   Renewal: Authorization to drive a taxicab shall not be given to a person
who, at the time of application for renewal of authorization issued hereunder
would not be eligible or qualified for such authorization upon a first
application, and a driver must continue to have and maintain all the
qualifications. A renewal application will also include an annual background
check and medical certification every two (2) years.
G.   Owner Notification: The Chief of Police shall promptly notify the owner if
he is aware a driver is not qualified to drive; however, the owner remains
responsible to monitor drivers and ensure they meet the requirements of this
chapter.
H.   License Issuance, Transfer, Display: Authorized taxicab drivers will be
issued an individual taxicab driver's license authorizing them to operate a
taxicab under any taxicab company's license within the City of Bonners Ferry.
The taxi driver may transfer this license to another taxicab company after
review of the City of Bonners Ferry Police Department. A taxicab driver's
license shall be displayed to the public or a law enforcement officer upon
request. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A.   Before any license is issued for any taxicab, the owners thereof shall be
required to file with the City Clerk a certified copy of a policy of insurance
executed by an insurance company authorized to do business within the State
insuring the public against any loss or damage which may result to any person
or persons from the operation of said taxicab, provided the limited amount of
liability in such policy of insurance specified shall be as follows:
   1.   Property damage: Not less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) except for carriages and pedicabs, which shall be not less than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
   2.   Public liability: Minimum five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
per incident except for carriages and pedicabs, which shall be not less than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
B.   Owners to provide for notice to the City of nonrenewal or cancellation of
insurance coverage.
C.   The license to operate such taxicab business shall expire of itself or
terminate upon the cancellation of said insurance for failure to pay premiums
or for any other reason and no license shall be granted or be effective unless
the taxicab for which said license is requested has been fully covered with
insurance as hereinabove specified. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-5: LICENSE FEES AND CARD:
Owners of taxicabs licensed hereunder shall pay to the City Clerk an annual
license fee set by resolution adopted by the City Council. Taxicab drivers
shall pay to the City Clerk an annual background check fee set by resolution
adopted by the City Council. Such license shall expire on the last day of each
year and must be renewed before the first day of the following year. Proof of
the license provided for herein shall be plainly posted in said taxicab in such
a manner that the same may be readily readable and legible to the passenger or
passengers therein. It shall be printed and posted in such a manner and placed
in said taxicab as shall be approved by the Chief of Police. It shall be
unlawful for any taxicab to operate without such proof of license being so
posted. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSES:
Taxicab business owners' licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be transferable subject to the consent and approval of the City Council;
provided, however, that no license may be issued to another or to any other
person until such licensee or person has applied for a license and has been
found to be qualified to obtain such license under the provisions of this
chapter; provided, further, that upon the approval of the transfer of any
license as herein provided, the City Clerk shall charge and collect a fee set
by resolution for transferring said license and issue a new license as provided
for in this chapter. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-7: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
In addition to other suspensions and revocations provided for in this chapter,
the following procedures shall govern the suspension or revocation of licenses:
A.   Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended at any time by the
Chief of Police for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any
other ordinance of the City, State or Federal law, or if such vehicle shall or
has been used for any immoral, illegal, disorderly or improper purpose.
B.   Any licensed owner or licensed operator of a taxicab vehicle within
Bonners Ferry who violates any provision of the Idaho Code or this Code, in
addition to: 1) the criminal or civil penalties prescribed by law for such
violation, and 2) the suspension and revocation provisions of this chapter,
shall be subject to a temporary suspension of their taxicab license for a
period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
C.   Notice of a temporary suspension may be personally served which suspension
shall be effective upon such service. However, notice shall also be deemed
properly served if sent by U.S. Postal Service certified mail to the address on
file in the City Clerk's Office that was provided by the licensee. Such
temporary suspension shall then be effective at one minute after twelve o'clock
(12:01) A.M. on the third day following the date written notice is mailed to
the licensed owner or licensed operator. A licensee's failure to accept,
acknowledge, or receive notification of a temporary suspension shall not
invalidate the temporary suspension, provided notice was served as provided in
this subsection. Notice of a temporary suspension shall include grounds for the
temporary suspension, and shall include a statement that informs the licensee
of their right to appeal the temporary suspension. A license may be temporarily
suspended for good cause even though no criminal charge or infraction is filed.
Any operation of a taxicab during the period of a temporary suspension shall be
deemed a separate offense for each day of such operation.
D.   Any licensed owner or licensed operator of a taxicab within the City of
Bonners Ferry whose license is temporarily suspended pursuant to this section
may appeal the temporary suspension to the City Council by filing a written
request with the City Clerk's Office within fifteen (15) working days of the
start of the temporary suspension. Upon appeal, a temporary suspension shall be
stayed pending a determination by the City Council, unless a separate finding
is made by the Chief of Police that continued operation under the applicant's
license would endanger the public, with the reasons for such finding being
clearly stated. In the event an appeal of a suspension is denied by the City
Council, the suspension period shall commence at one minute after twelve
o'clock (12:01) A.M. on the day immediately following issuance of the denial by
the City Council.
E.   The City Council may revoke any license issued under this chapter for any
cause which would have disqualified the applicant from receiving a license upon
a first application. Further, if the City shall receive a complaint of
deficiency or violation which, after investigation, proves to be valid, the
licensee shall be served with a warning notice and citation providing five (5)
working days to rectify. If the deficiency or violation is not corrected within
said five (5) working days, the license shall be revoked for the remainder of
the year. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-8: VEHICLE INSPECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and use or permit or allow the
operation and use of any vehicle as a taxicab upon the streets of the City
unless such vehicle has been inspected and approved. All vehicles shall be kept
in good and proper mechanical order and of sanitary and good appearance, inside
and outside. All taxicabs operated by one (1) taxicab company shall be easily
distinguishable from taxicabs operated by other companies. Each taxicab shall
have a lighted sign to indicate that the vehicle is in service or out of
service. All vehicles (carriages and pedicabs excluded) shall be equipped with
a taximeter which automatically registers the amount of the fare; such
taximeter shall be installed so the taximeter and the amount of fare shall be
plainly visible to the passengers riding in the taxicab. There shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in each taxicab a rate card or sticker, of not less than
four inches by six inches (4" x 6") in size, stating the rates of the taxicab,
or rate policy of the pedicab or carriage. Inspection of the mechanical safety
and sanitary condition of each vehicle shall be made by an ASE certified
mechanic designated by the City Council or by the Police Chief for that
purpose. Mechanical inspections shall certify the vehicle is equipped with, but
not be limited to, properly working brakes (pedicabs must have 2 sets of
operational brakes: 1 located on the front wheel and the other located on the
back axle), lights, turn signals, tires, horn or bell, muffler, rear vision
mirrors, seat belts, and windshield wipers in good condition. Windshields shall
not have any defect which obstructs or impedes the view of the driver. Further,
pedicabs shall only have a single frame; bike trailers or similar devices will
not be permitted. Carriages must have appropriate braking systems and lights
satisfactory to the City's designee. The mechanical inspection shall be
reviewed by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall inspect each taxicab
concerning its sanitary condition. All taxicabs shall be so inspected on or
before January 1 of each year. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-9: OPERATING RULES:
A.   The driver of any motor vehicle used within the City to transport
passengers for hire shall be required to bring such vehicle to a complete stop
before driving across any railroad crossing within the City.
B.   No smoking shall be permitted in a taxicab, pedicab or carriage at any
time.
C.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxicab to carry more
passengers than the rated seating capacity of said motor vehicle as given by
the manufacturer of said vehicle and not more than one (1) person shall occupy
the front seat with the driver at the same time while the taxicab is in
operation.
D.   All occupants shall wear seat belts (except in carriages and pedicabs,
which must be equipped with seat belts that may be worn at the occupants'
discretion).
E.   It shall be unlawful for any person driving a taxicab, pedicab, carriage
or limousine to use a handheld cellphone while operating the vehicle, when
vehicle is in motion.
F.   Taxicab, pedicab, carriage and limousine companies and drivers are subject
to all applicable Federal, State and local laws.
G.   Horse or animal drawn carriages shall be equipped with a manure catching
device which will capture and retain animal manure. All manure will be removed
from the capture device as soon as is practical and stored in a covered metal
container provided by the carriage operator. The carriage operator will be
responsible for the disposal of animal manure at an approved location outside
the City limits. Any manure deposited on a City roadway must be cleaned up and
disposed of by the carriage operator as soon as practical.
H.   All pedicabs and carriages operating at night must use headlights and
taillights. (Ord. 568, 9-5-2017)
3-6-10: PENALTY:
In addition to being subject to license revocation or suspension, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable according to the provisions of Idaho State Code. (Ord.
568, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Findings And Intent
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Special Event Permit Required
3-7-4: Permit Application, Fees, Insurance And Indemnification
3-7-5: Issuance Of Permit; Extraordinary Resources; Conditions Of Approval;
Grounds For Denial
3-7-6: Revocation Or Suspension Of A Permit
3-7-7: Prohibitions And Penalties
3-7-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
A.   The Bonners Ferry city council finds that special events which take place
in the city of Bonners Ferry which are offered to the general public or a
substantial segment of the public have the potential to attract large
gatherings of people which may cause adverse public health and safety
conditions requiring municipal involvement and regulation to ensure adequate
protection of public health and safety.
B.   It is the intent of the Bonners Ferry city council that this chapter be
enacted to protect and promote the health, welfare, and safety of citizens and
visitors to the city of Bonners Ferry and to regulate special events for the
benefit and protection of the public health and safety. Special event
applicants, promoters, and sponsors whose special events require the use of
extraordinary city resources as a result of anticipated attendance, heightened
security concerns, or other logistical situations should pay for those
extraordinary resources in order to alleviate the cost to the public taxpayer.
(Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   APPLICANT, PROMOTER, OR SPONSOR: The person making an application for a
permit to plan and operate a special event within the city of Bonners Ferry. As
used herein, the applicant, promoter, and sponsor may be used interchangeably
and the requirements of this chapter and any administrative regulations shall
be enforced against the applicant, promotor, or sponsor.
   EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCES: Government, public health and safety personnel,
equipment, or other resources which would not, in the absence of the special
event, be required or expended.
   INSURANCE: A general liability policy for each permitted event in the amount
designated within this chapter written by an insurer authorized by the state of
Idaho to write insurance policies and kept continuously in force for the full
term of the permit.
   PERMITTEE: A person having a city issued permit in full force and effect
issued hereunder to plan and operate a special event within the city of Bonners
Ferry.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   PROJECTED ATTENDEES AND PARTICIPANTS: The estimated number of persons who
will attend or participate, are reasonably likely to attend or participate, or
are expected to attend or participate in a special event. The number estimate
should consider the type and format of the special event, the size and location
of the event, any prior events which were similar, including the special event
history itself if it is an annual event or part of a series of gatherings or
events, and the entertainment, if any, planned.
   SIDEWALK: Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.
   SPECIAL EVENT: A preplanned gathering, event, or series of related
consecutive events of an entertainment, cultural, recreational, educational,
political, religious, or sporting nature, or any other nature that:
      A.   Is expected to draw fifty (50) or more persons at any session as
participants or spectators;
      B.   Impacts city streets, sidewalks, parks, common areas, or utilizes
city resources;
      C.   Requires special city services beyond normal functions including,
but not limited to: street closure, increased police or fire protection; or
      D.   Intends to broadcast amplified sound or generate unusual noise.
Examples of special events include, by way of illustration and without
limitation, the following types of events: concerts, dances, assemblages,
processions, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties, community
events, mass participation sports such as running events, bicycle races, or
sports tournaments, or other organized activity conducted for a common and
collective use.
   STREET: Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular traffic including any berm or shoulder, right of way, or
median strip thereof. (Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
3-7-3: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   No person shall stage, promote, or conduct any "special event", as defined
above, in the city without first obtaining a special event permit approved by
the chief of police, fire department chief, and city administrator.
B.   The requirements for permitting under this chapter shall not apply to the
following (unless closure of city streets is requested, in such case, the
organizer must complete an application, but fees shall be waived):
   1.   Funeral processions;
   2.   Spontaneous events for the purpose of expressive activity that occur in
response to breaking news or events;
   3.   Government sponsored functions;
   4.   Venues that are permitted to hold such activities by the property's
zoning or an approved special use permit;
   5.   Private functions held on private property; and
   6.   School district functions.
In determining whether an event is exempt, no consideration shall be given to
the content of any constitutionally protected expression connected with the
planned activity. No permit shall be required under this chapter, nor any
condition imposed on any permit if requiring so would violate the rights
protected by the constitution of the United States or by the constitution of
the state of Idaho. (Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
3-7-4: PERMIT APPLICATION, FEES, INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A.   All applicants for a special event permit shall submit an application for
a special event permit to the city clerk no later than thirty (30) days prior
to the commencement of the special event.
B.   The application for a special event permit shall require and contain
information as determined by application approved by the city council and the
chief of police.
C.   The council shall establish by resolution, a nonrefundable fee amount to
be submitted with a permit application, the amount of which shall cover the
expenses incident to processing the application. This may include an additional
fee for applications not submitted in a timely manner as determined by this
chapter.
D.   All applicants shall submit, with the application, and maintain at least
until the conclusion of the event, a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), naming the city of
Bonners Ferry as a coinsured party. If alcohol is to be served at the event,
the insurance policy must also contain an alcohol rider. Applicants must also
execute indemnification and hold harmless provisions contained within the
application.
E.   A cleanup fee, which shall be established by resolution of the city
council shall be required at the time of application, all, a portion of, or
none of which shall be returned upon recommendation of the chief of police
after his inspection of the premises after the event has concluded and the
premises have been vacated. Cleanup shall include removal of all signs and
advertising materials posted on public property to advertise the event.
F.   Upon application to the council and good cause shown, the council may,
reduce or waive part or all of the financial requirements for issuance of a
permit where the proceeds of the performance or parade are to be donated to a
charitable or community organization or for a purpose to benefit the residents,
business, or purpose of the city. (Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
3-7-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; EXTRAORDINARY RESOURCES; CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL;
GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
A.   Upon submission of the application and any supporting documents required
by this chapter, the chief of police or his designee may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a permit. If additional information is required by the
chief of police the applicant shall have five (5) business days to submit all
requested information.
B.   Special event applicants, promoters, or sponsors whose special events
require the use of extraordinary city resources as a result of their
anticipated attendance or heightened security concerns shall be required to pay
for those resources as determined by the chief of police. Full recovery for
extraordinary expenses shall be required no later than sixty (60) days
following the conclusion of the event.
C.   The chief of police shall seek advice of other relevant staff members when
the review and coordination of a specific event application is deemed necessary
including the street department, clerk's office, and fire department. The
applicant may be required to attend a meeting with the relevant parties during
the review of the application.
D.   An application for a permit may be denied if the chief of police
determines:
   1.   The applicant has made any false, material representation in the
application;
   2.   The applicant fails to provide any items or information required by
this chapter;
   3.   In the opinion of the chief of police, the proposed event fails to
provide a safe and secure venue or puts at risk the safety and well being of
citizens in the community, or if the applicant fails to gain required licenses,
permits, or permissions;
   4.   The special event will substantially interfere or conflict with any
other special event for which a permit has already been granted or activity
already scheduled with the provision of public safety or other city services in
support of such other previously scheduled event.
   5.   The special event will:
      a.   Substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of public
transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in area of the special
event;
      b.   Close streets so as to cause unsafe conditions for the public;
      c.   As a result of the expected attendance at the event, the lawful
capacity of the facility or area will be exceeded;
      d.   The parking available at the facility will be inadequate to
accommodate the expected attendance; or
      e.   The event coordinator, applicant, promotor, or sponsor has failed to
pay for a previously permitted event.
E.   If a permit is denied or if the permit is approved with conditions to
which the applicant objects, the chief of police or his designee shall provide
the applicant with a written decision to deny or approve the conditions within
ten (10) business days. The applicant, within ten (10) business days of the
denial may appeal the decision to the city council for a final review based
upon the documents and circumstances presented. The applicant's appeal will be
scheduled for consideration by the city council during a regularly scheduled
council meeting within fifteen (15) business days. (Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
3-7-6: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF A PERMIT:
The chief of police or his designee may summarily suspend or revoke a special
event permit issued under this chapter for violation by the applicant of
federal, state, or local laws or ordinances during the event, for violations of
conditions of the permit, or for making any material false representations in
an application for a permit. In deciding whether to suspend or revoke a permit,
the chief of police or his designee may consult with other members of city
staff. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the appeal provisions above
shall apply commencing upon the date of the suspension or revocation notice.
(Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
3-7-7: PROHIBITIONS AND PENALTIES:
A.   At special events, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Conduct, present, stage, or promote a special event without a permit;
   2.   Violate any provision of this chapter;
   3.   Serve or cause to be served alcohol in violation of Idaho Code; and/or
   4.   Violate any condition of a special event permit.
B.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed the statutory maximum established by Idaho Code. (Ord. 557, 9-20-2016)
CHAPTER 8
LOCAL OPTION TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1:    Definitions
3-8-2:    Imposition And Rate Of Certain Non-Property Sales Taxes, To Wit: A
One Percent (1%) Tax On The Sales Price Of All Property Subject To Taxation,
Exempting Those Sales In Excess of $1,000.00, In One Individual Transaction
3-8-3:    Duration Of Taxes
3-8-4:    Purposes For Which The Revenues Derived From Said Non-Property Taxes
Shall Be Used
3-8-5:    Creation Of A Property Tax Relief Fund
3-8-6:    Authorization For City Clerk To Administer, Regulate And Collect Said
Non-Property Taxes
3-8-7:    Permits Required And Issuance Of Permits
3-8-8: Method For Payment Of Taxes
3-8-9:    Audits Deficiency Determination
3-8-10:    Redetermination Of Deficiency
3-8-11:    Appeals, Interest On Deficiency
3-8-12:    Collections And Enforcement
3-8-13:    Refunds And Limitations
3-8-14:    Responsibility For Payment Of Taxes
3-8-15:    Period Of Limitation Upon Assessment And Collection
3-8-16:    Successors’ Liability
3-8-17:    General Administration By City Clerk
3-8-18:    Penalties
3-8-19:    Penalty Charges
3-8-20:    Exemptions
3-8-21:    Confidentiality Of Information
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phases, words and
derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
 
CITY OF BONNERS FERRY: Within the municipal boundaries of the City of Bonners
                       Ferry, Boundary County, Idaho.
 
INDIVIDUAL   Any sale of tangible personal property reflected on a single invoice, receipt,
TRANSACTION: or statement for which the aggregate sale transaction has been completed
             between the buyer and the seller.
             Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club,
PERSON:      fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver,
             trustee, syndicate, cooperative, assignee, or any other group or combination
             acting as a unit.
             Any transfer, rental, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any
             manner or by any means whatsoever, of tangible personal property for a
             consideration. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred
PURCHASE:    but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price is a
             purchase. A transfer for consideration of any publication or of tangible
             personal property which has been produced, fabricated, or printed to the
             special order of the customer is also a purchase.
             A sale of tangible personal property for any purpose other than resale of that
             property in the regular course of business or lease or rental of that property
             in the regular course of business where such rental or lease is taxable under
             Section 63-3612(2)(h), Idaho Code.
             1.   All persons engaged in constructing, altering, repairing or improving real
             estate, which includes construction of prefabricated buildings as defined in
             Title 63, Chapter 36 Idaho Code, are consumers of the material used by them;
             all sales to or use by such persons of tangible personal property are taxable
RETAIL SALE/ whether or not such persons intend resale of the improved property.
SALE AT      2.   The delivery in this State of tangible personal property by an owner or
RETAIL:      former owner thereof or by a factor, or agent of such owner, former owner or
             factory, if the delivery is to a consumer or person for redelivery to a
             consumer, pursuant to a retail sale made by a retailer not engaged in business
             in this State, is a retail sale in this State by the person making the
             delivery. He shall include the retail selling price of the property in his
             total sales subject to tax under this Chapter.
             3.   For the purposes of this Chapter as enacted, the sale or purchase of a
             prefabricated building is deemed a sale or purchase of real property and not a
             sale or purchase of tangible personal property.
 
 
          The term "retailer" means and includes:
          1.   Every seller who makes any retail sale or sales of tangible personal
          property and every person engaged in the business of making retail sales at
          auction of tangible personal property owned by the person or others.
          2.   Every person engaged in the business of making sales for storage, use, or
          other consumption or in the business of making sales at auction of tangible
          personal property owned by the person or others for storage, use, or other
          consumption.
          3.   Every person making more than two (2) retail sales of tangible personal
          property during any twelve (12) month period, including sales made in the
RETAILER: capacity of assignee for the benefit of creditors, or receiver or trustee in
          bankruptcy, or every person making fewer sales who holds himself out as engaging
          in the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail.
          4.   When the City Clerk determines that it is necessary for the efficient
          administration of this Chapter to regard any salesmen, representatives, peddlers,
          or canvassers as agents of the dealers, distributors, supervisors, or employers
          under whom they operate or from whom they obtain the tangible personal property
          sold by them, irrespective of whether they are making sales on their own behalf
          or on behalf of such dealers, distributors, supervisors, or employers, the City
          Clerk may so regard them and may regard the dealers, distributors, supervisors,
          or employers as retailers for the purpose of this Chapter.
 
 
       Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any
       manner or by any means whatsoever, of tangible personal property for a
       consideration and shall include any transfer of possession through
       incorporation or any other artifice found by the State Tax Commission to be in
       lieu of, or equivalent to, a transfer of title, an exchange or barter. "Sale"
       shall also include:
       1.   Producing, fabricating, processing, printing, or imprinting of tangible
       personal property for a consideration for consumers who furnish either directly
       or indirectly the materials used in the producing, fabricating, processing,
SALE:  printing, or imprinting.
       2.   Furnishing, preparing, or serving for a consideration food, meals, or
       drinks.
       3.   A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the
       seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price.
       4.   A transfer for a consideration of the title or possession of tangible
       personal property which has been produced, fabricated, or printed to the
       special order of the customer, or of any publication.
       5.   Admission charges.
       6.   Receipts from the use of or the privilege of using tangible personal
       property or other facilities for recreational purposes.
       The total amount for which tangible personal property including services agreed
SALES  to be rendered as a part of the sale, is sold, rented or leased, valued in
PRICE: money, whether paid in money or otherwise, without any deduction on account of
       any of the following:
 
 
  1.   The cost of the property sold. However, in accordance with such rules and
  regulations as the State Tax Commission may prescribe, a deduction may be taken
  if the retailer has purchased property for some purpose other than resale or
  rental, has reimbursed his vendor for tax which the vendor is required to pay to
  the State or has paid the use tax with respect to the property, and has resold or
  rented the property prior to making any use of the property other than retention,
  demonstration, or display while holding it for sale in the regular course of
  business. If such a deduction is taken by the retailer, no refund or credit will
  be allowed to his vendor with respect to the sale of the property.
  2.   The cost of materials used, labor or service cost, losses, or any other
  expense.
  3.   The cost of transportation of the property prior to its sale.
  The term "sales price" does not include any of the following:
 1.   Discounts allowed and taken on sales, but only to the extent that such
  discounts represent price adjustments as opposed to cash discounts offered only
  as an inducement for prompt payment.
  2.   Any sums allowed on merchandise accepted in part payment of other
  merchandise.
  3.   The amount charged for property returned by customers when the amount
  charged therefor is refunded either in cash or credit; but this exclusion shall
  not apply in any instance when the customer, in order to obtain the refund, is
  required to purchase other property at a price greater than the amount charged
  for the property that is returned.
  4.   The amount charged for labor or services rendered in installing or applying
  the property sold, provided that said amount is stated separately and such
  separate statement is not used as a means of avoiding imposition of this tax upon
  the actual sales price of the tangible personal property.
 
 
             5.   The amount of any tax (not including, however, any manufacturers' or
             importers' excise tax) imposed by the United States upon or with respect to
             retail sales whether imposed upon the retailer or the consumer.
            6.   The amount charged for finance charges, carrying charges, service
             charges, time price differential, or interest on deferred payment sales,
             provided such charges are not used as a means of avoiding imposition of this
             tax upon the actual sales price of the tangible personal property.
             7.   Charges for transportation of tangible personal property after sale.
SALES TAX    The Idaho Sales Tax Act, Idaho Code section 63-3601, et. seq., including
ACT:         subsequent amendments thereto, which is hereby adopted by reference.
SELLER:      Every person making sales at retail or retail sales to a buyer or consumer,
             whether as agent, broker, or principle.
TANGIBLE     Personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or
PERSONAL     which is in any other manner perceptible to the senses.
PROPERTY:
TAXPAYER:    Any person subject to or liable for any taxes imposed by this Chapter.
TRANSACTION: A completed agreement between a buyer and a seller to exchange goods. (Ord.
             609, 6-6-2023)
 
3-8-2: IMPOSITION AND RATE OF CERTAIN NON-PROPERTY SALES TAXES, TO WIT: A ONE
PERCENT (1%) TAX ON THE SALES PRICE OF ALL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAXATION,
EXEMPTING THOSE SALES IN EXCESS OF $1,000.00, IN ONE INDIVIDUAL TRANSACTION:
The City of Bonners Ferry, hereby imposes and shall collect certain non-
property taxes, as follows:
   A municipal sales tax is hereby imposed upon each sale at retail within the
city of Bonners Ferry, at the rate of one (1%) of the sales price of all
property subject to taxation under Idaho Code sections 63-3601 et. seq., Idaho
Sales Tax Act, including subsequent amendments thereto, excepting those
purchases or sales in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), completed in
a individual transaction.
A.   All monies collected and/or retained under the provisions of this chapter
shall be held in trust for the City of Bonners Ferry and for payment thereof to
the City Clerk in the manner and at the times provided in this chapter.
B.   This section, as well as Idaho State Law, provides that when there is a
retail sales transaction within the city of Bonners Ferry, a local option is
imposed. For a sale of goods, a sale is made in the city when title passes to
the buyer in the city. When delivery of goods occurs in the city, title passes
at the time of delivery. If goods are shipped from outside the city into the
city, the seller must obtain a city of Bonners Ferry local-option tax permit
pursuant to the terms of section
3-8-7 of this chapter. Alternatively, when goods are delivered by a seller
within the city to a location outside the city, then title generally passes
outside the city and no sales tax is owed to the city. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-3: DURATION OF TAXES:
The non-property sales taxes authorized and collected under this chapter are
hereby imposed commencing on July 1, 2023, and ending on December 31, 2033.
(Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-4: PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE REVENUES DERIVED FROM SAID NON-PROPERTY TAXES
SHALL BE USED:
The non-property tax revenue derived from and collected under this chapter
shall be used for the following purposes:
A.   Fire protection, including capital and operating expenses.
B.   Law enforcement, including capital and operating expenses.
C.   Streets, sidewalks, buildings and grounds, including capital and operating
expenses, such as road construction and maintenance and snow removal.
D.   Property tax relief (per Idaho Code, any excess revenue received will be
placed in a designated property tax relief fund).
E.   Direct costs to the city to collect and enforce the tax. (Ord. 609, 6-6-
2023)
3-8-5: CREATION OF A PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FUND:
There is hereby created in the office of the City Clerk a fund to be designated
as the "Municipal Property Tax Relief Fund." All monies collected under this
chapter, and not otherwise budgeted by the City Council (excluding the current
fiscal year which has already been budgeted ending September 30, 2023) shall be
placed by the City Clerk into the municipal property tax relief fund. All
monies collected and placed into said fund shall be used to replace City
property taxes in the ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-6: AUTHORIZATION FOR CITY CLERK TO ADMINISTER, REGULATE AND COLLECT SAID
NON-PROPERTY TAXES:
The City Clerk of the City of Bonners Ferry is hereby authorized and empowered
to administer, regulate and collect payment of all non-property taxes adopted
and imposed by this chapter. Said Clerk shall have all of the powers set forth
in this chapter together with those additional powers necessary and proper to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-7: PERMITS REQUIRED AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
A.   Every person desiring to engage in or conduct business of retail sales,
within this City shall file with the City Clerk an application for a municipal
non-property sales tax permit for each place of business. A separate permit is
required for each place of business within the City. Every application for said
permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall set
forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact
business, the location of the business or places of businesses, and such other
information as the City may require. The application shall be signed by the
owner, if he is a natural person; or in the case of an association or
partnership, by a member or partner, in the case of a corporation, by an
executive officer or other person authorized by. the corporation to sign the
application.
B.   Upon filing an application meeting the requirements set out above, the
City Clerk shall issue to each applicant a permit for each place of business. A
permit shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose
name it is issued and for the transaction of business at the place designated
therein. It shall at all times be conspicuously displayed at the location for
which it was issued. Issuance of a permit may be subject to additional
requirements as set forth in this Chapter.
C.   On the face of the permit shall be fixed a municipal non-property tax
number which shall be used by the applicant as an identifying number on all
filing, payment and correspondence with regard to the non-property tax imposed
under this chapter. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-8: METHOD FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
A.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed and paid for each
calendar month. Said taxes are due and payable to the City Clerk on or before
the twentieth day of the succeeding month. The amount of tax paid shall be
computed on all sales subject to taxation under this chapter. Each person
required to hold a municipal non-property sales tax permit and number shall
file a municipal non-property sales tax return and a copy of their Idaho State
Sales Tax Return for the month at the same time said taxes are paid to the City
Clerk, unless said person has been permitted in writing by the Idaho State Tax
Commission to file quarterly sales or use tax returns. Persons who have been
permitted to file other than monthly returns shall notify the City Clerk in
writing and the City Clerk thereupon may require reporting of State Tax Returns
over some other period.
B.   The first payment of taxes under this chapter shall be due and payable
together on the twentieth day of August 2023, for that period beginning July 1,
2023, and ending July 31, 2023, thereafter all payments shall be made monthly.
C.   A municipal non-property sales tax return shall be filed each and every
month by every person engaging in sales subject to taxation under this chapter
regardless of whether or not any tax is due. Returns shall be signed by the
person required to file the return or by a duly authorized agent.
D.   A valid sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Idaho State Tax
Commission upon filing a copy thereof with the City Clerk shall have the same
effect to exempt the sale from the taxes imposed hereunder as in the Idaho
Sales Tax Act. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-9: AUDITS DEFICIENCY DETERMINATION:
A.   The City Clerk may order an audit of any taxpayer under this chapter for
the purpose of ascertaining the correctness or completeness of any return or
payment.
B.   If any error or omission is discovered in such audits or in any other way,
the City Clerk may compute and determine the amount of tax due upon the basis
of facts obtained from such information within its possession and assert a
deficiency. One or more deficiency determinations may be made for the amount
due for one or for more than one period. In making such a determination, the
City Clerk may offset over payments against amounts due. Further, said
determinations shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the
person fails to make a return and shall be based upon any information which is
in the City Clerk's possession.
C.   The City Clerk shall give written notice of its determination and the
amount of its deficiency, including interest, at the rate of twelve percent
(12%) per annum from the date due, to the person from whom such deficiency
amount is due. Such notice may be given personally or mailed to the person at
the address furnished to the City Clerk in the non-property tax permit
application. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-10: REDETERMINATION OF DEFICIENCY:
A.   Any person against whom a deficiency determination is made under this
Chapter, or any person directly interested, may petition in writing for a
redetermination within thirty (30) days after service upon the person of notice
thereof. If the petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty
(30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the
period.
B.   If a petition for redetermination is filed with the thirty (30) day period
the City Clerk shall reconsider the determination and, if the person so
requests in the petition, grant the person an oral hearing and give said person
ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing personally or by
mail addressed to the person at the address furnished to the City Clerk in said
person's application for a non-property tax permit. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-11: APPEALS, INTEREST ON DEFICIENCY:
A.   When a redetermination is made, the City Clerk shall give notice to the
taxpayer against whom the redetermination is made. Within thirty (30) days of
the date upon which such notice of redetermination is mailed or served, the
taxpayer may file an appeal with the City Council or may file a complaint with
the District Court for review of the City Clerk's redetermination. There shall
be no right of review to the City Council nor to the District Court on the
determination of taxes due made by the City Clerk unless a redetermination has
been timely filed. No assessment of a deficiency in respect to the tax imposed
by this chapter or proceeding to collect for its collection shall be made,
begun or prosecuted until such notice has been mailed to the taxpayer and
expiration of such thirty (30) day period after notice of redetermination, nor
if a protest is filed until a decision on the protest becomes final. If the
taxpayer does not protest to the City Council or file an action in District
Court within the time prescribed in this section, the deficiency shall be
assessed and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the City
Clerk.
B.   Interest upon any deficiency shall be assessed at the same time as the
deficiency and shall become due and payable upon notice and demand from the
City Clerk and shall be collected as part of the tax at the rate of twelve
percent (12%) per annum from the date prescribed for payment of the tax. (Ord.
609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-12: COLLECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
As soon as practical after monthly municipal non-property sales tax return and
payment is filed, the City Clerk shall examine the same and determine the
correct amount of the tax. For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of
any payment determining the amount of tax due where none has been made,
determining liability of any person for any tax payable under this chapter, or
the liability at law or in equity of any person in respect to any tax provided
by this chapter or collecting any such liability, the City Clerk, or duly
authorized deputy, is authorized (1) to examine the books, papers, records, or
other data which may be relevant or material to the inquiry; (2) to summon the
person liable for the tax or any officer, agent or employee of such person, or
any person having possession, custody or care of books of accounting containing
entries relating to the business of the person liable for the tax, to appear
before the City Clerk, or deputy, at a time and place named in its summons to
produce such books, papers, records or other data and/or give such testimony
under oath as may be relevant or material to such inquiry. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-13: REFUNDS AND LIMITATIONS:
A.   If the City Clerk determines that any amount due under this chapter has
been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
computed, the City Clerk shall set forth that fact in its records and the
excess amount paid or collected may be credited on any amount due or payable to
the City Clerk for non-property taxes from that person, and any balance
refunded to the person by whom it was paid or to his successors, administrators
or executors.
B.   No such credit or refund shall be allowed or made after one (1) year from
the time the payment was made unless before the expiration of such period a
claim therefore is filed by the taxpayer.
C.   Appeal from the City Clerk's decision denying in part or in whole a claim
for refund shall be made in accordance with the laws of the State of Idaho with
regard to claims against municipalities. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-14: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAXES:
Every person with a duty to account for or pay over any tax imposed by this
chapter on behalf of a corporation, as an officer employee of the corporation,
or on behalf of a partnership, as a member employee of the partnership shall be
personally liable for payment of such tax, plus penalties and interest. (Ord.
609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-15: PERIOD OF LIMITATION UPON ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION:
A.   The amount of taxes imposed under this chapter shall be assessed within
three (3) years of the time the return upon which the tax asserted to be due
was or should have been filed, whichever is later; provided, however, if a
deficiency determination or assessment has been made within the prescribed
time, such tax may be collected within a period of six (6) years after
assessment. The running of limitations provided by this section shall be
suspended for the period during which the City Clerk is prohibited from making
the assessment or from collecting or proceeding in Court due to a petition for
redetermination or an appeal therefrom, and for thirty (30) days hereafter.
B.   In the case of taxes due during the lifetime of a decedent, the tax shall
be assessed, and any proceeding in court without assessment for the collection
of such tax shall be begun, within six (6) months after written request
therefor (filed after the return is made) by the executor, administrator, or
other fiduciary representing the estate of such decedent unless the assessment
is stayed by a petition for redetermination or any appeal therefrom.
C.   In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, or
of a failure to file a return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding in
Court for collection of such tax may be begun without assessment, at any time
within three (3) years after the date of the discovery of the facts
constituting the fraud. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-16: SUCCESSORS’ LIABILITY:
A.   If a vendor liable for any amount of tax under this chapter sells out his
business or stocks and goods, the vendee shall make an inquiry to the City
Clerk and withhold from the purchase price any amount of tax that may be due
under this Chapter until such time as the vendor produces receipt stating that
no amount is due.
B.   If the purchaser of business or stock of goods fails to withhold from the
purchase price as above required, he is personally liable for the payment of
the amount required to be withheld by him. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-17: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION BY CITY CLERK:
A.   The City Clerk shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may
prescribe, adopt, and enforce rules and regulations relating to its
administration and enforcement. The City Clerk may employ qualified auditors
for examination of taxpayers' books and records, and shall also employ such
accountants, investigators, assistants, clerks, and other personnel as are
necessary for the efficient administration of this Chapter and may delegate
authority to its representatives to conduct hearings, or perform other duties
imposed by this Chapter.
B.   Taxpayers in the City of Bonners Ferry shall keep such records, receipts,
invoices, and other pertinent papers as the City Clerk may require. Each such
taxpayer who files tax payments required under this Chapter shall keep all such
records for not less than four (4) years after making such payments unless the
City Clerk in writing authorizes their destruction.
C.   The City Clerk, or any person authorized in writing by the Clerk, may
examine the books, papers, records, and equipment of any taxpayer or any person
liable for any tax, and may investigate the character of the business of the
person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is
made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.
Any taxpayer whose pertinent records are kept outside of the City must bring
the records to the City for examination by the City Clerk upon request of the
latter, or by agreement with the City Clerk permit an auditor designated by the
City Clerk to visit the place where the records are kept, and there audit such
records. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-18: PENALTIES:
A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to one (1) year in the county jail, and/or three
hundred dollar ($300.00) fine, or both. Furthermore, each month in which a
person fails to report, or intentionally fails to accurately compute, or
intentionally fails to accurately disclose the total amount of sales or rentals
or the amount of tax to be paid, as imposed under this chapter, shall be
considered a separate offense.
B.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have his
municipal non-property sales tax permit and tax number revoked. The City Clerk
shall send written notice of revocation of said permit and tax number to the
permit holder by mailing the same by certified mail to the address given on the
permit application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date
said notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the City
Council, challenging said revocation. If no appeal is timely made said
revocation becomes final. Whenever a person subject to this chapter has had
said permit and tax number revoked, the City Clerk shall not reissue said
permit nor issue a new permit to said person until said person places with the
City Clerk a bond or other sufficient security in the amount equal to three (3)
times the actual, determined, or estimated average monthly amount of tax
payable by such person pursuant to this chapter.
C.   The City Clerk, whenever it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter, may require any person subject to this chapter to place with it
such security as it may determine. The amount of said security shall not be
greater than three (3) times the estimated average monthly amount payable by
such persons pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security may be
increased or decreased by the City Clerk at any time, subject to the
limitations set forth above.
D.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have all
municipal non-property sales tax permits, municipal beer license(s), and wine
license(s), and retail liquor by the drink license(s) revoked.
E.   Any amount of tax due under this chapter for which a person fails to
report or accurately compute, shall became a lien upon the property of said
taxpayer on the date that the same becomes due, and the City may seek to
enforce said lien and collect all taxes and interest due, together with the
reasonable costs of collection, including attorney 's fees, in a Court of
competent jurisdiction.
F.   For the purposes of proper administration of this chapter, and to prevent
evasion of said non-property sales taxes, the burden of proving that a sale or
rental is not a sale under this chapter is upon the person who makes the sale
or rental in question. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-19: PENALTY CHARGES:
A.   Any person who is required to collect and pay over any tax imposed by this
chapter and fails or refuses to pay over to the City the same when due in
accordance with section 3-8-9, hereinabove, shall be liable and pay a penalty
change equal to five percent (5%) of the tax not paid, or a minimum of ten
dollars ($10.00) (whichever is greater). The City Clerk shall assess and
collect said fee at the time any delinquent tax payment is tendered. The permit
holder shall have ten (10) days from the date payment is made to file a written
appeal with the City Council challenging said penalty determination. If no
appeal is timely made as herein provided, said penalty determination shall be
final.
B.   Any person who is required to collect, truthfully account for, and pay
over any tax imposed by this chapter and who willfully fails to collect such a
tax or truthfully account for or pay over such a tax, or willfully attempts in
any manner to evade or defeat such a tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition
to other penalties provided by law, be liable to a penalty equal to the amount
of the tax evaded, or not collected, or not accounted for or paid over. The
City Clerk shall determine and assess such penalties, and the same shall become
due and payable upon notice and demand from the City Clerk. The City Clerk
shall send written notice of such penalty charge to the permit holder by
mailing the same by certified mail to the address given on the permit
application. The permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date said
notice is mailed to file a written request of appeal with the City Council
challenging said penalty charge determination. If no appeal is timely made as
herein provided, said penalty charge determination shall be final. (Ord. 609,
6-6-2023)
3-8-20: EXEMPTIONS:
All transactions by the State of Idaho, otherwise subject to imposition of said
taxes, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 609, 6-6-2023)
3-8-21: CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION:
A.   No City Clerk of the City of Bonners Ferry, Boundary County, Idaho, nor
any duly authorized Deputy City Clerk, agent or employee shall divulge or make
known to any persons, in any manner, any information whatsoever submitted or
obtained, directly or indirectly, pursuant to this chapter, or to permit any
non-property tax return or information supplied with regard thereto, or any
copy thereof, or any paper or book so obtained, to be seen or examined by any
person except as provided by law; provided that in any action or proceeding
brought for the collection, remission, cancellation, or refund of the whole or
any part of a tax imposed under this chapter, or for enforcing the penalties
prescribed for making false or fraudulent returns, any and all information
contained in or provided with said returns may be made accessible to the
elected and appointed officials, officers, and representatives of said City
charged with enforcing or defending the same, all such returns, information,
statements and correspondence relating thereto may be produced into evidence in
any action, civil or criminal, directly pertaining to such returns or the tax
imposed on the basis of such returns.
B.   The Bonners Ferry City Council, under such rules and provisions as it may
prescribe, may permit, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter as to
secrecy, the Commission of Internal Revenue of the United States or his
delegate or the proper officer of any state imposing a tax to inspect the non-
property tax returns or information provided or obtained in connection
therewith, or may furnish to such officer, or his authorized agent, copies or
an abstract thereof.
C.   Nothing in the chapter shall prohibit a taxpayer, or authorized
representative upon proper identification, from inspecting and copying his own
non-property tax returns and information supplied therewith. (Ord. 609, 6-6-
2023)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Prohibited Acts
4-1-2: Enforcement
4-1-3: Public Nuisances
4-1-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The practice of locating upon any of the streets within the city any truck,
trailer, stand or stall or other object, if the purpose of such location is to
engage in the sale of merchandise or wares therefrom to the public for a
profit, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as
a misdemeanor. (1959 Code § 6-7-1; amd. 2003 Code)
4-1-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police and police force of the city are hereby required and
directed to suppress the same and to abate any such nuisance as is described in
section
4-1-1 of this chapter. (1959 Code § 6-7-2; amd. 2003 Code)
4-1-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A.   Defined: A "public nuisance" is a thing, act, occupation or use of the
property which is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property.
B.   Enumerated: For purposes of this section nuisances are:
   1.   Diseased Animals: All diseased animals running at large.
   2.   Carcasses: Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty four (24)
hours after death as provided by law.
   3.   Refuse; Garbage: Accumulations of refuse or garbage, in excess of what
the garbage company would haul away in a week period.
   4.   Noxious Weeds: All noxious weeds and other rank growth upon public or
private property (as defined by the county weed supervisor).
   5.   Smoke; Fumes: The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of any contaminant
or combinations thereof in such quantity or of such nature and duration and
under such conditions as would be injurious to human health or welfare, to
animal or plant life, or to property, or to interfere unreasonably with the
enjoyment of life or property.
   6.   Noise; Vibrations: All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
   7.   Obstructions; Excavations: Obstructions and excavations affecting the
ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds
except under such conditions as are provided by ordinance.
   8.   Discarded, Junk Items: Accumulations of discarded or junked items
creating an unsightly appearance.
   9.   Abandoned Or Airtight Containers: All abandoned, unattended or
discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or other containers which have a door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside,
upon public or private property.
   10.   Unreasonable, Unlawful Condition: No owner or occupant of any premises
within the city shall keep, cause or allow the premises, any portion of the
premises or any structure on the premises, to fall into a condition that is
dangerous or detrimental to life, health or property of members of the public.
   11.   Junkyards Or Dumping Grounds: All places used or maintained as
junkyards or dumping grounds or for the wrecking or disassembling of
automobiles, trucks, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of
worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks or machinery of any kind, or
of any parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or
equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which said
places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others.
   12.   Places In Disrepair: All places in such a state of disrepair as to
constitute a fire hazard, an attractive nuisance or a hazard of any sort.
   13.   Unsightly Structures: Any unsightly building, billboard or other
structure or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure
commenced and left unfinished, or vacant areas in rear of stores, vacant lots,
houses, buildings or premises containing trash, litter, rags, accumulation of
empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, lumber or firewood not neatly
piled, scrap iron, tin and other metal not neatly piled or anything whatsoever
in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire danger.
C.   Penalty:
   1.   Any person, who shall knowingly cause or create any public nuisance, or
permit any public nuisance to be created or to be placed upon or to remain upon
any premises owned or occupied by such person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished pursuant to this code and the
Idaho Code;
   2.   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this section shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be
required to correct or hereby remedy such violations or defects within five (5)
days; and when not otherwise specified, each five (5) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense;
   3.   Each day's or part of day's continuance of anything prohibited by this
section shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 481, 8-17-2004)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Collection; Hauling
4-2-4: Rules And Regulations
4-2-5: Enforcement
4-2-6: Fees
4-2-7: Handling Of Receptacles
4-2-8: Containers; Disposal Of Other Items
4-2-9: Hauling By Others
4-2-10: Accumulation Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 481, 8-17-2004)
4-2-11: Burning
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city acting
in its governmental capacity for the protection and preservation of the health,
welfare, morals, safety and cleanliness, and all of its provisions shall be
liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (1959 Code § 8-4-1)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, but
excluding recognizable industrial byproducts, and shall include all such
substances from public and private establishments and from all residences.
   REFUSE: Includes nonputrescible wastes. (1959 Code § 8-4-5)
4-2-3: COLLECTION; HAULING:
The city, its duly authorized agents, contractors, servants, employees or
licensees shall have the exclusive right to gather and collect garbage and
rubbish, and it shall be unlawful for any person, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter to collect or gather garbage and/or rubbish. (1959 Code § 8-4-
2)
4-2-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The governing body of the city shall have power to make such further rules and
regulations for the storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage as may be
necessary to effectuate and facilitate the provisions of this chapter;
including, but not limiting, such power by such inclusion the right to
establish, regulate, amend, alter, and otherwise modify garbage, rubbish,
refuse and trash collection rates. (1959 Code § 8-4-10)
4-2-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The clerk or other designated officer of the city is hereby charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (1959 Code § 8-4-12; amd.
2003 Code)
4-2-6: FEES:
A schedule of fees shall be adopted by the governing body for the collection
and disposal of garbage, which schedule shall be filed with the clerk and which
may be amended or altered by the governing body from time to time. (1959 Code §
8-4-6)
4-2-7: HANDLING OF RECEPTACLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city, its agents or
employees, or a person having a contract for such purpose to interfere in any
manner with any receptacle containing garbage or rubbish, or any form of
refuse, or to remove any receptacle from the location where the same was placed
by the owner thereof or to remove any of the contents of such receptacle. (1959
Code § 8-4-4)
4-2-8: CONTAINERS; DISPOSAL OF OTHER ITEMS:
A.   Containers Required: No owner or occupant of any public or private
premises shall permit to accumulate upon his premises any refuse except in
covered containers approved by the clerk.
B.   Specifications: Such containers, except as otherwise specified in the
rules and regulations, shall be constructed of metal or plastic in such a
manner as to be strong, not easily corrodible, rodentproof, with two (2)
handles, a capacity of not more than thirty four (34) gallons, with tight
covers, which shall be in place at all times except when garbage or refuse is
being deposited therein or removed therefrom.
C.   Maintenance: Such containers, except as otherwise specified in the rules
and regulations, shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times and
shall be kept in a rack or device so as to prevent them from being overturned
by animals.
D.   Separate Containers Required: In the event that garbage and one or more
types of refuse are disposed of separately, separate containers must be had if
required by the clerk.
E.   Other Items: Boxes, papers, tree cuttings, and all odd articles shall be
crushed and/or bundled in lengths not to exceed five feet (5') and not to
exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight, except articles taken in special hauls.
(1959 Code § 8-4-8; amd. 2003 Code)
4-2-9: HAULING BY OTHERS:
A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city,
its agents or employees, to collect or convey through, over or upon any street
or alley, any "rubbish", "garbage", or night soil, as in this chapter defined,
without first securing a permit from the clerk so to do. (1959 Code § 8-4-3;
amd. 2003 Code)
B.   Revocation: Any person hauling rubbish and/or garbage under a permit
issued by the clerk to do so shall obey all the regulations of the city and
laws of the state as well as the rules and regulations of the governing body
with regard to the storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage. Any failure to
obey any of such laws or rules and regulations shall be sufficient grounds for
the revocation of the permit to haul rubbish and/or garbage as issued by the
clerk. (1959 Code § 8-4-9; amd. 2003 Code)
4-2-10: ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 481, 8-17-2004)
4-2-11: BURNING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage or refuse within the city
except wastepaper, boxes, brush grass, weeds and cuttings from trees, lawns and
gardens for which, during the fire season, a permit must be had from the fire
chief of the city. (1959 Code § 8-4-7)
CHAPTER 3
FLUORIDE
(Rep. by Ord. 517, 9-21-2010)
CHAPTER 4
REGULATION OF THE SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Prohibited Acts
4-4-3: Limitation On Accessibility To And Sale Of Methamphetamine Precursor
Drugs
4-4-4: Penalty
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:
   METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS:
      A.   A drug or product containing as its sole active ingredient
pseudoephedrine, or any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical
isomers; or
      B.   A combination drug or product containing as one of its active
ingredients pseudoephedrine, or any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of
optical isomers;
      C.   This term does not include any compounds, mixtures, or preparations
that are in liquid, liquid capsule, or gel capsule form.
   OVER THE COUNTER SALES: A retail sale of a drug or product, but does not
include the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid
prescription.
   RETAILER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity
conducting business within the city of Bonners Ferry, Idaho, who sells or
furnishes any over the counter drug product containing pseudoephedrine. (Ord.
496, 1-17-2006, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2006)
4-4-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A.   It shall be unlawful within the incorporated limits of the city for any
retailer or employee thereof to knowingly sell, transfer, or to otherwise
furnish in a single transaction more than three (3) packages of any product
that he or she knows to contain more than a total weight of nine grams (9 g) of
methamphetamine precursor drugs.
B.   The limits established in this section shall not apply to any quantity of
methamphetamine precursor drugs dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription.
(Ord. 496, 1-17-2006, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2006)
4-4-3: LIMITATION ON ACCESSIBILITY TO AND SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR
DRUGS:
A business establishment that offers for sale methamphetamine precursor drugs
shall ensure that all packages of the drugs are displayed and offered for sale
only:
A.   Behind a checkout counter where the public is not permitted; or
B.   Inside a locked display case; and
C.   All sales shall be conducted with an employee of the retailer and cannot
be conducted by a self-service system. (Ord. 496, 1-17-2006, eff. retroactive
to 1-1-2006)
4-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both.
(Ord. 496, 1-17-2006, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2006)
CHAPTER 5
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE, ACCESSORY STORAGE AND OCCUPANCY
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Storage
4-5-3: Storage Containers
4-5-4: Parking
4-5-5: Permit Required
4-5-6: Occupancy Of Recreational Vehicles
4-5-7: Violations - Penalties
4-5-8: Severability
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ALLEY: A public highway not designed for general travel and used primarily
as a means of access to the rear of residences and business establishments.
   BOAT: Any type of watercraft or vessel used primarily for transportation on
the water. The term "boat" shall include personal watercraft that uses a motor-
powered jet pump as its primary source of motor power designed to be operated
by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on the watercraft.
   CAMPER (Pickup): A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck
chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a
temporary dwelling for recreational use, camping or vacation use.
   LARGE VEHICLE: Any vehicle that exceeds twelve thousand (12,000) pounds
gross weight.
   MOTOR HOME: A motor vehicle or device primarily designed as a temporary
living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use.
   MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT: A parking lot owned by the City and posted with
signage designating the lot as a City-owned parking lot.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any camp trailer, travel trailer or fifth wheel
designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or
travel use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable
by motor vehicle.
   ROADWAY: The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk or shoulder even though such
sidewalk or shoulder is used by persons riding bicycles.
   SNOWMOBILE: A vehicle with a continuous tread and runner type steering
device used primarily for transportation on the snow.
   STORAGE CONTAINER: Any large metal portable cargo container, such as a conex
box, used to ship, store, or dispose of items of personal property.
   STORED OR STORAGE: Parking or placing of boats, campers (pickup), large
vehicles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, snowmobiles or utility trailers
for more than five (5) consecutive days.
   UTILITY TRAILER: A structure or device with or without its own mode of
power, designed and/or used to transport goods, equipment, boats, snowmobiles,
vehicles or other devices and materials. (Ord. 567, 7-18-2017)
4-5-2: STORAGE:
No boats, campers (pickup), large vehicles, motor homes, recreational vehicles,
snowmobiles or utility trailers (hereafter referred to as "vehicle or personal
property") may be stored on public streets, roads, highways or sidewalks.
Storage of any vehicle or personal property is permitted on private property
under the condition that such vehicles or personal property are set back ten
feet (10') from any alley or roadway and meet the requirements of title 6,
chapter 3 of this Code regarding inoperable and junk vehicles. (Ord. 567, 7-18-
2017)
4-5-3: STORAGE CONTAINERS:
Storage containers shall not be placed on City right-of-way. Any storage
container so located shall be promptly removed. Any storage container not
promptly removed in compliance with this section may be removed by the City at
the owner/renter's expense. (Ord. 567, 7-18-2017)
4-5-4: PARKING:
No boats, campers (pickup), large vehicles, motor homes, recreational vehicles,
snowmobiles or utility trailers may be parked on a roadway or alley within ten
feet (10') of any driveway or within fifteen feet (15') of an intersection.
(Ord. 567, 7-18-2017)
4-5-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
The registered owner of a camper, motor home, or recreational vehicle may
obtain a permit from the City Clerk's Office at no cost which grants permission
to park on the public roadway or alley for fourteen (14) days. The registered
owner shall be limited to two (2) permits within a 12-month period. Each permit
shall identify the vehicle for which it is issued and the time when the permit
is valid. Such permit shall be conspicuously displayed in the lower right-hand
corner of the windshield or in a window that is easily visible from outside the
camper, motor home or recreational vehicle. (Ord. 567, 7-18-2017)
4-5-6: OCCUPANCY OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
No person shall live in or continuously occupy a recreational vehicle or camper
(pickup), as defined in this chapter whether or not self-contained, within the
City, unless said recreational vehicle is located within a legally established
recreational vehicle park or recreational vehicle campground; except that the
temporary occupancy of a recreational vehicle parked on a residentially zoned
property for a period of up to fourteen (14) days is permitted. No residential
property shall be permitted more than a total of twenty eight (28) days of
temporary occupancy during any calendar year.
On properties zoned for commercial uses, recreational vehicles may be
temporarily occupied for a period of up to fourteen (14) days; provided, that
the occupancy of the recreational vehicle is used to support a legally
established sale of merchandise, such as Christmas trees or similar type of
temporary or seasonal sale items.
Commercial property owners may permit the occupancy of recreational vehicles on
their properties that are developed with retail uses for a period of up to
fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 567, 7-18-2017)
4-5-7: VIOLATIONS - PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter for the first time shall be
subject to an infraction.
Provided, if the same violator has been found to have committed an infraction
and/or violation for the same or similar conduct two (2) separate times, with
the violations occurring at the same location and involving the same or similar
sections of this Code, the third or subsequent violation shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Idaho State Code for misdemeanor
criminal offenses.
Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 567, 7-18-2017)
4-5-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application
of the provisions to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. 567,
7-18-2017)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Chief Of Police
5-1-2: Records
5-1-3: Special Police Officers
5-1-1: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A.   Appointment: The mayor shall appoint, with approval of the city council, a
chief of police who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment or
until such time as he shall be removed. (1959 Code § 1-14-1; amd. 2003 Code)
B.   Duties: The chief of police, under the direction of the mayor shall direct
and control the police of the city. He shall preserve the peace and good order
of the city, quell all riots, arrest and bring all violators of this code
before the proper officer for trial either with or without process, serve all
processes issued by the proper officer to him directed, and enforce all orders
and judgments of said court, and take such measures as shall secure the peace
and good order of all public meetings. The chief of police, in execution of his
duty, with or without process or warrants, in arresting any person accused or
suspected of crime or in the suppression of any riot or unlawful assembly, or
in the prevention of violation of this code, shall have power to call upon any
citizen or bystander to assist him in the execution of his duty. He shall
inquire into and report to the proper officer all violations of this code and
criminal laws of the state, and cause all ordinances passed to be enforced. He
shall take into custody with or without process, any person found violating
this code and bring such person before the proper officer to be dealt with
according to law. (1959 Code §§ 1-14-2, 3-2-1; amd. 2003 Code)
5-1-2: RECORDS:
A.   Funds Received: The chief of police shall keep a record in a book provided
for that purpose, of all monies belonging to the city which may come into his
hands from whatever source, stating from whom and on what account received and
pay the same into the city treasury.
B.   Arrests: The chief of police shall also record the name, if known, of
every person arrested, the date and cause of arrest, and such other facts as
may be deemed important, and report an abstract thereof to the city council
quarterly, or more often if required. (1959 Code § 3-2-2; amd. 2003 Code)
5-1-3: SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS:
The chief of police shall, with the consent of the city council, appoint such
special police officers as may be required to properly enforce the laws. (1959
Code § 1-14-1; amd. 2003 Code)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Abandonment Of Airtight Containers Without Removing Door Locks
Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 481, 8-17-2004)
5-2-2: Aid In Escape (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-3: Aid To An Offense (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-4: Assault Or Battery (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-5: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
5-2-6: Beer Or Intoxicating Liquor, Consumption Of
5-2-7: Beer; Procuring For Or Selling (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-8: Cruelty To Animals (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-9: Deposits Of Injurious Material On Thoroughfares
5-2-10: Disorderly Conduct (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-11: Distribution Of Obscene Literature (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-12: Disturbing The Peace (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-13: Drug Use And Paraphernalia (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-14: Drunkenness (Rep. by Ord. 580, 10-16-2018)
5-2-15: Encouraging Delinquency (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-16: Escapes (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-17: Expectorating On Sidewalks Or In Public Buildings
5-2-18: False Pretenses (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-19: False Representation (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-20: Fornication (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-21: Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of Admission Fees (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-
2015)
5-2-22: Furnishing Weapons And Other Articles To Prisoners (Rep. by Ord. 546,
1-6-2015)
5-2-23: Gambling (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-24: General Offense
5-2-25: Giving Assistance To Police Officers (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-26: Indecent Exposure (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-27: Keeping Of Junk Restricted
5-2-28: Loudspeakers Or Sound Trucks
5-2-29: Lug Wheels Prohibited
5-2-30: Malicious Injury To Property (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-31: Mufflers; Unnecessary Noise (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-32: Obscene Conduct (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-33: Petit Theft (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-34: Playing Ball On Streets Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-35: Prostitution (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-36: Resisting An Officer (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-37: Riot (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-38: Sale Or Distribution Of Tobacco Products To A Minor (Rep. by Ord. 546,
1-6-2015)
5-2-39: Swindling (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-40: Trespassing (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-41: Unlawful Assembly (Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-42: Water Flowing Upon Streets
5-2-43: Windowsills To Be Kept Clear
5-2-44: Urination Or Defecation In Public Prohibited
5-2-1: ABANDONMENT OF AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS WITHOUT REMOVING DOOR LOCKS
PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 481, 8-17-2004)
5-2-2: AID IN ESCAPE:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-3: AID TO AN OFFENSE:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-4: ASSAULT OR BATTERY:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-5: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or
any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire
as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land. (1959 Code § 6-1-4)
5-2-6: BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUOR, CONSUMPTION OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beer or intoxicating liquor
or to have in their possession any opened containers or receptacles containing
any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public park, public place, street, alley
or highway within the city or at any other place therein other than in a
private residence or upon premises licensed for the sale and consumption of
such beer or liquor. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor on premises covered by a catering
permit. (1959 Code § 6-1-46)
5-2-7: BEER; PROCURING FOR OR SELLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-8: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-9: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or
upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or
property. (1959 Code § 6-1-7)
5-2-10: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-11: DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE LITERATURE:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-12: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-13: DRUG USE AND PARAPHERNALIA:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-14: DRUNKENNESS:
(Rep. by Ord. 580, 10-16-2018)
5-2-15: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-16: ESCAPES:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-17: EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALKS OR IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any of the
sidewalks or upon the floor of any theater, public building, church, or room
used for public assemblies. (1959 Code § 6-1-14)
5-2-18: FALSE PRETENSES:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-19: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-20: FORNICATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-21: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-22: FURNISHING WEAPONS AND OTHER ARTICLES TO PRISONERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-23: GAMBLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-24: GENERAL OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such laws
are applicable to municipal government. Any violation of this section that
would be considered a misdemeanor under Idaho law shall be a misdemeanor under
this code; any violation of this section that would be considered an infraction
under Idaho law shall be an infraction under this code. This section shall also
comply with the Idaho criminal rules. (Ord. 498, 4-4-2006)
5-2-25: GIVING ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-26: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-27: KEEPING OF JUNK RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or
materials which may be classed as junk, adjacent to or in close proximity to
any schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds, business buildings or
residence without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of
the same. (1959 Code § 6-1-26)
5-2-28: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, use or operate any device known as a sound truck,
loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, boom boxes, cassette and
CD players with loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or any instrument of any kind
or character which emits loud and raucous noises, unless such persons have
first applied to and received permission from the chief of police to operate
any such vehicle so equipped. (1959 Code § 6-1-28; amd. 2003 Code)
5-2-29: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be
permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle
shall first plank such streets. (1959 Code § 6-1-29)
5-2-30: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-31: MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-32: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-33: PETIT THEFT:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-34: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-35: PROSTITUTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-36: RESISTING AN OFFICER:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-37: RIOT:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-38: SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO A MINOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-39: SWINDLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-40: TRESPASSING:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-41: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
(Rep. by Ord. 546, 1-6-2015)
5-2-42: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any
public thoroughfare. (1959 Code § 6-1-43)
5-2-43: WINDOWSILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch
or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any
sidewalk any article which might do injury in falling on any person on the
sidewalk in front of such building, unless the same is securely fastened or
protected by screens. (1959 Code § 6-1-44)
5-2-44: URINATION OR DEFECATION IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on public property
or public right of way, or on private property open to public view, except in
restrooms and facilities provided for such purpose. Violation of this section
shall be a misdemeanor subject to penalties as established by Idaho Code. (Ord.
593, 5-5-2020)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Animal Control Officer
5-3-2: Interference With Officials
5-3-1: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
A.   Designation: The animal control officer shall be any person empowered by
the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. When no specific
appointment is made, the chief of police shall be the animal control officer.
The animal control officer shall be within the police department and under the
control and jurisdiction of the chief of police.
B.   Duties:
   1.   The animal control officer and his staff shall have the duty and the
power to enforce all sections of this chapter.
   2.   The animal control officer and his staff are hereby designated as peace
officers and shall be authorized to issue, sign and serve summons and
complaints in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter; and to make all
determinations within their discretion required by the provisions of this
chapter.
   3.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep or cause to
be kept, accurate and detailed records of all reports of any animal bites
reported to the animal control section of the department of community services.
(1959 Code § 6-2-10)
5-3-2: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIALS:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, harass, molest, injure or
obstruct any animal control officer or any other city employee or official in
the discharge of his official duties under this chapter. (1959 Code § 6-2-12)
ARTICLE A. ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Definition
5-3A-2: Running At Large
5-3A-3: Impoundment
5-3A-4: Restraining Animals
5-3A-5: Freeing Impounded Animals
5-3A-6: Sanitation
5-3A-7: Injured Or Killed Animals
5-3A-8: Biting Animals
5-3A-9: Wild Animals
5-3A-10: Pet Shops
5-3A-11: Court Proceedings
5-3A-12: Prosecution
5-3A-1: DEFINITION:
"Animal" means any animal brought into domestic use by man so as to live and
breed in a tame condition, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, other
household pets, horses, livestock and animals generally regarded as farm or
ranch animals. (1959 Code § 6-2-10)
5-3A-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
A.   Animals:
   1.   Prohibited: No animal shall be permitted at large in the city at any
time during the year; and it shall be unlawful for anyone to herd or drive any
animal through the streets without having said animal under control by means of
rope, strap or other device by which they may be led, unless such animal is
being driven in harness or hauled.
   2.   Exception: This article shall not be construed as prohibiting stockmen
from driving herds through the city when necessary to transfer them from one
pasture to another or for the purpose of shipping, but such stockmen so driving
stock through the city shall be liable to property owners for all damages done
to their property by such stock while being driven through said city, whether
such damage is caused by the negligence of said stockmen or their agents or
not. Such stock shall be driven through the city in as short a time as
possible. (1959 Code § 6-2-1)
B.   Poultry: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl or poultry
unless such fowl or poultry are at all times kept upon his own premises and in
enclosures. (1959 Code § 6-2-2)
5-3A-3: IMPOUNDMENT:
A.   Duty To Impound: If any animal, except for cats and dogs to the extent
authorized by other ordinances herein to run at large, shall be found running
at large contrary to provisions of this article, it is hereby made the duty of
the police department to take up and confine the same in a secure place or
other place provided for that purpose.
B.   Costs: Such animal taken up and confined shall not be released until the
owner or person entitled to the possession thereof shall pay the hereafter
outlined costs:
   1.   All out of pocket costs for keeping said animal;
   2.   Cost of advertising;
   3.   Five dollars ($5.00) for the act of impounding;
   4.   Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for reimbursement to the city for its costs in
maintaining the animal in the pound. (1959 Code § 6-2-3)
C.   Failure To Redeem; Sale Of Animal: If the owner or person entitled to
possession of an impounded animal, except for dogs and cats, does not, within
five (5) days from the time it is taken into custody, pay the charges and take
it away, it shall be lawful for the police department to sell at public auction
said animal.
D.   Notice Of Sale:
   1.   Preparation; Posting: Prior to such sale, the police department shall
prepare and post a notice upon the front door of the clerk's office at the city
hall for three (3) days prior to the sale or disposition of said animal.
   2.   Contents: The notice shall contain a description of the animal so
impounded, and fix a time and place where said animal will be sold, except in
the case of dogs and cats when said notice shall set forth that the dog or cat
will be disposed of unless redeemed.
   3.   Service: Such notice shall be sent to the owner of the animal, if
known. If the owner is not known, the police department will file an affidavit
with the city clerk so stating and stating what efforts were made to locate the
owner thereof.
E.   Right Of Redemption: Any animal may be redeemed at any time before the
sale or disposition by the payment to the city clerk of the charges provided
hereinabove. (1959 Code § 6-2-4)
F.   Revenue From Sale: In case any animal sold pursuant to the provisions of
this article be sold for more than is sufficient to pay the fees, and charges
aforesaid, such excess shall be by the officer or his assistant making the
sale, deposited with the clerk which shall be paid upon an order of the council
to the owner of such animal or animals or to the person entitled to the
possession of the same upon claim and proper proof within six (6) months from
date of said sale. (1959 Code § 6-2-5)
G.   No Buyer At Sale; Disposal: If there is no buyer of the animal, the city
may dispose of same in any manner it seems fit without liability to the city.
(Ord. 427, 7-9-1996)
5-3A-4: RESTRAINING ANIMALS:
An animal, including a cat, running at large, found causing damage to property
or found trespassing and creating a nuisance upon such property, may be
humanely restrained by the owner or occupant of such property, or by such owner
or occupant's agent, for a reasonable time, during which time such owner,
occupant or agent shall:
A.   Notify the police department of his possession of the animal, request the
impoundment of the animal at the pound; or
B.   Notify the owner or keeper of his possession of the animal or cat and
release the animal or cat to the owner or keeper; or
C.   Release the animal or cat. (1959 Code § 6-2-8)
5-3A-5: FREEING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to break open or in any manner, directly or indirectly,
aid or assist in breaking open any pen or enclosure with intent of releasing
any animal confined therein pursuant to the provisions of this article. (1959
Code § 6-2-6)
5-3A-6: SANITATION:
A.   Enclosure, Stable Or Building: No person who shall, within the corporate
limits of the city, keep or maintain any pen or enclosure, stable or building
for cattle, horses or other animals in such a filthy condition as to be
offensive to neighbors or passersby or injurious to the health of the
neighborhood.
B.   Accumulation Of Manure: No person shall permit any manure to accumulate in
or near their premises in such quantities as to be offensive to the public, and
no person shall at any time allow any manure to accumulate on any lot, alley,
street or premises, or near any building unless the same be properly kept in
some box, can or other receptacle securely covered and free from exposure, and
such box, can or other receptacle shall be thoroughly cleaned out and the
manure removed from the city at least once each week.
C.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and in conviction thereof shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1959 Code § 6-2-7; amd. 2003 Code)
5-3A-7: INJURED OR KILLED ANIMALS:
Animals injured or killed in the street shall be considered as running at
large, and animal control officers shall remove all animals to the pound. The
owner of such animal shall be liable for impoundment costs of any injured
animal. (1959 Code § 6-2-9)
5-3A-8: BITING ANIMALS:
A.   Notice Required: The owner of any dog, cat or other animal that has bitten
any person shall immediately advise an animal control officer of this fact.
B.   Confinement:
   1.   Duration: Any dog, cat or other animal that has bitten any person or
has been exposed to another animal that is believed to have rabies shall be
immediately confined for a period of ten (10) days to be observed for symptoms
of rabies.
   2.   Location: Such confinement may be on the premises of the owner if
deemed appropriate in the discretion of the animal control officer. If the
animal is not confined on the premises of the owner, the animal may be confined
in any veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. An animal control officer may
order the confinement of the animal at any suitable location. Stray animals
whose owners cannot be located shall be confined at any location deemed
suitable by an animal control officer.
   3.   Cost: Such confinement shall be at the expense of the owner.
C.   Destruction Prior To Confinement Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner
of any dog, cat or other animal that has bitten any person or that is believed
to have rabies, to destroy such animal before it can be properly confined by an
animal control officer. (1959 Code § 6-2-13)
D.   Failure To Produce For Confinement: The owner of any animal that has been
reported as having inflicted a bite on any person shall, upon the demand of an
animal control officer, produce the animal for observation and confinement as
prescribed in this article. If the owner of any such animal refuses to produce
the animal, the owner shall be subject to immediate arrest if there shall be
probable cause to believe the animal has inflicted a bite upon a person and the
owner is keeping or harboring the animal and wilfully refuses to produce the
animal upon such demand. Such persons shall be taken before a magistrate judge
who may order the immediate production of the animal. If the owner of any such
animal shall wilfully or knowingly secrete or refuse to produce the animal,
each day of secretion or refusal to produce the animal shall constitute a
separate and individual violation of this article. (1959 Code § 6-2-14)
5-3A-9: WILD ANIMALS:
A.   Definition: "Wild animal" shall mean any animal or reptile which is wild
by nature and is not commonly domesticated. (2003 Code)
B.   Prohibited: Animal control officers are hereby authorized to apprehend any
wild animal that may be at large within the city. Such wild animal may be
impounded, released in wild areas outside of the city or destroyed as the
animal control officer in his discretion shall determine subject to the
applicable provisions of the laws of the state. Animal control officers are
authorized to use any tranquilizer guns, firearms, or any other suitable
devices to subdue or destroy any animal that is deemed by an animal control
officer, in his discretion, to be of danger to itself or to the public health
and safety. (1959 Code § 6-2-15)
5-3A-10: PET SHOPS:
A.   Definition: "Pet shop" within the meaning of this article is defined as
any establishment that sells or traffics in animals of any species, except in
the course of normal veterinary practice.
B.   Building Requirements; Runs And Pens: Pet shops shall be confined in a
building that is totally enclosed and all animals shall be confined exclusively
to the building. The pet shop may not have outside runs or pens and none of the
animals owned by the pet shop are to be harbored or housed outside of the
building at any time for any reason.
C.   Sick Or Injured Animals: It is unlawful for any pet shop to sell any sick
or injured animals or to house or have in possession on the premises any such
animal when known to be sick or injured. (1959 Code § 6-2-17)
5-3A-11: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
If an animal is impounded, an animal control officer may institute legal
proceedings on behalf of the city against the owner charging the owner with a
violation of this title. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
preventing an animal control officer from instituting a legal proceeding for
violation of this article where there has been no impoundment. (1959 Code § 6-
2-11)
5-3A-12: PROSECUTION:
A.   For the purpose of prosecution for violations of any section of this
article, it is not necessary in order to obtain a conviction to prove notice or
knowledge on the part of the owner of any animal in question if there is a
violation of any of the sections of this article at the time and place charged,
it being the purpose and intent of this section to impose strict liability upon
the owner of any animal for the action, conduct and condition of that animal,
in accordance with the terms of this article.
B.   Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, prosecution for the
violation of this article shall be under the general penalty of the city. (1959
Code § 6-2-16)
ARTICLE B. DOGS
SECTION:
5-3B-1: Definitions
5-3B-2: Ownership
5-3B-3: License Tag
5-3B-4: License Fee
5-3B-5: Running At Large
5-3B-6: Declared Nuisance
5-3B-7: Strays
5-3B-8: Unlicensed Dogs; Penalty
5-3B-9: Animal In Unattended Vehicle
5-3B-10: Defense Of Life Or Property
5-3B-11: Vicious Animals
5-3B-12: Sanitation Responsibilities; Penalty
5-3B-13: Control And Restraint
5-3B-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   BITE: Any breaking or scratching of the victim's skin by the animal's teeth.
   DEPARTMENT: The Bonners Ferry police department, its agents, officers, or
other persons so designated by the city.
   DOG: Any dog whose owner resides within the incorporated limits of the city
or any dog which enters the city limits.
   SUBSTANTIAL INJURY: Any injury caused by an animal which requires the
services of a physician.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which:
A.   Has twice within a forty eight (48) month period bitten or attacked a
person; or
B.   Has once attacked or bitten a person engaged in an unlawful activity,
causing death or substantial injury.
C.   A vicious animal, within the meaning of this article, shall be deemed a
public nuisance and shall be subject to the provisions of this article for the
remainder of its life. (Ord. 427, 7-9-1996; amd. Ord. 539, 3-4-2014)
5-3B-2: OWNERSHIP:
For the purpose of this article, the ownership of any dog shall be determined
by the fact that such dog is fed or otherwise encouraged or permitted to remain
on any premises and the resident on such premises shall be considered the
lawful owner. (1959 Code § 6-3-2)
5-3B-3: LICENSE TAG:
Every owner bringing into the city or harboring a dog within the city is hereby
required to secure about the neck of said dog a specific license tag for use
solely on that dog, said license tag to be secured annually in the manner
outlined in this article. (Ord. 427, 7-9-1996)
5-3B-4: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee required to be paid shall be established by resolution
of the mayor and city council for each altered dog, male or female, and the
annual license fee for all other dogs shall be established by resolution of the
mayor and city council, which sum shall be due and payable annually on or
before January 31 of each year or within thirty (30) days from the date that
the party obtains possession of the dog if the dog is acquired between February
1 and November 1. Failure to obtain a license within the time required will
cause a doubling of the license fee. The annual license fee shall be for the
period of January 1 through December 31. The license fee is the obligation of
the person or persons possessing the dog. (Ord. 498, 4-4-2006)
5-3B-5: RUNNING AT LARGE:
No dog shall be allowed to run at large within the city limits. Any violation
of this section shall be prosecuted in accordance with Idaho Code section 25-
2805, dogs running at large. (Ord. 539, 3-4-2014)
5-3B-6: DECLARED NUISANCE:
A.   Nuisance Defined: A dog is a "nuisance" if it incessantly barks so as to
cause a disturbance. (Ord. 539, 3-4-2014)
B.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit the dog to
be a nuisance. Establishing the name of the person purchasing the dog license
shall be prima facie evidence of the dog's owner for the purposes of this
section. An "owner" under this section is the person or the head of the
household that is the principal harborer of the dog.
C.   Impoundment: Any dog being a nuisance shall be impounded. (1959 Code § 6-
3-3)
D.   Penalty:
   1.   First Offense: Any owner convicted of having a dog or dogs that is or
are a nuisance shall be guilty of an infraction and fined fifty dollars
($50.00) for a first offense.
   2.   Second Offense: Any owner convicted of having a dog or dogs that is or
are a nuisance shall be guilty of an infraction and fined one hundred dollars
($100.00) for a second offense.
   3.   Third And Subsequent Offenses: Any owner convicted of having a dog or
dogs that is or are a nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
fined up to three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus any court costs associated
with the prosecution of said offense.
   4.   Impound Fees: The owner convicted of having a dog or dogs that is or
are a nuisance shall pay an impound fee if the dog is impounded of twenty
dollars ($20.00) per offense. (Ord. 539, 3-4-2014)
   5.   Fine Per Offense: The fine is per offense, regardless of whether it is
the same or a different dog. (Ord. 427, 7-9-1996)
5-3B-7: STRAYS:
It shall be the duty of the police chief or any other officer detailed
therefor, to seize all stray dogs running at large that do not wear a license
tag, and where any such dog remains unclaimed for twenty four (24) hours it
shall be the duty of the police chief or other officer detailed therefor, to
cause such dog to be killed or otherwise disposed of in a humane manner. (1959
Code § 6-3-7; amd. 2003 Code)
5-3B-8: UNLICENSED DOGS; PENALTY:
Any person neglecting or refusing to take out a license for any dog or dogs
owned or harbored by him shall be guilty of a separate infraction with a
penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each dog which is unlicensed in a license
fee period from January 1 through December 31. A person may be cited under this
provision for each license fee period in which he neglects or refuses to obtain
a license for each dog. (Ord. 359, 3-4-2014)
5-3B-9: ANIMAL IN UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
No person shall leave an animal in any unattended vehicle without adequate
ventilation or in any manner as to subject the animal to extremes of
temperature which adversely affects the animal's health and welfare. (Ord. 427,
7-9-1996)
5-3B-10: DEFENSE OF LIFE OR PROPERTY:
Any dog may be killed by any police officer, or any citizen, whether such dog
be licensed or unlicensed when such killing is in defense of life or property.
(1959 Code § 6-3-9)
5-3B-11: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A.   Vicious Animal: Any person owning or having custody of any vicious animal
is guilty of a misdemeanor if, as a result of that person's failure to exercise
reasonable care, the animal injures any other person or animal engaged in
lawful activities. The owner shall be prosecuted in accordance with Idaho Code
section 25-2805(2). This does not apply to military or police dogs actively
engaged in the pursuit of their official duties. (Ord. 539, 3-4-2014)
B.   Possession Of Vicious Animals: Any person who owns, keeps, harbors,
possesses or has custodial care of a vicious animal within the meaning of this
article shall:
   1.   Restrain: Keep such animal restrained in a manner which prevents any
further attacks, or bites;
   2.   Liability Insurance: Shall be required to provide proof of three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) in liability insurance specifically
naming the animal as a covered liability and shall provide the city with a copy
of said insurance policy. The city shall also be named as an additional
insured;
   3.   Sale Or Transfer: Shall notify the department in the following manner:
Owners of a vicious animal who sell, or in any way, transfer the ownership,
custody, care or residence, inform the department, in writing, of the name,
address and telephone number of the new owner or custodian, or new residence
address. Said notification shall include the name and description of the
animal. The owner shall, in addition, notify the new owner, in writing, of the
details of the animal's record, the terms and conditions of the animal
maintenance, and provide the department with a copy thereof. Said copy shall
contain signed acknowledgment by the new owner of his/her receipt of the
original;
   4.   Escape: If a vicious animal escapes, the owner shall immediately notify
the department and shall make every effort to recapture the animal;
   5.   Signs: The owner of a vicious animal shall display in a prominent place
on the owner's premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is
a vicious animal on the premises. The sign must be readable from a public
highway or thoroughfare. The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol
warning children of the presence of a vicious animal. Similar signs shall be
posted on the animal's kennel, pen, or enclosed structure;
   6.   Inspections: The owner of a vicious animal shall contact the department
on an annual basis and shall have an inspection of the premises wherein the
vicious animal is confined. The inspection shall deal with the security of the
confinement and all other items listed above; and
   7.   Failure To Comply: If the owner of any animal declared vicious fails to
comply with all of the above requirements, the animal shall be impounded
forthwith.
C.   Impoundment: The department may order the impoundment of any animal that:
   1.   Has attacked, bitten, or injured a human being or domestic animal; or
   2.   Has been declared a vicious animal and the owner has failed to comply
with the requirements and conditions for keeping a vicious animal within five
(5) days of being declared vicious; or
   3.   Poses a threat of serious harm to the public health or safety.
D.   Notice Of Impoundment: Upon impoundment the city will follow the same
procedure as this chapter provides for any impoundment. (Ord. 427, 7-9-1996)
5-3B-12: SANITATION RESPONSIBILITIES; PENALTY:
A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner or any person having custody or control
of any dog to fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by his/her dog on
public property or private property not belonging to the dog owner. Removal
must be effected before the dog owner or responsible party leaves the immediate
area where the fecal matter was deposited. The dog owner or responsible party
must dispose of the fecal matter in a sanitary manner by depositing the same in
a trash receptacle.
B.   A violation of these sanitation responsibilities shall constitute an
infraction, with penalties and fines, as provided in Idaho Code. (Ord. 550, 6-
2-2015)
5-3B-13: CONTROL AND RESTRAINT:
A.   Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public property, or upon private
property without the consent of the owner, shall be secured by a leash or chain
of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the dog and be controlled by a
person of sufficient age and strength to control the dog.
B.   Exceptions: This shall not apply to police dogs engaged in police work or
to service animals performing medically necessary purposes.
C.   Any dog found in violation of this section shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the owner of the animal is in violation of this section. A
violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 550, 6-2-2015)
ARTICLE C. DOG CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3C-1: Disposal
5-3C-2: Adoption Of Dogs
5-3C-3: Rabies Shots
5-3C-4: Fine
5-3C-1: DISPOSAL:
Any dog that has been received by the pound may be put to sleep or adopted out
within five (5) days, excluding weekends and holidays, of receipt of the animal
or within five (5) days, excluding weekends and holidays, of notice to the
owner if the owner is known through its dog license or if the owner of the
animal is actually known by the police department. (1959 Code § 6-4-1; amd.
2003 Code)
5-3C-2: ADOPTION OF DOGS:
Any person desiring to adopt a dog that has been delivered to the pound and
that has not been claimed by the owner within the five (5) day holding period
shall, before being given possession of the dog, make arrangements with a
veterinarian to have the dog neutered or spayed prior to receiving the dog. The
city will then deliver the dog to the veterinarian at the adopter's sole
expense. If the veterinarian refuses to accept the dog, the city will then
dispose of the dog. (1959 Code § 6-4-2)
5-3C-3: RABIES SHOTS:
A.   Required: All dogs found within the city limits must have had current
rabies shots, and shall wear a current tag so showing. Any dog found without
such a current tag shall be impounded and treated like any other dog impounded.
Before releasing any such dog, the person claiming such dog shall make
arrangements with a veterinarian for necessary rabies shots in the manner
provided in section
5-3C-2 of this article.
B.   Definition: "Ownership" is defined as that term is defined in section
5-3B-2 of this chapter.
C.   Penalty: Any person convicted of owning such a dog shall be fined a sum
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). (1959 Code § 6-4-3)
5-3C-4: FINE:
A.   First Impoundment: The animal control officer shall charge the owner of
said animal (or the person obtaining release of and possession of the animal)
the sums outlined in section
5-3C-3 of this article, together with the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for
conducting the sale of the animal, plus the city's costs of advertising.
B.   Second And Third Impoundment: In the event the animal control officer
shall impound an animal for a second time, in addition to the above costs,
there shall be imposed upon the owner of said animal, a fine of thirty dollars
($30.00); and fifty dollars ($50.00) for a third offense.
C.   Fourth And Subsequent Impoundment: In the event that a given animal is
picked up for a fourth time and for each time over four (4) times, in addition
to the above stated fees and costs, there shall be a fine of one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00). (1959 Code § 6-4-4; amd. 2003 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Curfew
5-4-2: Parental Responsibility
5-4-3: Penalties
5-4-1: CURFEW:
A.   Imposed: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years to be in or upon any street, highway, road, alley, park, playground
or other public places or buildings, or places of amusement, eating
establishments, vacant lots and/or any other place without being accompanied by
an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by the adult
having custodial rights of said minor between the hours of ten thirty o'clock
(10:30) P.M. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until four
o'clock (4:00) A.M. of the following day, and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
until four o'clock (4:00) A.M. on Friday or Saturday.
B.   Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in cases where
the minor is:
   1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
   2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop;
   3.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   4.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop;
   5.   Involved in an emergency;
   6.   Attending an official school, religious, recreational, or other
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of Bonners Ferry,
Boundary County, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from such activity,
without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop; or
   7.   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the right of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly, or going to or returning from such activity,
without any unauthorized detour, delay, or stop.
C.   Responsibility Of Owner, Operator, Or Employee: The owner, operator, or
any employee of an establishment commits an offense under this chapter if he or
she knowingly allows a minor, without permission of a parent or guardian, to be
present upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours, unless the
establishment is involved in rendering services for an emergency or is a
designated "safe place" and the minor is seeking emergency help, shelter, or
care. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner,
operator, or employee of an establishment asked the minor to leave the premises
and promptly notified the Bonners Ferry city police department that a minor is
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refuses to
leave. (Ord. 540, 3-18-2014)
5-4-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of a child or any adult person designated by the person having legal
custody of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit and/or allow
said minor to be upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement,
eating places, vacant lots or other locations without having designated an
adult person or said parent, guardian or other legal custodian supervising said
child between the hours established in 5-4-1A of this chapter, excluding the
exceptions as set forth in 5-4-1B of this chapter. A violation of this
provision shall be punishable in accordance with the penalties set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 540, 3-18-2014)
5-4-3: PENALTIES:
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable as a misdemeanor under the laws of the state of Idaho,
or shall be subject to the provisions of the juvenile corrections act of the
state of Idaho as applicable. (Ord. 540, 3-18-2014)
CHAPTER 5
AIR GUNS, FIREARMS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Discharge Prohibited
5-5-3: Exceptions
5-5-4: Violations
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this chapter, the term shall mean any
instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or other harmful
objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the action of
compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and including what are
commonly known as air rifles, BB guns, slings or flippers. (1959 Code § 6-6-1)
5-5-2: DISCHARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or
description within the limits of the city. (Ord. 549, 4-21-2015)
5-5-3: EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Shooting Galleries, Gun Clubs, Etc.; Permit Required: The city council
may, upon application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and
others for shooting within the city limits in fixed localities and under fixed
rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the clerk conforming to
such requirements as the council shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall
be subject to revocation at any time by action of the council.
B.   Law Enforcement: This chapter does not apply to those persons listed in
section 18-3302(12)(a through c), Idaho Code, while acting in their official
capacity.
C.   Lawful Defense: A person discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of
person or persons or property. (Ord. 549, 4-21-2015)
5-5-4: VIOLATIONS:
Any person found guilty of a violation of this section may be charged as a
misdemeanor with penalties pursuant to Idaho Code. (Ord. 549, 4-21-2015)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC
SECTION:
6-1-1: Motor Vehicle Code Adopted
6-1-2: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-1-3: Stopping For Loading Or Unloading Only
6-1-4: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Restricted Or Prohibited On Certain
Streets
6-1-1: MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
A.   Adopted: Title 49, Idaho motor vehicle code, as it now exists or may
hereafter be modified or amended is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 467, 5-7-2002)
B.   Penalties: Penalties provided for and the application of title 49, Idaho
Code, when enforced as an ordinance of the city shall be as follows:
   1.   Violation Enforced As City Ordinance: The penalties for a violation of
any provision of title 49, Idaho Code, when enforced as an ordinance of the
city as herein provided shall be the lesser of the penalty provided in title
49, but not to exceed the general penalties for violations of city ordinances.
Offenses designated by title 49 to be infractions shall be enforced under this
ordinance as infractions both as to procedure and penalty.
   2.   Ordinances Regulating Specific Conduct: The adoption of ordinances
regulating specific conduct also regulated by title 49, Idaho Code, will
supersede the general adoption of title 49 by this chapter.
   3.   Application: Nothing in the adoption of title 49 as an ordinance of the
city will limit the application of title 49 as a state law of general
application within the city. City officials may exercise their authority to
enforce the conduct regulated by title 49 either as a law of the state of Idaho
or as an ordinance of the city. When a provision of title 49 is enforced as an
ordinance of the city, it will be referenced by both ordinance number and the
appropriate section of title 49, Idaho Code. (Ord. 468, 7-2-2002)
6-1-2: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
A.   Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required:
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control device in any
of the following places:
      a.   On a sidewalk;
      b.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      c.   Within an intersection;
      d.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      e.   On a crosswalk;
      f.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      g.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic control signal;
      h.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the chief of police has indicated a different length of a zone by signs
or markings;
      i.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      j.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
      k.   Alongside or opposite any street obstruction or excavation when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      l.   Upon a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of
a curb of a street;
      m.   Upon a bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel;
      n.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
      o.   On theater property between the street or alley and the theater
exits.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not lawfully
under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such
distance as is unlawful. (1959 Code § 10-2-11)
B.   All Night Parking And Parking During Specific Emergencies Prohibited:
   1.   All Night Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle within the business district for a period of time longer than
one hour between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M., of any day. (1959 Code § 10-2-11; amd. 2003 Code)
   2.   Business District: "Business district" means North Main Street, Main
Street, South Main Street and all streets in Bonnerport Addition, first
addition to Bonnerport Addition and Riverside Addition.
   3.   Snow Removal And Street Repair: During time of snow removal and street
construction and repair, the city, through its street department, may give six
(6) hour public notice to remove all vehicles from specific streets or from all
streets. Such notice may be given by leaving a written notice on each residence
adjacent to the affected street or streets, or by announcement through one or
more media having general coverage of the geographic area of the city.
   4.   Removal Of Vehicles: After the lapse of six (6) hours after the giving
of such notice, then the city shall have the right to remove or cause to be
removed any vehicle on the affected street or streets, and the party removing
such vehicle shall have a possessory lien thereon for cost of such removal.
(1959 Code § 10-2-11)
C.   Parking In A Fire Lane Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic control
device, in any fire lane or other emergency vehicle access which is designated
with erected signage or indicated by paint upon the asphalt, within the
prohibited parking area. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction
punishable by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. (Ord. 543, 10-21-2014)
6-1-3: STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY:
A.   Standing In Freight Curb Loading Zone: It shall be unlawful for any person
to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than
for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials
in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop
for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
B.   City Council Regulations: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the city council, by resolution, may at any time establish parking
spaces with parking time limits as established in the resolution and which may
be for times either more or less than three (3) minutes. (1959 Code § 10-2-12;
amd. 2003 Code)
6-1-4: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS:
A.   Application Of Section: The provisions of this section prohibiting the
standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary
to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or official traffic control devices.
B.   Regulations Not Exclusive: The provisions of this section imposing a time
limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other
and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
C.   City Council Regulations: By resolution, the council shall, from time to
time, establish parking limitations, restrictions and time limits on given
areas along the street not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length. Such
resolution shall be based upon a recommendation from the chief of police that
such limitations and restrictions are necessary due to hazardous conditions,
traffic congestion, public convenience or public welfare. Adoption of this
chapter ratifies the prior acts of the chief of police under subsection B of
this section, the council having examined the locations of such existing signs
limiting and restricting standing, stopping or parking. (1959 Code § 10-2-13;
amd. 2003 Code)
CHAPTER 2
HUMAN POWERED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definition
6-2-2: Use Restricted
6-2-3: Designated Areas
6-2-4: Applicability To Private Property
6-2-1: DEFINITION:
"Human powered" or "propelled, wheeled vehicles" are any device designed or
used to transport or to be ridden by human beings where the source of power to
propel it is by the physical pushing, pulling, or peddling by a human being, or
a vehicle that is propelled by gravity without the aid of power produced by
electricity, internal combustion engine or other mechanical source of
propulsion. (Ord. 468, 7-2-2002)
6-2-2: USE RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as an infraction for any person to operate,
ride or otherwise use any human powered or propelled, wheeled vehicle or device
in an area where such is prohibited upon a public right of way or upon private
property open for public use when posted as provided herein. Excepted from this
chapter is any vehicle or device primarily designed and used for the purpose of
compensating for a physical disability of the operator, or a device designed
for adults to transport children. (Ord. 468, 7-2-2002)
6-2-3: DESIGNATED AREAS:
A.   Power To Designate: Upon recommendation by the chief of police or the
traffic safety committee, the council shall designate such areas and adopt such
restrictions as they determine appropriate for the application of this chapter
which they deem necessary and appropriate to protect the health and safety of
persons and property.
B.   Signs:
   1.   Posting: The areas so designated shall be marked by signs at the end of
such portion of any street or pedestrianway where the use of such vehicle is
prohibited and/or restricted.
   2.   Specifications: The signs shall be rectangular in shape and the size of
the sign and the lettering thereon shall not be smaller than that used to
designate restrictions upon parking and, where appropriate, may be of standard
size used for highway traffic control. (Ord. 468, 7-2-2002)
6-2-4: APPLICABILITY TO PRIVATE PROPERTY:
For this chapter to be applicable to private property open to public use, the
owner must post at each entrance signs meeting the same specifications as those
used by the city, excepting that they will additionally designate that they
have been posted by the owner. (Ord. 468, 7-2-2002)
CHAPTER 3
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Short Title
6-3-2: Definitions
6-3-3: Storing, Parking Or Leaving Dismantled Motor Vehicle Prohibited
6-3-4: Procedure For Removal
6-3-5: Responsibility For Removal
6-3-6: Liability Of Owner Or Occupant
6-3-7: Penalty
6-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE ORDINANCE. (1959 Code § 6-8-1)
6-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
   CITY: The city of Bonners Ferry.
   DIRECTOR OF TRAFFIC: The chief of police.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined herein, which does not
have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates, and
the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts,
campers, and trailers.
   PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purpose of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility. (1959 Code § 6-8-2; amd. 2003 Code)
6-3-3: STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
A.   Prohibited: No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking,
storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled
condition whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within
the city for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
B.   Declared Nuisance: The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof,
on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be
abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C.   Exception: This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a
building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a
business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any
motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for
operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner for
antique collection purposes. (1959 Code § 6-8-3)
6-3-4: PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL:
The procedures established in chapter 18, title 49, Idaho Code, for
notification, hearing, removal, and sale or disposition of abandoned vehicles
shall be applicable to unlicensed, dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts stored, parked or situated upon public or private property in violation
of any ordinance of the city. The poststorage hearing required by Idaho Code
section 49-1805 shall be conducted by the mayor, or if unavailable, president
of council or such person as the mayor or president of council shall designate
who shall meet the qualifications of Idaho Code section 49-1803(2)(d). (Ord.
467, 5-7-2002)
6-3-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the
private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be
responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
city, the owner, or occupant of the private property where same is located,
shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (1959 Code § 6-8-5)
6-3-6: LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which abandoned
vehicles have been removed by the city to pay the unrecovered expenses incurred
by the city in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the property for the
amount of such expenses. (1959 Code § 6-8-16)
6-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than
three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each act in violation of any of the provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (1959 Code § 6-8-17; amd. 2003 Code)
TITLE 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
7-1-1: Established
7-1-2: Membership; Term
7-1-3: Duties Of Chief
7-1-4: Duties Of Volunteer Members
7-1-5: State Laws To Prevail
7-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department herein designated as the fire
department. (1959 Code § 3-3-1)
7-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERM:
The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department, to be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, and such other
personnel as the mayor and council may, from time to time, determine necessary.
The chief and such assistants shall hold office for the duration of his or
their appointment or until such time as he or they may be removed. (1959 Code
§§ 1-15-1, 3-3-2; amd. 2003 Code)
7-1-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The duties of the chief of the fire department shall be as follows:
A.   Firefighting: To direct the fighting of fires.
B.   Equipment; Apparatus: To have charge of, be responsible for, and keep in
good repair all equipment and apparatus connected with or belonging to the fire
department.
C.   Fire Drills; Meetings: To call and direct such fire drills and meetings as
he deems necessary for the training of persons in efficient firefighting.
D.   Authority Over Personnel: To have authority over the personnel of the fire
department during their activities while firefighting and during drills and
meetings.
E.   Police Authority: To have police authority while on duty as fire chief.
F.   Records; Reports: To keep records of all fires and make reports of same at
each regular monthly meeting of the city council.
G.   Other Duties: Such other duties as the city council may, from time to
time, impose upon him by law. (1959 Code § 3-3-2; amd. 2003 Code)
7-1-4: DUTIES OF VOLUNTEER MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of volunteer members of the fire department to respond to
all fire calls, unless prevented from so doing by unavoidable circumstances.
They shall attend fire department drills and meetings and obey such rules and
regulations as are established for the fire department. (1959 Code § 3-3-3)
7-1-5: STATE LAWS TO PREVAIL:
All public traffic, during a fire run and the use and equipment of fire
apparatus, shall be governed by this code and by state law. (1959 Code § 3-3-4)
CHAPTER 2
REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Interfering Or Destroying Fire Apparatus
7-2-2: Driving Over Fire Hose
7-2-3: False Alarm
7-2-4: Fire Seasons
7-2-1: INTERFERING OR DESTROYING FIRE APPARATUS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or carelessly injure, damage or
destroy any fire apparatus or any other property belonging to the city. (1959
Code § 7-4-1; amd. 2003 Code)
7-2-2: DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any conveyance wilfully or
carelessly across any hose or fire apparatus belonging to the city or any
railroad company to interfere in any manner with hose laid across its tracks in
time of a fire. (1959 Code § 7-4-1; amd. 2003 Code)
7-2-3: FALSE ALARM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false fire alarm in the city.
(1959 Code § 7-4-1; amd. 2003 Code)
7-2-4: FIRE SEASONS:
A.   Fire Seasons Designated: The chief of the fire department shall annually
designate one or more fire seasons. He shall make this determination from time
to time based upon weather conditions, soil conditions, area congestion and his
experience in dealing with fires and fire hazards. His designation shall state
the beginning date and ending date; but this shall not prevent him from
extending the season by declaring a new fire season.
B.   Council Approval: Upon his determination to establish a fire season, the
fire chief will notify the council, and that fire season shall be effective if
the council approves it and proper public notice is given.
C.   Notice: Public notice shall be given by one public notice in the Bonners
Ferry Herald, and the fire season shall commence the day following the first
delivery or sale of that issue of that newspaper.
D.   Permit Required: It is unlawful to set a fire by any means or method from
May 10 through October 20 without first obtaining a permit from the fire chief
ten (10) days before wanting to set such fire and paying the permit fee as
determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. The above dates
may be extended by the fire chief. The following exceptions shall not require a
permit:
   1.   Stove, furnace and fireplace fires; and
   2.   Barbecue fires contained in containers manufactured for that purpose;
and
   3.   Cooling pit fires not over three feet (3') in diameter, lined with
stone or nonwood block, and with debris removed within a ten foot (10') radius
of the center of the fire. (1959 Code § 7-6-1; amd. 2003 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Applicability
7-3-2: Definition
7-3-3: Prohibited
7-3-4: Permit Required
7-3-5: Transportation
7-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all explosives except small arms ammunition and
pyrotechnic devices. (1959 Code § 7-2-1)
7-3-2: DEFINITION:
The term "explosive" means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which
contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in
proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases with which the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb. (1959 Code § 7-2-1; amd. 2003
Code)
7-3-3: PROHIBITED:
Explosives shall not be in the possession of any person, nor shall any person
bring into the city or receive inside the city, or cause to be brought in or
received, or use or cause to be used, any explosive except as herein provided
otherwise. (1959 Code § 7-2-4)
7-3-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   Required: Section
7-3-3 of this chapter shall not apply to any person who has received a permit
to possess, receive, bring, cause to be received or caused to be brought, used
or caused to be used into the city explosives.
B.   Application: A permit is obtained by applying to the chief of police, who
shall submit it to the council. The council, upon majority vote, shall issue
the permit after receiving a report and recommendation from each the chief of
police and chief of the fire department.
C.   Permit Specifications: The permit shall specify the kind and amount of
explosive allowable, the time it can be kept within the city, the use to which
it may be put, and specify that it shall not go into effect until the applicant
provides liability insurance in an amount required by the council, and includes
the city and the council members in its coverage. (1959 Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2003
Code)
7-3-5: TRANSPORTATION:
A.   Use Of Vehicles For Hire Prohibited: Explosives shall not be transported
or carried on or in any conveyance carrying passengers for hire. (1959 Code §
7-2-3)
B.   Required Markings: Required markings shall meet or exceed requirements of
Idaho Code sections 49-592 and 49-1427. (2003 Code)
C.   Smoking; Intoxication; Careless Or Reckless Driving: It shall be unlawful
for any person in charge of a vehicle containing explosives to smoke in, upon
or near such vehicle, to drive, load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated,
to drive the vehicle in a careless or reckless manner or to load or unload such
vehicle in a careless or reckless manner.
D.   Metal Tools In Vehicle Containing Explosives: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, any metal tool or
other similar piece of metal, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing
explosives.
E.   Exploders, Detonators, Blasting Caps, Etc.: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place or carry or cause to be placed or carried, in the bed or body
of a vehicle containing explosives, any exploders, detonators, blasting caps,
or other similar explosives, material, or to carry in or upon any such vehicle
any matches. (1959 Code § 7-2-3)
CHAPTER 4
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Statute Adopted
7-4-2: Public Display
7-4-3: Nonaerial Common Fireworks
7-4-4: Sale, Possession, Discharge, Storage Or Display
7-4-5: Power To Enact Resolutions
7-4-6: Penalty
7-4-1: STATUTE ADOPTED:
The possession, sale, delivery, storage and use of fireworks within the city
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the fireworks
act of 1997 as set forth in chapter 26, title 39, Idaho Code. All standards,
regulations, definitions and times established by the fireworks act of 1997 as
set forth in chapter 26, title 39, Idaho Code, as now in effect or hereafter
modified are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 462, 6-19-
2001)
7-4-2: PUBLIC DISPLAY:
A.   Permit Required: There shall be no public display or sale of fireworks
within the city without first having obtained a permit from the city clerk to
do so.
B.   Requirements For Issuance: No permit will issue for the sale or public
display of fireworks unless the applicant shall pay a fee, provide insurance,
and complete an application, which shall be in accordance with the form and
amounts established by resolution of the council. Should the council fail to
establish by resolution a fee or insurance requirement, the maximum fee and
insurance requirement authorized by chapter 26, title 39, Idaho Code, shall be
applicable. (Ord. 462, 6-19-2001)
7-4-3: NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS:
Except as provided by Idaho Code section 39-2603 for the wholesale and
importation of fireworks and Idaho Code section 39-2605 for the public display
of fireworks supervised by a qualified person, no person shall possess,
discharge, or deliver to another any fireworks within the city except
"nonaerial common fireworks" as defined by Idaho Code section 39-2602(6). (Ord.
462, 6-19-2001)
7-4-4: SALE, POSSESSION, DISCHARGE, STORAGE OR DISPLAY:
No fireworks shall be sold, possessed, discharged, stored or displayed within
the city except as provided by the ordinances and resolutions of the city and
the provisions of Idaho law. Any sale, possession, discharge, storage and/or
display of fireworks not in compliance with the ordinances and resolutions of
the city and the laws of the state shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 462, 6-19-
2001)
7-4-5: POWER TO ENACT RESOLUTIONS:
A.   Power: To ensure the health and safety of persons and property within the
city and to respond to changing conditions and standards, the city council may
by resolution establish fee schedules, insurance requirements, safety
requirement, including the establishment of extended times for sale or display
of fireworks and training or experience qualifications to obtain a permit to
sell or display fireworks, which are uniformly applicable to each class of
activity regulated by this chapter and the laws of the state of Idaho as
applicable within the city.
B.   Time Limitation For Adoption; Posting, Publication: Any regulations
adopted by resolution of the council as provided herein must be adopted not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the effective date, and shall be posted in
a public place in the city hall, and provided to newspapers, radio and cable
television having general circulation or service within the city to use as a
news item or public service announcements and copies of all applicable
ordinances and resolutions shall be available to the public upon request.
C.   Declaration Of Emergency: However, this will not limit the mayor's or
council's authority to declare an emergency and limit, restrict or ban the use
or possession of fireworks in times and circumstances of high risk of injury to
persons or property by reason of fire or other hazardous circumstances. (Ord.
462, 6-19-2001)
7-4-6: PENALTY:
Any act or omission regulated by the laws of the state of Idaho will be
punishable as provided for the punishment of misdemeanors under the law of the
state of Idaho. Any act or omission, which is unlawful only by reason of the
ordinances of the city, will be punishable as a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 462, 6-19-2001)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Permit Required
8-1-2: Owner To Construct
8-1-3: Action By Council
8-1-4: Notice To Construct Or Repair
8-1-5: Failure To Comply
8-1-6: Lien
8-1-7: Maintenance
8-1-8: Refusal To Maintain
8-1-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No sidewalks that are hereafter proposed to be built shall be built without
first obtaining a building permit therefor. (1959 Code § 9-8-1)
8-1-2: OWNER TO CONSTRUCT:
All sidewalks hereafter built shall be built and kept in repair by the owner of
the property adjacent thereto and abutting thereon. All presently existing
sidewalks shall be kept in repair by the owner of the property adjacent thereto
and abutting thereon, upon notice given by the city council. (1959 Code § 9-8-
2; amd. 2003 Code)
8-1-3: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
Whenever the city council shall deem it necessary that any sidewalk be
constructed, replaced or repaired, it shall order the same done by resolution,
order and motion as a part of the minutes of the meeting of the city council.
(1959 Code § 9-8-3; amd. 2003 Code)
8-1-4: NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR:
The city engineer or any person authorized by the council shall notify the
owners of all lots or parcels of land fronting, abutting on or adjacent to the
side of the street upon which a sidewalk is ordered to be constructed, replaced
or repaired, and which property is liable for the costs of such sidewalk, by
serving upon such persons, in writing, in substantially the language of the
order of the council, requiring such person to begin the construction,
replacement or repair of such sidewalk within thirty (30) days from the date of
service of such notice and to complete the same within forty five (45) days
therefrom. (1959 Code § 9-8-4; amd. 2003 Code)
8-1-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
If any person having been duly notified, as herein provided, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to construct, replace or repair such sidewalk as ordered
without reasonable excuse for such failure, neglect or refusal, the city
engineer shall report the same to the city council, with the name of such
owner, and with the description of the property in front of which said sidewalk
has not been built, and the council may proceed to cause the same to be
constructed, replaced or repaired by the city street department, or other
person thereunto appointed or employed, or may proceed to let the construction
thereof by bid or contract under such conditions as the city council shall
designate. (1959 Code § 9-8-5; amd. 2003 Code)
8-1-6: LIEN:
Whenever the city council shall have caused the sidewalk to be constructed,
replaced or repaired as herein provided, the full expense thereof shall be a
lien upon the lot or parcel of land in front of which the same shall be
constructed, replaced or repaired and shall take precedence of all other liens
and may be foreclosed in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the
state of Idaho. A statement of said expenses shall be certified by the clerk of
the city to the county auditor of Boundary County, and shall be collected as
other municipal taxes. (1959 Code § 9-8-6; amd. 2003 Code)
8-1-7: MAINTENANCE:
The duty to maintain, repair and replace sidewalks shall be upon the adjacent
and abutting property owners, subject only to their receipt of notice from the
city containing instructions as to the manner and method of repairing and
replacing the sidewalks. (1959 Code § 9-8-7; amd. 2003 Code)
8-1-8: REFUSAL TO MAINTAIN:
In the event any adjacent or abutting owner shall fail or refuse to commence
compliance with such notice for a period of five (5) days, then such adjacent
or abutting owner shall be liable to the city in an amount equal to all damages
and costs and fees paid by the city in tort actions arising after said five (5)
day period out of the condition of such sidewalks. (1959 Code § 9-8-8; amd.
2003 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CURBS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definition
8-2-2: Curb Protection
8-2-3: Penalty
8-2-1: DEFINITION:
"Curb" is defined as a stone, concrete, wooden or asphalt barrier paralleling
the side limit of the roadway to protect the adjoining property from incursion
by vehicles and controlling access to and from streets and highways. (1959 Code
§ 10-5-1)
8-2-2: CURB PROTECTION:
A.   Driving On Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a
vehicle to go upon or over any curb on any street or highway within the limits
of the city.
B.   Damage Or Destruction Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
damage or destroy any curb on any street or highway within the limits of the
city. (1959 Code § 10-5-1)
8-2-3: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1959 Code § 10-5-1)
CHAPTER 3
ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Working In Public Right Of Way
8-3-2: Excavations
8-3-3: Access To Streets And Rights Of Way
8-3-1: WORKING IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
A.   Adoption Of Standards: The city of Bonners Ferry adopts the current
editions of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) and
American Traffic Safety Services Association (ATSSA) standards for traffic and
pedestrian notification and control for all construction and maintenance
activities in the public rights of way in the city of Bonners Ferry.
B.   Signing And Flagging: All persons and/or companies requiring signing or
flagging along public rights of way within the city of Bonners Ferry will
follow the MUTCD.
C.   Cessation Of Operations: Persons and/or companies found not to be in
compliance with the MUTCD shall cease operations until compliance.
D.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any contractor working in
the city of Bonners Ferry on the public rights of way to fail to be in
compliance with MUTCD. (Ord. 528, 11-1-2011)
8-3-2: EXCAVATIONS:
A.   Permit Required: It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to do
any excavating, construction, or landscaping in the public streets or alley
rights of way of the city without first applying to and obtaining from the city
engineer a permit to do so, specifying in the application the time, place and
nature of the proposed work, together with a plan and sketch showing the method
of excavation and the location of all utilities within the proposed work area.
B.   Issuance Of Permit: The city engineer designee shall issue all permits for
excavation, drilling, boring and any other activities physically affecting the
airspace above, surface of, and subsurface under city and public streets; but
before doing so, he may notify, and receive input from, any department whose
works could be affected by the issuance of such permit. The fee for such permit
shall be established from time to time by council resolution.
C.   Utility Crossing: Utility crossings of city and public streets shall be
underground, except as otherwise provided herein. The method shall be by some
procedure, including boring or jacking, that does not disturb the street
pavement.
D.   Exception To Underground Utility Construction: In certain instances, the
act of placing the utility crossing underground could cause excessive damage to
adjoining property, the street and/or utilities in the street regardless of the
procedure used. The burden is upon the utility requesting the permit to make
such determination. Upon making such a determination, the utility shall apply
for a waiver from subsection C of this section, and in the application shall
outline in detail why the damage is anticipated, the anticipated amount of
damage, the nature of the damage, the unfeasibility of compliance with
subsection C of this section, and such other related information as requested
by the city engineer. After examining the application, the city engineer shall
determine, from the facts submitted in the application and from the facts he
finds in his examination of the premises, whether an underground crossing would
cause excessive damage to adjoining property, the street and/or utilities in
the street, or for some other economic or physical reason be unfeasible, he
will then issue a written waiver of compliance with subsection C of this
section, and will thereupon outline the crossing procedure to be used.
E.   Safety Precautions; Work Requirements:
   1.   Safety Precautions: It is the duty of each permit holder to take proper
and adequate precautions to protect the public and public facilities including,
but not limited to, such inclusion, adequate barricades, fences, signs, lights
and certified flaggers.
   2.   Repair Of Settling: Proper filling, grading and paving of the street
shall be done upon completion of the work, and responsibility for repairing
settling shall remain with permittee for eighteen (18) months following
completion of the work. Upon observing settling, or when repairs are not
promptly made, the city, at its option, may repair same and bill permittee the
cost thereof.
F.   Purpose; Indemnification:
   1.   Purpose: By this section, it is not the intent of the city to oversee
the work of permittee or to assume the obligation of requiring the permittee to
comply herewith. The sole purpose of this section is to advise the minimum
standards required for obtaining permission to excavate or construct in, on,
under or over a city or public street.
   2.   Indemnification: No permit shall be issued unless the permittee first
provides the city engineer a written indemnification or, at engineer's
discretion, a bond whereby the permittee assumes the defense of and payment of
all claims and actions brought against the city arising from the malfeasance or
nonfeasance of permittee, its agents or employees, in its work under the
permit.
G.   Liability For Damages: Any permittee or other person, who shall break or
damage any city water, sewer or electric system or other city property shall
forthwith repay the city an amount equal to the damage caused. (Ord. 528, 11-1-
2011)
8-3-3: ACCESS TO STREETS AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
A.   Application For Permit; Fee: Before any person and/or organization shall
develop any access from private property onto the rights of way and/or city
streets of the city, they shall file an application for a permit for such with
the city clerk on a form to be provided by the city and pay a fee in an amount
to be set in accordance with a resolution of the council.
B.   Review By City Engineer: The city clerk shall promptly provide a copy of
such application to the city engineer who shall cause the proposed access to be
examined to determine:
   1.   Traffic safety hazards;
   2.   Load impact on streets and rights of way;
   3.   Increased street and right of way maintenance; and
   4.   Impact on utility service.
C.   Issuance Of Permit:
   1.   No Appreciable Impact: If in the judgment of the city engineer such
access will have no appreciable impact on any of the foregoing criteria, a
permit shall issue.
   2.   Material Impact:
      a.   Notice To Applicant: If in the judgment of the city engineer the
access will materially impact one or more of the foregoing criteria, then he
shall, in writing, state in what respect said items are impacted and state the
manner which if possible such impact may be cured or reduced to an acceptable
level.
      b.   Negotiation Of Cure: In such case no permit shall thereafter issue
for such access without the property owner negotiating a cure at his own
expense with the mayor and city council and with the advice and consent of the
planning and zoning commission.
D.   Violation; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for a person to create or
construct an access onto the city streets or rights of way without compliance
with this section and a violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor. The city may take such action as they deem appropriate to obstruct
such access until compliance with this section be complied with. (Ord. 528, 11-
1-2011)
CHAPTER 4
SNOW AND ICE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Removing Snow And Ice Required
8-4-2: Penalty
8-4-1: REMOVING SNOW AND ICE REQUIRED:
Every owner of any building or vacant lot, or their designated agent for a
building or vacant lot, and every person having the charge of any church, jail
or public building in this city shall, during the time snow shall be on the
ground, by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. every morning, when necessary, clear the
sidewalks and gutters in front of the property from snow, and keep conveniently
free therefrom during the day, so as to allow citizens to use the sidewalks in
an easy, safe and commodious manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to
neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section. (1959 Code §
9-1-1; amd. 2003 Code; amd. Ord. 587, 11-19-2019)
8-4-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter for the first time, upon
conviction, shall be guilty of an infraction with a penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). A second violation shall be an infraction with a penalty of
three hundred dollars ($300.00). A third or subsequent violation of this
chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in Idaho Code and 1-4-1 of this code. (1959 Code § 9-1-2; amd. 2003
Code; amd. Ord. 587, 11-19-2019)
CHAPTER 5
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
SECTION:
8-5-1: Trees To Be Trimmed
8-5-2: Hedges And Shrubbery
8-5-3: Injury To Trees Or Shrubbery
8-5-4: Trees Outside Property Line
8-5-1: TREES TO BE TRIMMED:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim to eight
feet (8') from the ground all trees on property owned or occupied by him,
overhanging the sidewalks, streets or alleys, so that the branches thereon will
not interfere with pedestrian or public travel. (1959 Code § 9-2-1; amd. 2003
Code; Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
8-5-2: HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY:
Any owner, agent, tenant or occupant of any real property shall trim all hedges
and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/
or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk. Hedges and
shrubbery on corner lots will be trimmed so as to not interfere with visibility
of traffic. (1959 Code § 9-2-2; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
8-5-3: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBBERY:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or
without lawful authority so to do, to wilfully injure, deface, disfigure or
destroy any fruit, shade or ornamental tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy,
cut or pick any flower or plant, growing, standing or being either on private
ground or any street, parking, public park or place. (1959 Code § 9-2-3; amd.
Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
8-5-4: TREES OUTSIDE PROPERTY LINE:
The mayor and council are hereby given full and complete control over all trees
growing within the confines of the city limits which are outside the property
lines of the respective lots, plats and tracts. (1959 Code § 9-2-4; amd. 2003
Code; Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
CHAPTER 6
WEEDS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Definition
8-6-2: Noxious Weeds
8-6-3: Responsibility For Cutting Or Removal
8-6-4: Notice To Remove; Failure To Comply
8-6-1: DEFINITION:
"Weeds", within the meaning of this chapter, include all vegetable growth that
is unsightly, troublesome, useless or noxious. (1959 Code § 9-6-1; amd. Ord.
527, 11-1-2011)
8-6-2: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
All weeds and vegetable growth that have been declared noxious, destructive and
detrimental to the agricultural interests shall be completely and effectually
destroyed. It shall be a sufficient compliance with this chapter if all other
kinds not so declared noxious are kept closely cut to the ground. (1959 Code §
9-6-1; amd. Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
8-6-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CUTTING OR REMOVAL:
All owners, occupants, tenants or agents of any lot, block, parcel or
subdivision of land are hereby required to cut and remove all weeds from said
premises and to the center of the street or alley along, in front of or
abutting on said premises and to keep the same free from weeds. (1959 Code § 9-
6-1; amd. Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
8-6-4: NOTICE TO REMOVE; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Whenever the growth of weeds exceeds twelve inches (12") in height or becomes a
condition prohibited by this chapter, the city or any of its officers shall
notify such owner or occupant to remove such growth and in default of this
being done, the city shall remove the same and cut such weeds, or do any other
work necessary to place said premises in condition. The clerk shall certify the
cost of the same and the cost therein occurred shall be a lien upon the
property. (1959 Code § 9-6-1; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 527, 11-1-2011)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Authority; Establishment Of The Building Department
9-1-2: Appointment Of The Building Official
9-1-3: Fees For Permits And Associated Services
9-1-4: Contractor's Registration Number
9-1-5: Penalties; Civil Remedies
9-1-1: AUTHORITY; ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 39-4116, there is hereby established a building
department which is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
and such other ordinances as directed by the mayor. This department shall be
supervised by the building official, appointed by the mayor. (Ord. 486, 1-11-
2005)
9-1-2: APPOINTMENT OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The mayor shall appoint an individual, partnership, corporation or other
business association or entity as the building official. The appointed building
official is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the
building, mechanical, fire and life safety and other codes adopted pursuant to
this chapter and such other ordinances and resolutions as directed by the mayor
and/or city council. All building code inspectors shall be certified as
provided by the Idaho Code. (Ord. 486, 1-11-2005)
9-1-3: FEES FOR PERMITS AND ASSOCIATED SERVICES:
The city shall adopt by resolution a fee schedule for building permits and
associated services (the "schedule"). The schedule shall contain, but not be
limited to, fees for permits and associated services required by this chapter.
Fees for other services and applications including other ordinances
administered by the building official may be added as deemed necessary by the
city. (Ord. 486, 1-11-2005)
9-1-4: CONTRACTOR'S REGISTRATION NUMBER:
No building permit will be issued without the contractor's registration number
being presented by the contractor, except when the permit applicant provides
evidence to the satisfaction of the building official that the applicant is
exempt from the registration requirements pursuant to title 54, chapter 52 of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 497, 2-21-2006)
9-1-5: PENALTIES; CIVIL REMEDIES:
A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or of the
standardized codes adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or incarcerated in the county jail for not more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B.   A separate violation is deemed to have occurred with respect to each
building or structure not in compliance with the codes adopted herein. Each day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed by this section, the city
may seek any civil remedies available to it, including, but not limited to,
injunctive relief to restrain conduct in violation of this chapter or compel
performance of duties established by this chapter.
D.   The city may further assess investigation fees, as provided in the uniform
building code, 1997 edition, "an investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued.
The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee. The
payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance
with all other provisions of this code nor any penalty prescribed by law," as
published by the International Conference of Building Officials. (Ord. 486, 1-
11-2005; amd. Ord. 497, 2-21-2006)
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
9-1A-1: Adoption Of Building Codes
9-1A-2: Amendments To Adopted Codes
9-1A-3: Metal Roofs, Materials
9-1A-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES:
A.   Adoption: The city hereby adopts the following building codes and
standards, and shall enforce them with regard to all construction and
development in the incorporated areas of the city:
   1.   The international building code, 2003 edition, and any subsequent
edition or supplement thereto, as published by the International Code Council,
including all rules promulgated by the Idaho building code board to provide
equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with disabilities act
accessibility guidelines and the federal housing act accessibility guidelines.
   2.   The international residential code, 2003 edition, parts I–IV, and part
IX, and any subsequent edition or supplement thereto, as published by the
International Code Council.
   3.   The international energy conservation code, 2003 edition, and any
subsequent edition or supplement thereto, as published by the International
Code Council. (Ord. 486, 1-11-2005)
B.   Updating Of Adopted Codes: The adopted versions of the codes specified in
subsection A of this section and modified in section
9-1A-2 of this article shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of
such codes as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho building code board
effective on January 1 the year following the adoption by the department of
building safety. (Ord. 486B, 7-3-2007)
C.   Exemptions: Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes
adopted herein but shall remain subject to placement requirements established
by zoning regulations. (Ord. 472, 10-15-2002)
D.   Copy On File: One copy of the building code shall be duly certified and
kept on file in the office of the city clerk for use and examination by the
public. (2003 Code)
9-1A-2: AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES:
A.   The following sections of the international residential code and the Idaho
residential code are hereby revised:
   1.   Section R101.1: Insert "city of Bonners Ferry".
   2.   Table R301.2: Insert:
      a.   Ground snow load = 68 pounds per square foot, minimum roof snow load
= 70 pounds per square foot.
      b.   Wind speed = 90 mph
      c.   Seismic design category = C
      d.   Weathering = Severe
      e.   Frost line depth = 24 inches
      f.   Termite = None to slight
      g.   Decay = None
      h.   Winter design temp = -10 degrees Fahrenheit
      i.   Ice barrier underlayment required: YES
   3.   Table R301.2(1), footnotes: Insert "New footnote: Regardless of
construction design standards as outlined in this chapter, one and two family
dwellings and townhouses not more than three (3) stories above grade plane in
height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more
than three (3) stories above grade plane in height shall not be constructed for
less than seventy (70) pounds per square foot snow load."
   4.   Table R301.2(1), footnotes: Insert "New footnote: “Manufactured homes
shall be constructed for a minimum snow load of not less than seventy (70)
pounds per square foot. Manufactured homes not meeting this standard are
required to have additional protective covering of not less than seventy (70)
pounds per square foot snow load.”
B.   The following sections of the international building code are hereby
revised:
   1.   Section 101.1: Insert: "city of Bonners Ferry".
   2.   Section 3409.2: Insert: "January 1, 2005".
(Ord. 486, 1-11-2005; amd. Ord. 486A, 7-18-2006; Ord. 620, 2-18-2025)
9-1A-3: METAL ROOFS, MATERIALS:
   When metal roofs are installed on existing or hereafter erected structures,
that portion of the material in the roof that faces the natural elements shall
be material that has been precolored by the manufacturer. This section shall
not apply to any existing or hereinafter erected structures in the industrial
zone.
(1959 Code § 4-1-2; amd. Ord. 486, 1-11-2005)
ARTICLE B. UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-1B-1: Adoption
9-1B-1: ADOPTION:
A.   Adopted: The latest edition of the uniform plumbing code (UPC) as adopted
by the state as it now is and as it hereafter may be amended or superseded is
hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city and the provisions thereof
shall apply to and control all plumbing work done within the city. (1959 Code §
4-2-1; amd. 2003 Code)
B.   Copy On File: One copy of the uniform plumbing code shall be duly
certified and kept on file in the office of the city clerk for use and
examination by the public. (2003 Code)
ARTICLE C. NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-1C-1: Adoption
9-1C-2: Damage Not Assumed By City
9-1C-1: ADOPTION:
A.   Adopted: The latest edition of the national electrical code (NEC) as
adopted by the state as it now is and as it hereafter may be amended or
superseded is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the city and the
provisions thereof shall apply to and control all electrical work done within
the city. (1959 Code § 4-3-1; amd. 2003 Code)
B.   Copy On File: One copy of the national electrical code shall be duly
certified and kept on file in the office of the city clerk for use and
examination by the public. (2003 Code)
9-1C-2: DAMAGE NOT ASSUMED BY CITY:
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any electrical
wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for damages to anyone
injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect therein; nor
shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by
reason of inspection authorized herein or certificate of inspection issued by
the clerk. (1959 Code § 4-3-2)
CHAPTER 2
HOUSE NUMBERS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Designation Of Street Numbers
9-2-2: Posting Of Designated Street Address
9-2-3: New Structures
9-2-4: Penalty
9-2-1: DESIGNATION OF STREET NUMBERS:
A.   Assigned By City: Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business
on all public streets shall be assigned by the city.
B.   Record: The city shall keep a record of all numbers assigned by ordinance
409. (1959 Code § 4-10-1)
9-2-2: POSTING OF DESIGNATED STREET ADDRESS:
A.   Notice Of Number Assigned: The owner or occupant or person in charge of
any house or building to which a number has been assigned (person) will be
notified, in writing, by the city of the number assigned to the same at any
time after the adoption of ordinance 409.
B.   Duty To Affix Number: Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of such
request and of such written notification from the city, the owner or occupant
or person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned
shall affix the number in a conspicuous place.
C.   Removal Of Conflicting Number: It shall be the duty of such person upon
affixing the new number to remove any different number which might be mistaken
for, or confused with, the number assigned to said structure by the city.
D.   Multiple Uses: Each principal building shall display the number assigned
to the frontage on which the address is based. In case a principal building is
occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit each separate
business or family dwelling unit may have a separate number.
E.   Manner Of Posting: Numerals indicating the official numbers for each
principal building or each front entrance to such buildings shall be posted in
a manner as to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the
address is based. (1959 Code § 4-10-2)
9-2-3: NEW STRUCTURES:
No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner
or developer has procured from the city the official number on the premises.
(1959 Code § 4-10-3)
9-2-4: PENALTY:
In the event that the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or
building refuses to comply with the terms of this chapter by failing to affix
the number assigned within sixty (60) days after notification, or by failing
within said period of sixty (60) days to remove any old numbers affixed to such
house, or house entrance or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number
assigned thereto, that person shall be punished as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1959 Code § 4-10-4; amd. 2003 Code)
TITLE 10
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
10-1-1: Purpose
10-1-2: Applicability
10-1-3: Best Interest
10-1-4: Definitions
10-1-5: Property Of The City
10-1-6: Eligible Services
10-1-7: Expansion Of Services Outside City Limits, Not Allowed
10-1-8: Capitalization Charge, New Accounts, Previous Accounts, New Service
Connections
10-1-9: Deposit Required For Service Connections
10-1-10: Security Deposit On New Accounts
10-1-11: Billing For Services
10-1-12: Payments
10-1-13: Closed Accounts, Delinquent Accounts, Disconnections
10-1-14: Overdue And Inactive Accounts
10-1-15: Reserved
10-1-16: Meters
10-1-17: Meter Upgrades Required
10-1-18: Public Utility System Construction Or Extension
10-1-19: Application For Utility Construction And/Or Extension
10-1-20: Enforcement
10-1-21: Penalties
10-1-22: Appeals/Mediation
10-1-23: Standards For Administration, Adopted By Reference
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, the city of
Bonners Ferry deems it necessary to control the use and connection to the
municipal water, wastewater and electrical and waste disposal systems. To
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public and to comply with
the city's obligations under law to provide an equitable system of rates and
fees with the view toward attempting to make the city's utility systems self-
supporting, there is established a system of periodic rates and fees for the
purpose of equitably imposing upon all users the costs and expenses of
operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the municipal water,
wastewater and electrical systems. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned utility systems;
provides for eligibility, monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; allowances for setting rates,
billing and recovering costs; and requires user reporting. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-3: BEST INTEREST:
The city reserves the right to deny connection, expansion of or modification
to, the city utilities systems where it is deemed by the city, or its
affiliates, to not be in the best interests of utility or its customers to do
so. In execution of this section the city may provide written communication
indicating the reasons for which it may or may not be in the best interest or
the City Council shall provide so in the form of an official record. (Ord. 608,
6-6-2023)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used within the entire Title 10, the following words and terms shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
ACCOUNT HOLDER: That person who is listed on the account and/or is responsible
for payments on the utility account.
CAPITALIZATION FEE or CHARGE: A one-time charge paid by new development to
finance construction of public facilities needed to serve them. These fees are
intended to provide funds to the utility to finance all or a part of the
capital improvements needed to serve new customer growth on the utility.
CITY: The city of Bonners Ferry, Boundary County, Idaho, or its authorized or
designated agent, representative or deputy.
CITY ENGINEER: The engineers appointed by and acting for the council, who shall
be an Idaho registered civil engineer.
CONTIGUOUS LANDS: Those lands adjacent to the city's incorporated boundary.
CONTRACT SERVICE AREA: That area in which electric customers are served outside
city limits by contract or agreement.
CUSTOMER or USER: The owner of a residence, building, structure, or tenant of a
single service connection of a residence, building or structure who has made
application and who has been accepted under the terms of this chapter and who
receives utility from the city. Those structures with multiple connection
services the owner shall be considered the customer or user.
DOOR HANGER: A city form or notice, wherein the account holder or customer is
notice of a delinquent account and a city staff member placed the notice at the
physical property where the account is located.
EDU - EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT: The equivalent dwelling unit is the basis the
city shall use to establish initial capitalization charges for new or expanded
utility services. Each utility shall establish the EDU for which fees will be
charged within the chapter regulating the utility.
EXPANSION OF SERVICE: Expansion of service includes the upsizing of service
line(s), extension of water or sewer mains, additional water or sewer taps,
connections, or capacity for any parcel of land including the expansion or
addition of new buildings.
FEE FOR SERVICE: Any fee for service set forth and paid to the City shall be to
provide sufficient revenue to pay the operation and maintenance, to repay
bonded indebtedness and provide for the reserve fund for said system.
FIXTURE UNIT: A unit measurement for computing waste flow volumes for each
plumbing fixture as set forth in the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) as then
adopted by the city in Title 9 of this code.
IMPLIED CONSENT: Calid consent to annex lands connected to water or wastewater
collection system operated by the city if the connection was requested in
writing by the owner, or the owner's authorized agent, or the connection was
completed before July 1, 2008.
INACTIVE SERVICE OR ACCOUNT: An account which has been disconnected and
inactive for thirty (30) days or more. Inactive accounts have been placed in
inactive status by the customer or the property owner. An inactive service or
account is still liable for monthly base rate charges, even if no utility use
is consumed.
LANDOWNER: That person(s) who is listed as the current owner of the property by
deed.
MAY: Is permissive.
OWNER: Property owner or authorized person who is responsible for maintenance
and care of private property.
SERVICE AREA: The city of Bonners Ferry incorporated city boundaries or by
contract with the property owner.
SERVICE CONNECTION: Is the connection owned by the individual property or
account owner. It is the lateral connection from the city owned utility line to
the property or building.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person who has been hired by the city to manage the
respective utility department.
USPS: United States Postal Service. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023; amd. Ord. 616, - -
2023)
10-1-5: PROPERTY OF THE CITY:
   A.   All public sewer mains, pipelines, conduits, catch basins, manholes,
clean outs, sewer interceptors and sewer outfalls, lift stations, pumps,
structures, mechanical equipment and facilities for the treatment and disposal
of sewerage or sewage byproducts located in any street, alley or easement in
the city shall belong to the city.
   B.   Lateral sewer lines, as defined herein, even within the public right-
of-way, shall not be owned or maintained by the city and shall be owned and
maintained by the property owner served by the line, including maintenance of
the main service tap.
   C.   The city shall be responsible for that portion of the utility from the
main line to the meter. The property/account owner shall be responsible for
everything from the meter to the structure. The city shall own and maintain any
meter. Any upgrades or changes to the meter shall be done so at the direction
of the city, unless otherwise provided for within the chapter. Any cost
associated with meter replacement may be charged to the account holder.
   D.   If no meter exists, then the city shall not have responsibility beyond
the city utility main line. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-6: ELIGIBLE SERVICES:
   A.   Eligible Properties:
      1.   Only those properties located within the city's service area shall
be eligible for new water or sewer service connections by the city water and
sewer department. Existing services located outside of the city's service area
shall be allowed to continue, provided they do not require an expansion of
service as defined.
      2.   The city shall not provide water or sewer by contract outside of the
city limits.
      3.   Those properties receiving city water or sewer services outside city
limits, imply consent to annex by receipt of such services. Any future
annexation shall be done in accordance with all Idaho statutes.
      4.   Electric Service: Any property which can be served by the city
through agreement or contract.
   B.   Service Area:
      1.   The city services area for water and sewer services is the
incorporated boundaries of the city of Bonners Ferry.
      2.   The city service area for electric shall be by contract or agreement
with the property owner and the city when outside of the city limits.
   C.   Lands Contiguous To Service Area: Lands contiguous to the incorporated
city limits shall first be annexed before sewer or water service is provided or
extended to those properties. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-7: EXPANSION OF SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS, NOT ALLOWED:
   A.   No existing water or sewer service located outside of the city service
area shall be expanded without first being incorporated into the city limits.
   B.   Expansion Of Service: The City Administrator and/or City Engineer shall
have final decision over whether circumstances around a property qualifies as
an expansion of service.
      1.   In deciding as to whether a property qualifies as an expansion of
services the City Administrator or Engineer shall first determine if the
circumstances around such expansion of services meets the definition as
provided in section
10-1-3 .
      2.   If the determination has been made that an expansion of service will
occur, then the City Administrator or City Engineer shall require the property
first be annexed before receiving any city water or sewer services.
      3.   If the determination has been made that an expansion of services has
not or will not occur, then the city administrator or engineer shall document
to the requestor the decision along with those findings in which the
determinations is made.
      4.   Any final, written administrative decision made pursuant to this
title shall be considered final unless appealed by an affected person to city
council. The appeal process shall follow the same standards as listed at
10-1-20 , of Bonners Ferry City Code. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-8: CAPITALIZATION CHARGE, NEW ACCOUNTS, PREVIOUS ACCOUNTS, NEW SERVICE
CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Capitalization Charge: Any new development on to the city's system is
subject to a capitalization charge. This fee is developed by the city and
charged to the customer or requestor at the time the services is applied for.
The purpose of the capitalization fee is to assess new customers their
proportionate share of the cost of infrastructure required to provide them
service by the utility.
      1.   The capitalization fee or charge shall be set forth by the city
council on the official fee schedule. The fee may vary depending on each
utility.
      2.   Where the city has not contemplated a new use as established on the
use table by the Appendices of this title, the City Engineer shall set a EDU
rate for capitalization charges using their professional judgement and what is
in the best interest of the city.
   B.   New Accounts: Any new customer shall request a new account by using a
city utility service form or application. The application, once prepared, shall
be submitted to the city with any and all documents that the city requires in
order to process the application. Those can include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Warranty Deed or lease agreement;
      2.   Photo identification;
      3.   Required fees and deposits set forth on the official fee schedule.
   C.   Previous Accounts: A customer who has a prior account with the city
that has been closed or retired and has a balance owing or a balance in
collection, shall pay all past-due balances before opening a new account with
the city.
   D.   New Service Connections: A customer may seek a new service connection
on a form provided by the city. The city has the right to review, approve or
deny service connections if it deems it not in the interest of the city to
allow such connection, in concert with any standards or requirements within the
specific utility. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023; amd. Ord 616, - - 2023)
10-1-9: DEPOSIT REQUIRED FOR SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
The Departments of water, sewer, and electricity, or any one or more of them,
may require advance deposits before providing customer service. The deposit is
used by the utility to schedule, purchase, and otherwise prepare for the
service line connection to the city system. The deposit will be shown as a line
of credit on the final invoice by the city for the actual cost of connecting to
the city utility. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-10: SECURITY DEPOSIT ON NEW ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Security Deposit Required: All new utility accounts are required to
submit a security deposit on the account up setup, unless an acceptable letter
of credit is provided as described in subsection C of this section, or the
customer enrolls in autopay.
      The deposit will be collected at the time of application, of which the
amount shall be set forth by the official fee schedule as adopted by resolution
by the council.
   B.   Payment Arrangement: If payment arrangement is needed on the deposit, a
minimum of fifty percent of the deposit amount will be collected at the time of
application and the remaining amount by the due date of the first billing cycle
on the account. Payment of deposit will take priority and the remaining amount
will be applied to utility service balance.
   C.   Security Deposit Wavier: The security deposit will only be waived on
accounts if the customer has the previous twelve (12) months of consistent
full, on-time payment history with the city or the city has received some form
of communication acceptable to the city, from the previous utility company,
documenting the previous twelve (12) months of consistent full, on-time payment
history. This letter must show historic payment obligations for a like-sized
account.
   D.   Return Of Deposit: After twelve (12) continuous months of non-
delinquent payment of the monthly bill by the customer for the utility
requiring a deposit, such deposit shall be applied to the customer's account.
If the customer closes an account, the deposit is applied at closing. Refunds
are mailed to the customer if the account balance results in a credit and there
are no other active accounts of the customer.
   E.   Interest: No interest will be paid to customers on security deposits.
   F.   Bankruptcy: If a customer has previously declared bankruptcy while a
utility customer of the City of Bonners Ferry, the security deposit required
shall double. Additionally, the deposit shall not be refunded to the account
until there has been twenty-four (24) months of full, on-time full payments or
when the account is closed. (Ord. 537, 12-3-2013; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-11: BILLING FOR SERVICES:
The City shall reserve the right to bill for monthly services for each utility
and shall do so in accordance with the City's billing policy as adopted by
resolution by City Council.
   A.   Non-Sufficient Fund (NSF) Policy: When the City receives an NSF for
auto-pay or a check, the payment is cancelled from accounts receivable and the
customer is charged a NSF fee in accordance with the city's official fee
schedule. The City Clerk will advise the Police Department of NSF checks when
appropriate. The City is not responsible for any other NSF fee charged to the
accountholder by any other entity which charges the customer a NSF fee.
   B.   Notification: The Clerk will notify the account holder or customer of
the NSF. In the event that the Clerk is unable to contact the person(s), he/she
shall then notify the account holder by means of a door hanger to inform them
of the NSF.
   C.   Landlord/Rental Dwelling Transfer Of Service: Upon a tenant vacating a
property the utility accounts shall revert back to the landlord's name or
property manager. The landlord/property manager may contact the City at any
time to request the status of the tenant's account.
   D.   Tenant's Liability: If the service is placed in the landlord's name and
the tenant has outstanding utility bills, the tenant will be subject to the
collection process.
   E.   Meter Reading: Meters are read monthly or when a final read is
necessary.
   F.   Estimated Billing: When the City is unable to gain reasonable access to
a meter or when the meter collection system fails, the city will estimate the
reading for a billing period based on the historical usage of that service.
   G.   Retired Service: A service may be retired by written request of the
property owner. When a service is retired, meters will be removed. Request for
service at a location from which a service has been retired shall be required
to install a new service. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-12: PAYMENTS:
   A.   Due Date: Payments for charges on the utility bill shall be made-due on
the thirtieth of each month of that month's bill date, or as provided for in
the city's utility billing policy adopted by council. February's bill shall be
due on the last day of the month, or as otherwise provided for within the
city's utility billing policy adopted by council.
   B.   Payment Arrangements: Customers who cannot make full payment shall make
payment arrangements in accordance with this chapter. Failure to do so may
result in the account being delinquent and being disconnected, as provided for
in accordance with this chapter.
   C.   Requests For Billing: Customers may request to be billed in any method
as provided for within the city's utility billing policy. If the customer makes
no request, the customer shall be sent notice of charges through USPS mail.
   D.   Receipt Of Bill Is Not Cause For Non-Payment: Not receiving an invoice
or bill from the city via the approved or requested method does not deprive the
customer of paying any charges accrued on the account. Failure to make payment,
even if the customer claims it was not received, is grounds for the city to
take action to disconnect the account or send the account holder to collections
in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-13: CLOSED ACCOUNTS, DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS, DISCONNECTIONS:
   A.   Customer Requested Closure:
      1.   To close an account, a customer must complete a request to
discontinue utility services on a form provided by the city. The account will
remain in the customer's name until the city has received the completed form.
      2.   The customer will continue to receive a bill for account charges
until the account is paid for in full or turned over to a collection agency.
      3.   Accounts closed due to non-use, delinquency, or at the request of
the customer, may require the service to be updated to any new standards the
city has adopted since the account originated.
   B.   Closure By Non-Use:
      1.   When an account has been inactive for thirty (30) days, the account
will be closed and any past due balances sent to collection, pursuant to
standards adopted by resolution.
      2.   Reconnection of an account closed due to non-use will require a new
application and payment of all associated fees and deposits, including any past
fees not collected or due to the city.
   C.   Delinquent Accounts:
      1.   Account or balances over an amount set by Councils (see official fee
schedule) and past due by thirty (30) days, shall be considered a delinquent
account.
      2.   An account that is not brought current shall be disconnected in
accordance with subsection E of this section.
   D.   Payment Arrangements:
      1.   A customer may request a payment arrangement for delinquent
accounts, but first must pay a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the past
due amount.
      2.   Any remaining balance of the past due amount will be due within
thirty (30) days of the payment arrangement being made.
         a.   No new payment arrangements will be allowed if the previous
payment arrangement was not paid or completed in the time frame accepted by the
city.
         b.   If the payment arrangement is not completed by the account
holder, then a door hanger is then placed on the address of the delinquent
account.
         c.   Any aggrieved account holder may appeal the staffs decision in
accordance with section 10-1-20 of this chapter.
   E.   Disconnections And Reconnections:
      1.   The city may immediately and without notice disconnect services for
the following reasons:
         a.   Broken payment arrangements
         b.   Diversion or unauthorized use of city utility services.
         c.   Discovery of a condition determined by the City to be hazardous.
         d.   Violation of and/or noncompliance with any applicable Federal,
State or other local laws, regulations and codes.
         e.   Discovery of meter tampering.
         f.   Other circumstances where public health and/or safety is at risk.
      2.   Disconnections for routine maintenance during normal working hours
by the request of the customer can be made by the account holder or customer at
no cost to the customer, provided the disconnect can be completed within two
(2) working hours in a single business day and can be accommodated within ten
(10) working days of the request.
      3.   Disconnection for routine maintenance outside of normal business
hours or have to be accommodated within a ten (10) working daytime frame, or
that take longer than two (2) working hours in a business day, will be charged
actual costs of labor expended for such work to be completed.
      4.   Delinquent accounts shall be disconnected after failure to make an
account current in payment after notice is provided by the city.
      5.   City staff shall cause the delinquent account to be shut off or the
meter removed for accounts that remain delinquent. The city may at any time
remove the meter from the property if the account is not brought current.
      6.   A customer can delay termination of service for an additional thirty
(30) days from the scheduled disconnect date by obtaining a certificate from a
doctor or public health official stating that a medical emergency would exist
of a medical condition would be aggravated if the service is turned off. The
certificate must be signed by the person diagnosing the medical conditions and
must name the person affected.
      7.   Reconnection of a property after being disconnected for non-payment
shall not be re-energized or reconnected until the service is brought up to
current Idaho State or National Code requirements, or any city standards.
      8.   All charges, fines or penalties shall be paid in full before
reconnection or account activity is reinstated. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023; amd. Ord.
617, 8-20-2024)
10-1-14: OVERDUE AND INACTIVE ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Inactive accounts, as defined in section
10-1-3 , are still liable for monthly base rates as provided for within the
official fee schedule adopted by the city council from time to time.
   B.   In the event that a utility's customer is listed as the debtor on two
(2) or more accounts, if one such account is no longer active or in-use but a
balance is owed on such account, the city may transfer the balance of the
inactive account to another active account of the same customer, the inactive
account may be closed, and the balance shall be due in accordance with the
terms of the active account. (Ord. 537, 12-3-2013; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-15: RESERVED:
10-1-16: METERS:
   A.   Ownership Of Meters: All water meters installed or accepted by the city
shall remain the property of the city and may be removed or replaced by the
city at any time.
   B.   Maintenance Of Meters: The city shall maintain and repair all the
meters. Where replacement, repair or adjustment of any meter is rendered
necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner, occupant or tenant,
any expense incurred by the city thereby shall be charged and collected against
the customer. Water services may be discontinued until the meter is repaired.
   C.   Meter Location And Access: Meters shall be located near the customer's
property line closest to the street where the source water main is located or
as directed by the superintendent of the utility. Adjacent areas next to meters
shall be kept free of trees, shrubbery, or other obstructions, including
debris, snow or other items which may bury the meter. Failure to comply with
this ordinance may result in charges for locating, cleaning or removing
vegetation if cost is incurred by the city.
   D.   Meter Adjustments: Any adjustment whatsoever of a meter shall only be
done with the express written consent of the city official in charge of the
water department. Furthermore, all city water system taps shall be by the city
or under the supervision of the water superintendent.
   E.   Meters In Structures: No meter shall be located within a structure
without written approval by the city. If a meter is located within a private
structure, the city shall obtain free right of access at all times to said
meter. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-17: METER UPGRADES REQUIRED:
   A.   Notwithstanding specific requirements within the utilities chapters,
any account which is shut-off, discontinued, retired or otherwise removed from
the city system shall be upgraded to the city's current system, if it is
otherwise determined to be nonconforming by the city.
   B.   Any cost associated with an upgrade shall be borne by the account
holder. If the request is made by the account holder to install a new meter,
the city shall bill the account holder for all costs associated with the
installation and upgrade.
   C.   No service shall be reinstalled or activated until such measures,
meters or other required elements of the system upgrades have been completed
and installed to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-18: PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION OR EXTENSION:
   A.   Licensed Contractors: Only Idaho Public Works licensed contractors
shall be authorized to perform the work of public utility construction within
the city. The contractor must also be licensed at the appropriate level based
on construction cost and Idaho Statute requirements. All terms and conditions
of the approval issued by the city to the applicant shall be binding on the
contractor.
   B.   Permission To Extend: The mayor and council may authorize the
construction or extension of public utility in accordance with this Title. No
person shall construct, reconstruct, extend or connect to any public sewer
without first obtaining written approval from the city and paying all fees and
connection charges and furnishing bonds as required therein. Any person or
entity constructing within the city's rights-of-way shall first obtain a right-
of-way permit from the city.
   C.   Adopted Design Standards: Staff shall require compliance with any
specific standards of the utilities as adopted from time-to-time by resolution
of the city council.
   D.   Construction Agreement: The city council may enter into development and
construction agreements with the landowner, developer and/or installer to
ensure the public system is protected overall.
   E.   Adoption Of ISPWC: The City by reference hereto adopts the latest
edition, and subsequent editions thereto, the Idaho Standards for Public Work
Contractors, (ISPWC) for City utility construction. All utility extensions or
modification shall be designed, constructed and installed to this standard.
(Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-19: APPLICATION FOR UTILITY CONSTRUCTION AND/OR EXTENSION:
   A.   Application: An application with completed construction plans showing
profiles and specifications, complying with all applicable ordinances, rules
and standards, showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate
survey of the ground prepared by an Idaho registered civil engineer shall be
submitted to the city for review.
   B.   Plan Approval: The application, together with the plans, profiles and
specifications shall be examined by the city engineer who shall approve them as
filed or require them to be modified as they deem necessary for proper
installation.
   C.   State Submission And Approval: Once plans and specifications are
approved by the City Engineer, the applicant must then submit the plans and
specifications to the respective Idaho State office, if applicable, for
approval.
   D.   Issuance To Construct: When the City Engineer and/or the State of Idaho
is satisfied that the proposed work is proper and the plans, profiles and
specifications are sufficient and correct, he/she shall order the issuance of a
permit predicated upon the payment of all connection charges and fees, and
furnishing bonds as required by the city. The permit shall prescribe such terms
and conditions as the council finds necessary in the public interest.
   E.   Compliance With Regulations: Any person constructing within a city
street shall comply with all state and city laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement, opening, barricading,
lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving thereof and shall
obtain all permits and pay fees required by the department having jurisdiction.
   F.   Modification Of Standards/As-Builts:
      1.   The City Engineer may permit modifications or may require higher
standards where unusual conditions are encountered.
      2.   As-built plans are required to be submitted to the city. No less
than two (2) sets of as-built drawings showing the actual location of all mains
extensions, wyes and laterals shall be filed with the city before final
acceptance of the work is completed.
   G.   Excavations:
      1.   Safety Devices: The applicant or contractor shall maintain such
barriers, lights and signs as are necessary to always give warning to the
public that a utility is under construction and of each dangerous condition to
be encountered as a result thereof. They shall also likewise protect the public
in the use of the sidewalk against any such conditions in connection with the
construction of the utility.
      2.   Restorage of the Excavated Area: Streets, sidewalks, pathways and
other property disturbed in the course of the work shall be reinstalled in a
manner satisfactory to the city.
   H.   Testing Of Completed Utility Line: Before any acceptance of any sewer,
water or electrical line by the city and prior to the admission of any services
into the city system, the utility line shall be tested and shall be completed
in full compliance with all city and state regulations and to the satisfaction
of the City Engineer.
   I.   Sewer Lift/Water Booster Stations: In areas and subdivisions where
elevations do not allow gravity flow to, sewer lift or water booster stations
shall be required. Required sewer lift stations and/or water booster stations
must be constructed to the city standards and policies as adopted or amended
from time to time. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-20: ENFORCEMENT:
The city may take all measures as deemed fit to ensure the public system is
protected from violations of this Title.
   A.   Notification Of Violations: Whenever the City finds that any persons
who have violated the prohibitions of this Title, the City may cause to be
served upon such person a written notice (either personally or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested) stating the nature of the alleged
violation. Within fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the
person(s) shall respond personally or in writing or by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, to the City, advising of its position with
respect to the allegations.
   B.   Plans For Correction: Thereafter, the person shall be given the
opportunity to meet with a representative of the City to ascertain the veracity
of the allegations and establish a plan for the satisfactory correction of the
violations and preclusion of a recurrence thereof. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-21: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this Title shall be
served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
provided a reasonable time limit, but in any event not to exceed ninety (90)
days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   The city shall have the authority to issue warnings and invoke
administrative sanctions as deemed proper by the city. Including, but not
limited to, disconnection of the utility from the property.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by the city by reason
of such violation. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-22: APPEALS/MEDIATION:
   A.   Appeals And Review: Any person aggrieved by a ruling of City,
respecting the interpretation of this act or any officer, department of the
city concerning the interpretation of this act may take an appeal to the
council in the following manner:
      1.   Such appellant shall, within fifteen (15) days after staff makes the
decision, file a written notice with the city clerk, together with a filing fee
as hereinafter required. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the council
all papers constituting the record upon which this action was taken.
      2.   The council, upon receipt of any notice of appeal, shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal.
      3.   The council shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable
time but in no event more than forty-five (45) days after its final adjournment
of the hearing. At the hearing, parties in interest may appear in person or by
agent or attorney and testify and offer evidence and material relevant to the
issue.
      4.   The council may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as, in its opinion,
ought to have been made on the premises. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-1-23: STANDARDS FOR ADMINISTRATION, ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The city shall, from time to time, adopt certain policies and procedures for
administrating the utilities, which shall be modified as needed to best manage
the respective department. The policies and procedures, as included by
reference herein, shall serve as the city basis for directing staff and
customers on connections, extensions, billing and other day-to-day activities.
Those policies include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Electric Service Standards;
   B.   Water Service Standards;
   C.   Sanitary Sewer Standards;
   D.   Road Standards. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
CHAPTER 2
WATER
SECTION:
10-2-1: Department Established
10-2-2: Purpose; General Provisions
10-2-3: Definitions
10-2-4: Eligible Service
10-2-5: Property Of The City; Unlawful To Sell
10-2-6: Property Of The Customer
10-2-7: Required To Connect
10-2-8: Authority To Charge Rates
10-2-9: Moving Water Service Fee   
10-2-10: Billing Relief For Water Leaks
10-2-11: City Not Liable For Damages; Responsibility For Repairs
10-2-12: Right To Turn Off Water
10-2-13: Waste Prohibited; No Contamination
10-2-14: Injury To Water System
10-2-15: Inspection Of Premise
10-2-16: Application For Service
10-2-17: Use Stated
10-2-18: Arrangement Of Service Lines
10-2-19: Branch Service
10-2-20: Cross Connections Prohibited
10-2-21: Backflow Prevention And Testing Required
10-2-22: Public Water System Construction Or Extension
10-2-23: Fire Hydrants
10-2-24: Violations, Enforcement, Penalties And Appeals
Appendix A: Water EDU Table
10-2-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
A water department is hereby established. The officers and other employees
shall consist of a Superintendent and other such personnel as the council may
from time to time deem necessary for the efficient administration of the same.
(Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-2: PURPOSE; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A.   Establish reasonable rules and regulations for the operation of the water
department of the City.
B.   Establish reasonable fees to be charged to customers receiving water
service and provide fair, orderly, and efficient procedures for collection and
termination of delinquent accounts.
C.   Establish a fair and equitable means of having all persons who hook into
or receive direct and immediate benefit from water mains throughout the city by
requiring owners to participate in the capital cost and maintenance of water
mains fronting and providing benefits to properties and the general operation
of the water system, including fire protection and other health and safety
benefits.
D.   Establish fair and equitable charge for the actual cost of material and
labor expended by the City whenever City crews install water service or do
maintenance for a customer.
E.   Protect public health and welfare by maintaining quality water to the city
and controlling cross-connections or other sources or potential sources of
contamination to the water supply.
F.   Provide clean, efficient, and adequate water system for residents and
customers of the city. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
 
                              The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or
BACKFLOW:                     substances into the distributing pipes of a
                              potable supply of water from any source or
                              sources other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow preventer which is testable.
                              The presence of any foreign substance (organic,
                              inorganic, radiological or biological) in water
CONTAMINATION:                that tends to degrade its quality so as to
                              constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of
                              the water.
CROSS CONNECTION:             Any physical connection between the city's system
                              and another water supply.
 
 
                     An unexpected event not routinely occurring in the course
                     of the operation of the system resulting from damage to or
                     failure of the system or some part thereof or a user's
                     system attached thereto and supplied by the system or an
                     event in the area surrounding the system that either
EMERGENCY:           causes damage to or contamination of the system or
                     threatens such damage or contamination. Or an event that
                     requires a major portion of the water delivery capacity of
                     the system be diverted and applied to the protection of
                     persons or property against an event damaging or
                     threatening damage to the health and welfare of persons or
                     property served by the system.
                     Any circumstances resulting in the actual or reasonably
                     expected demand for water exceeding the capacity for the
SHORTAGE:            system to deliver water to the users and maintain
                     sufficient reserves for the public health and safety of
                     persons and/or property served by the system.
WATER SERVICE LINES: That portion of water line that connects the building or
                     structure water to the city main. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
 
10-2-4: ELIGIBLE SERVICE:
A.   Eligible properties as defined in section
10-1-5  of this title are eligible for new services. Existing services located
outside of the city's service area shall be allowed to continue, provided they
do not require an expansion of service as defined in section
10-1-6  of this title.
B.   Lands contiguous to the incorporated city limits shall first be annexed
before water service is extended or expanded to those properties.
C.   Expansion of service includes upsizing of service line(s), extension of
water mains, additional water lateral taps or connections for a parcel of land
or the addition of a new building.
D.   Pursuant to section
10-1-6 , the City Administrator and/or City Engineer shall have final decision
over whether a circumstance qualifies as an expansion of service. (Ord. 608, 6-
6-2023)
10-2-5: PROPERTY OF THE CITY; UNLAWFUL TO SELL:
A.   In addition to those standards listed at
10-1-4 , the City shall have exclusive ownership, management, and control of
the City water system and shall have exclusive ownership, management, and
control of the supply and distribution of water to the inhabitants of the City.
The City may make such rules and regulations as are necessary for the complete
management, control, distribution, and supply of water within and without the
City.
B.   It shall be unlawful for users to resell or otherwise distribute city
water.
C.   Connections from the main to the water meter are installed and maintained
by the city and kept within its exclusive control. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-6: PROPERTY OF THE CUSTOMER:
A.   Water service lines as defined here from the meter to the structure,
location, or building shall be the property and ownership of the customer.
(Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-7: REQUIRED TO CONNECT:
A.   New houses, buildings, or properties within two hundred feet (200') shall
connect to and use water from the public system.
B.   No building permit shall be issued until evidence is submitted that the
owner has obtained a permit to construct a private water supply or connect to a
public water system.
C.   New subdivisions within city limits shall be required to connect to the
public water system for each lot within the subdivision.
D.   All existing houses, buildings, or properties served by a private water
supply shall abandon the private water supply and connect to the public water
system once public water becomes available within two hundred feet (200'). The
disconnection of a private supply shall be inspected and approved by the City.
Cross-connection is not permitted.
E.   Once connected to the City water system, it shall be unlawful to
disconnect.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the use of the city water as a primary source of
irrigation in new development is prohibited, and use of irrigation water is
required. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-8: AUTHORITY TO CHARGE RATES:
A.   All Real Property Subject To Rates: All real property, with or without
buildings, shall be subject to the water rates so long as a service pipe (i.e.,
hook-on) is in place.
B.   The City shall charge a rate as established on the official fee schedule
and shall do so in accordance with the billing policy as adopted by resolution
of the City.
C.   Water Meters: Water meters shall be used to determine water charges for
all water customers, unless technical circumstances prohibit the use of them.
In this event, a nonmetered flat rate shall be levied until such time as the
technical issues are resolved.
D.   All water meters installed or accepted by the city shall remain the
property of the city and may be removed or replaced by the city at any time.
E.   The city shall have the authority to charge capitalization fees for water
based on the adopted table listed as Appendix A of this Title. (Ord. 552, 11-
17-2015; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023; Ord. 616, - - 2023)
10-2-9: MOVING WATER SERVICE FEE:
A.   There shall be reasonable charge for time and materials for the moving of
a water service after original installation is made on property.
B.   The applicant shall make an application, on a form provided by the city,
to request movement of the water service. Should the move not be in the best
interest of the city, the water superintendent shall be authorized to deny such
movement of service and declare in writing the reasons for the denial.
C.   The city shall charge the customer who requests the change, all time and
material as well as equipment used in the move. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-10: BILLING RELIEF FOR WATER LEAKS:
A.   When a major water leak is discovered on the customer's lines the City
will provide bill relief under the following conditions.
   1.   Only for the billing cycle in which the leak is detected.
   2.   The leak must be external to any structures.
   3.   Not greater than ½ of the amount in excess of the normal water usage,
as estimated by the City
   4.   The customer must notify City Hall within thirty (30) days of the
billing date.
   5.   The customer must provide a detailed explanation, in writing, of the
conditions.
   6.   If the leak is caused by customer negligence, the City will not absorb
any of the loss. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-11:   CITY NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS:
A.   The City shall not be liable for damages caused by interruptions of water
supply, scarcity of water, accidents to water works or mains, or during the
time of alterations, additions or repairs or for any other unavoidable cause.
Nothing herein is intended to create any private duty to any customer to create
a private right of action against the city on account of any failure by the
city or its officers, agents or employees to provide water service or comply
with the provisions of this Chapter.
B.   All damage done to the city's water system, such as breaking pipes, water
meters, fire hydrants or any other equipment, shall be repaired or replaced by
the city and charges for the same will be made to the person or persons
incurring the damage. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-12: RIGHT TO TURN OFF WATER:
A.   The city may turn off water within the city water system as a whole,
portion or single user when deemed necessary to maintain or repair the water
system or when ordered to do so by the Mayor or City Council.
B.   Notification of water shut off may or may not come with much warning when
in emergency. However, the City will notify as soon as possible when shutoffs
occur and how long the anticipated shut off will last. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-13: WASTE PROHIBITED; NO CONTAMINATION:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit water to run or waste. All
outlets must be kept closed except during the time which water is being drawn
for necessary use. Letting the water run to prevent freezing in cold weather or
to keep water cool in warm weather is unlawful and is prohibited unless such
acts are required by the water department. The owner of any premises shall keep
their faucets, closets and other fixtures, and his pipes to the curb line in
good repair and free from leaks. (1959 Code § 3-1-6)
B.   No person shall contaminate or befoul any reservoir, stream or watershed,
spring or other source from which the supply of water for the city is obtained,
nor any pipe, fountain or any other device forming a part of the city water
system. (1959 Code § 3-1-7; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-14: INJURY TO WATER SYSTEM:
A.   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage or destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is a part of the water system.
B.   Any authorized work that results in damage to the water system shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent or city engineer, with the
cost being borne by the applicant or authorized person. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-15: INSPECTION OF PREMISE:
Upon such reasonable notice, inspection of service or customer lines shall be
provided to authorized city personnel to all places supplied with water from
the city water system. Failure to consent to a legitimate and reasonable
request may provide reason for the city to turn off water. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-16: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE:
A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, expand or
make any connection to any water main or service pipe through which water is
supplied by the city to water consumers or to interfere or tamper in any manner
with such mains or pipes or to use any water supplied by the city without first
having made application to the city and paying the service fee as set forth on
the adopted fee schedule.
B.   Contents Of Application: The applicant must state fully and truthfully all
purposes for which water is to be used and must agree to conform to the rules
and regulations as a condition for the use of water. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-17: USE STATED:
No person supplied with water from the city mains shall be entitled to use it
for any purposes other than those stated in their application, or to supply it
in any way to other persons or property. Should the owner or occupant of any
premises desire additional outlets or fixtures or desire to use water for a
purpose not stated in the original application, a new application must be made,
and a new permit obtained from the city. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-18: ARRANGEMENT OF SERVICE LINES:
A.   The service lines must be so arranged that the supply to each building,
business, place or tract of land shall be controlled by a separate meter placed
near the property line, unless a different arrangement is first authorized in
writing by the city.
B.   Where water is already supplied through one service to several buildings,
places or tracts, the city may, at its discretion, decline to furnish water
until separate services are provided or continue the supply on condition that
one person shall pay for all the same service. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-19: BRANCH SERVICE:
No service connection serving more than one customer shall be made, except with
written permission granted by the city and only for good cause. Such permission
may only be granted where common ownership of the multiple connections and
billing is made to that owner, not individual tenants or other parties in
possession of the property. If common ownership is terminated, then each
connection must be separately connected. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-20: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
A.   Cross connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
safety are prohibited except when and where, as approved by the authority
having jurisdiction, suitable protection is installed, tested annually by a
tester who is licensed in the state of Idaho and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
B.   Cross connections shall include, but are not limited to:
   1.   Any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste
pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or any unapproved source or system. Furthermore,
it is any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in
wastewater and/or any other source of contamination.
   2.   Any other connection where the public water system is connected,
directly or indirectly, to any other system which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water system; or
   3.   As provided in any state of Idaho regulations relating to public water
systems. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-21: BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND TESTING REQUIRED:
A.   Required: An appropriate and adequate backflow prevention assembly is
required to be installed when the city determines that such an assembly is
necessary due to the nature and the extent of the activity on the premises to
prevent cross connection, or when required by state of Idaho regulations
relating to public water systems. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be
selected from sources deemed acceptable by the Idaho department of
environmental quality.
B.   Testing Requirements:
   1.   Each backflow prevention assembly shall be tested by a certified tester
approved by the state of Idaho upon installation or repairs and after being
moved and shall be inspected annually, or more often when successive
inspections indicate failure, to ensure that it functions properly. The tester
shall attach a tag stating the tester's name and date of satisfactory test to
the assembly.
   2.   The assembly owner shall provide the city of Bonners Ferry a copy of
the test results.
C.   New Service: For new connections, suitable protection must be installed,
when necessary, prior to providing water service.
D.   Inspection: The water department superintendent, or his designated agent
who is an employee of the city, shall have the right of entry with permission
of the owner into any building during reasonable hours for the purpose of
making inspection of the plumbing systems installed in such building or
premises provided that with respect to the inspection of any single-family
dwellings, consent to such inspection shall first be obtained from a person of
suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof.
E.   Violations: Any account which fails to comply with the requirements of
this section will be subject to shutoff, and a disconnect fee will be charged
in the amount listed in the city of Bonners Ferry billing policy. If service is
restored, a connect fee will be charged in the amount listed in the city of
Bonners Ferry billing policy.
F.   Compliance: Water supply shall not be resumed until the cross connection
or source of contamination is eliminated or a backflow prevention device has
been installed in accordance with city standards. The customer shall be
required to bring the water line into compliance with current city standards
for service to re-initiated. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-22: PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION OR EXTENSION:
In accordance with sections
10-1-16  and
10-1-17  of this title, all construction relating to extension or development
of the city's water system shall comply with the standards therein. (Ord. 608,
6-6-2023)
10-2-23: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A.   Maintenance: All public fire hydrants shall be maintained by the Water
Department and be kept accessible at all times. Members of the Police and Fire
Departments shall also have access to such hydrants. No other person shall draw
or attempt to draw any water from a fire hydrant unless the person has written
permission by the city to do so.
B.   Operations: No person(s) other than those designated and authorized by the
city shall open, attempt to draw, or tamper with a hydrant belonging to the
city. Any violations of these regulations will be prosecuted according to law.
No tool, other than special hydrant wrenches, shall be used to operate a
hydrant valve. In cases where a temporary service has been granted and water
received through a fire hydrant, an auxiliary external valve will be provided
to control the flow of water.
C.   Moving A Fire Hydrant: When a fire hydrant has been installed in a
location specified by either the city or the property owner, the city has
fulfilled its obligation. If an owner or other party desires to change the
size, type or location of a hydrant, they shall bear all costs of such change.
Any change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the city and
the city fire department.
D.   Permission To Use Hydrant: No person, except a fire fighter in the
performance of his or her duty, shall open or in any way tamper with any fire
hydrant connected with the water system unless permission first be obtained
from the City. No person shall place upon or about any water valve connected
with the water system any material substance whatsoever which will prevent
access at all times to such hydrant or valve and no vehicle shall be allowed to
stand within fifteen feet (15') of such hydrant. The use of private hose in
time of or during an alarm of fire is unlawful and is strictly prohibited
unless for protection of property. (1959 Code § 3-1-5; amd. 2003 Code; amd.
Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-2-24: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND APPEALS:
Violations, enforcement, penalties and appeals shall follow such requirements
as provided for in
Chapter 10-1  of this Title. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
APPENDIX A: WATER EDU TABLE
EQUIVALENT RESIDENCE UNIT (EDU) TABLE FOR ESTABLISHING WATER CONNECTION AND
CAPITALIZATION FEES
OCCUPANCY UNIT OF MEASURE ER PER UNIT
EQUIVALENT RESIDENCE UNIT (EDU) TABLE FOR ESTABLISHING WATER CONNECTION AND CAPITALIZATION FEES
OCCUPANCY                                                              UNIT OF MEASURE  ER PER
                                                                                        UNIT
Automotive Repair And Maintenance Store                                By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                       Count         25 FU*
Bank                                                                   By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                       Count         25 FU*
Bar / Tavern / Cocktail Lounge                                         Per 10 seats  �0.25**
Barber / Beauty Shop                                                   Per Operator     0.50**
                                                                       Station   
Business Office                                                        By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                       Count         25 FU*
Car Wash-Automatic                                                  Per Bay       2.0
Car Wash-Hand-Held Wand                                             Per Bay       1.0
Church                                                           Per 100 Seats    1.0
Convenience Store                                                   By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                                     25 FU*
Dare Care / Preschool- additive to any other used occurring within the Per 10 Students  0.25**
building or facility                                                and Staff   
Nursing Home or Extended Care facility                                 Per Bed       0.50**
Fitness Center                                                         By Fixture Count 1.0 ER/
                                                                                        25 FU*
Grocery Store                                                       By Fixture Count 1.0 ER/
                                                                                     25 FU*
Hospital                                                            Per Bed          0.60**
Laundromat / Self Service                                              Per Machine      0.33**
Library                                                                By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                                        25 FU*
Medical or Dental Office                                               Per Patient Room 0.25**
Mobile Home Park                                                       Per Unit      1.0
Motel / Hotel                                                          Per Rented Room  0.5**
Multi-Unit Commercial Property - with shared meter                     Per Unit      0.5**
Professional Office Building                                           By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                       Count            25 FU*
Residence, including Multifamily with Shared Meter                  Per Unit      1.0
Residence, including Multifamily with Individual Meters             Per Unit      1.0
Residence, Single Family- including ADU's                              Per Unit      1.0
Restaurant/Cafeteria                                                Per 10 Seats  �0.25**
Restaurant- Fast Food                                                  Per Seat      1&0.5**
Retail Sales Store                                                  By Fixture Unit  1.0 ER/
                                                                                     25 FU*
RV Park or Campground with Water Hookups/Shower facilities          Per Space     0.25**
RV Park or Campground w/ Water hookups and without Showers          Per Space     0.15**
School- without gym and cafeteria                                   Per 50 Students/ 1.0
                                                                       Staff
School w/o Gym and w/ cafeteria or vice versa                          Per 30 Students/ 1.0
                                                                       Staff   
School w/ Gym AND Cafeteria                                            Per 25 Students/ 1.0
                                                                       Staff
Service Station- Without Convenience Store                          Per Restroom     0.25**
                                                                       Toilet   
Theater                                                             Per 25 Seats  �0.25**
Industrial- w/showers                                               Per Employee  �0.115**
Industrial - w/o showers                                            Per Employee  �0.050**
Industrial Use- in addition to the above the city may set EDU based on ***           ***
anticipated usage determined by the industrial use proposed.    
Warehouse/Office                                                    By Fixture Count 1.0 ER/
                                                                                     25 FU*
*Fixture Unit Increments shall be 1-13= 0.50 ER, 14-25=1.0 ER.
**Includes base rate of 1.0 ER plus additional ER's added per unit of Measurement
*** PER 10-1-8, City engineer shall set EDU amounts.
 
(Ord. 616. - - 2023)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Department Established
10-3-2: Purpose; General Provisions
10-3-3: Applicability/Public Health Statement
10-3-4: Definitions
10-3-5: Eligible Service
10-3-6: Property Of The City
10-3-7: Injury To Sewerage System
10-3-8: Required Use Of Sewers
10-3-9: Use Restrictions; Prohibited Discharges
10-3-10: Development Of On Site Pre-Treatment Systems And Plans
10-3-11: Public Sewer System Construction Or Extension
10-3-12: Sewer Lines In Platted Subdivision
10-3-13: Building Sewer And Lateral Connections
10-3-14: Sewer Rates And Fees
10-3-15: Annual Review/Sewer Study
10-3-16 : Unable To Serve Public Sewer
10-3-17: Violations, Enforcement, Penalties And Appeals
10-3-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
A sewer department is hereby established. The officers and other employees
shall consist of a superintendent and other such personnel as the council may
from time to time deem necessary for the efficient administration of the same.
(Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-2: PURPOSE; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works for the city of Bonners Ferry and enables the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws and the general pretreatment
regulations. The objectives of this ordinance are:
A.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation.
B.   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public.
C.   To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge
elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is
subject. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-3: APPLICABILITY/PUBLIC HEALTH STATEMENT:
A.   Applicability: This ordinance shall apply to all users of the publicly
owned treatment works. This ordinance authorizes the issuance of individual
wastewater discharge permits; providing for individual agreements for those
existing users who are not within the city incorporated limits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; and requires user reporting.
B.   Public Health Statement: It is hereby determined and declared to be
necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the public and inhabitants of the city, and for the purpose of
controlling the use and connection to and for providing an equitable
distribution of the costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, upkeep, and
repair of the entire sewerage system which includes the sewer collection system
and sewage disposal facilities of said city, to charge and collect service
charges or fees upon all lots, lands, property and premises served or
benefitted by the sewerage system of the city, which system and facilities
consist generally of pipelines, conduits, catch basins, manholes, clean outs,
sewer mains, intercepting sewer, outfall sewers, lift stations, pumps,
structures, mechanical equipment and facilities for the treatment and disposal
of sewerage or sewage byproducts; to provide for industry cost recovery from
all industrial users and to provide for the control, use and administration of
the installation of private sewage disposal systems where a public sanitary
sewer is not available. The public facility does not include the portion of
sewer connecting a building to the sewer main, otherwise known as the lateral
sewer line. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-4: DEFINITIONS:
All appropriate and applicable definitions as provided for in
chapter 10-1  of this title are included in addition to the following terms and
meanings. As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
                            Equivalent dwelling unit. EDU will be the minimum
EDU:                        unit assignment to any customer in any class. One
                            (1) EDU is defined as 4,500 gallons of water use.
LATERAL SEWER LINE:         The portion of a sewer connecting a building sewer
                            to the sewer main.
PRIVY:                      An outdoor toilet located in a small shed outside a
                            house or other building; an outhouse.
POTW:                       Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
                            A combination of water carried waste from
SEWAGE:                     residences, business buildings, institutions and
                            industrial establishments which contains polluted
                            matter subject to pre-treatment or treatment.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT:     Any arrangement of ponds, devices, and structures
                            used for treating sewage.
                            Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste
                            which in concentration of any given constituent or
                            in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
SLUG:                       duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more
                            than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24)
                            hour concentration or flows during normal
                            operation.
                            A sewer which carries storm and surface or ground
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: waters and drainage but excludes sewage and
                            polluted wastes. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608,
                            6-6-2023)
 
10-3-5: ELIGIBLE SERVICE:
A.   Eligible properties as defined in section
10-1-5  of this title are eligible for new services. Existing services located
outside of the city's service area shall be allowed to continue, provided they
do not require an expansion of service as defined in section
10-1-6  of this title.
B.   Lands contiguous to the incorporated city limits shall first be annexed
before sewer service is extended or expanded to those properties.
C.   Expansion of service includes upsizing of service line(s), extension of
water mains, additional sewer lateral taps or connections for a parcel of land
or the addition of a new building.
D.   Pursuant to section
10-1-6 , the City Administrator and/or City Engineer shall have final decision
over whether a circumstance qualifies as an expansion of service. (Ord. 602, -
-2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-6: PROPERTY OF THE CITY:
A.   All public sewer mains, pipelines, conduits, catch basins, manholes, clean
outs, sewer interceptors and sewer outfalls, lift stations, pumps, structures,
mechanical equipment and facilities for the treatment and disposal of sewerage
or sewage byproducts located in any street, alley or easement in the city shall
belong to the city.
B.   Lateral sewer lines, as defined herein, even within the public right-of-
way, shall not be owned or maintained by the city and shall be owned and
maintained by the property owner served by the line, including maintenance of
the main service tap. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-7: INJURY TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM:
A.   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewerage system.
B.   Any authorized work that results in damage to the public sewer shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent or city engineer, with the
cost being borne by the applicant or authorized person. (Ord. 602, - -2022;
amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-8: REQUIRED USE OF SEWERS:
A.   Connection Required: The owner or occupant of any house, building or
property used for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or
recreational use, or other purpose, situated within the City which is abutting
on or having a permanent right of access to any street, alley or right of way
in which there is located a public sewer of said City, is hereby required to
cease using any other method of disposing of sewage, waste or polluted water,
at the owners expense, connect such building directly with the public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The owner or occupant shall
complete this within thirty (30) days after date of official notice from the
City; provided that said sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of any
property line to be served or common property line in a multiple building
development.
B.   New Subdivisions: The developer of any new subdivision, at their expense,
shall construct the necessary extensions of the public sewer system to provide
public sewer facilities to each lot in the subdivision and where multiple
buildings are anticipated on a future lot, the developer shall make sewer
available to each building where warranted. These extensions of City's sewer
system may include, but not be limited to, the installation of mains, manholes,
lift stations, and other facilities for the treatment and disposal of sewerage
or sewage byproducts.
C.   Unlawful To Deposit: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste as described in section
10-3-8  of this chapter.
D.   Privies, Septic Tanks Or Cesspools Prohibited: Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
E.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection
with or opening into, use alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances
or perform any work on any lateral or building sewer without first obtaining a
written permit from the city as provided for at section
10-3-14  of this chapter.
F.   Adjacent Public Sewer For Each Lot: It shall be the position of the city
that each lot be adjacent to a public sewer main. Where such a main does not
exist at the time of plat or development, the landowner, property owner or
developer may extend a public sewer main in accordance with applicable sections
of this chapter. The City shall avoid approval of lateral sewer lines which
cross private property through private easement, where practical.
G.   Public Sewer Located In Public Right Of Way: It shall be the position of
the city that any new public sewer system, identified as property of the city,
be located, sited, placed, constructed and/or installed within a publicly owned
right-of-way. Newly planned public sewer mains placed in private easements or
on private property should not be allowed. Where a public sewer main is located
within a private easement, the easement shall be no less than thirty feet (30')
in width and provide the city with unencumbered public access to the facility
to access, maintain, construction or repair the line. Any obstructions placed
in said easement may be removed and not replaced by the city should access be
required to maintain or operate the system. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608,
6-6-2023)
10-3-9: USE RESTRICTIONS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
The use of the public sewers of the City shall be in accordance with the
following regulations:
A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any connection
any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B.   Storm water and all other drainage shall only be discharged to storm
sewers specifically designated for that purpose, or to a natural outlet
approved by the City.
C.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes, or substances to any public sewers:
   1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   2.   Septic tank effluent.
   3.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanides in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow of sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees (150°) Fahrenheit (65° centigrade).
   6.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/I or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°
Fahrenheit (0° and 65° centigrade).
   7.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
   8.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
   9.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting any excessive
chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the City for such materials.
   10.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   11.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the City in compliance with applicable
State or Federal regulations.
   12.   Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 6.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to sewer
structures, equipment, personnel, or adversely affecting any sewer treatment
process.
   13.   Materials which exert or cause:
      a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulphate).
      b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      c.   Unusual biological oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD)
or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works.
      d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
   14.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   15.   Waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City that
such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
D.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in subsection
10-3-8 C of this Chapter, and which in the judgment of the City, may have a
harmful effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters,
or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
City may:
   1.   Reject the waste.
   2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers in accordance with section
10-3-9  of this chapter.
   3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
   4.   Require plans and specification for any pretreatment system proposed.
   5.   Require that owner/discharger enter into agreement with City with
respect to installation, operation, and maintenance of any pretreatment system.
   6.   Charge the discharger for the actual cost of the additional operation
and maintenance costs borne by the City, that may include the costs of the City
hiring a third party to remove the waste material discharged.
   In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of wastes, the City will
consider such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree
of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors.
E.   When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by sewer
carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at their expense and shall be maintained by them to be safe and
accessible at all times.
F.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by American Public Health Association, or by
applicable EPA testing methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided or upon suitable samples taken at said manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
G.   No statement contained in this Chapter shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern.
H.   Any property owner or sewer user violating the provisions of this Section
shall, upon notice by the City, immediately install such pre-treatment as
provided for in section
10-3-9  of this title. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-10: DEVELOPMENT OF ON SITE PRE-TREATMENT SYSTEMS AND PLANS:
A.   Pre-Treatment Required: The city may require that pre-treatment and/or
interceptor be installed where in the opinion of the City, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing oils, grease, sand, dirt,
grit, rags, clothing, or any flammable wastes, or other constituents that may
inhibit the flow, pumping, or treatment of waste streams.
B.   Plan Required: A plan shall be submitted to address how the property or
business will remove fats, oils, greases, sediment or other harmful discharge
and maintenance frequency of the installed removal devices and structures.
C.   Plan Requirements: The property owner, business owner or other presiding
officer or a business, shall provide a written plan showing the actual location
of any pretreatment devices and include the following minimum requirements.
Prior to installation occurring, the plan shall be submitted to the City and
approved by the City Sewer Superintendent and/or the City Engineer.
   The plan shall include at a minimum the following:
   1.   Section and plan views of proposed treatment system that accurately
shows the details of the system.
   2.   Pretreatment type.
   3.   Frequency of cleaning and required maintenance.
   4.   Other pertinent items as deemed necessary.
   5.   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, or substances. Pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at their expense.
D.   Inspection Required: All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the City and shall be located readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. These interceptors shall be adequately maintained and
are subject to periodic inspection by the City. Any new interceptors installed
shall be only done so in accordance and approval by the City. (Ord. 602, - -
2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-11: PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION OR EXTENSION:
In accordance with sections
10-1-16  and
10-1-17  of this title, all construction relating to extension or development
of the city's water system shall comply with the standards therein. (Ord. 602,
- -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-12: SEWER LINES IN PLATTED SUBDIVISION:
A.   All sewer lines shall be installed and accepted by the city or bonded in
accordance with adopted or approved practices by the city before any final
subdivision plat is accepted by the council. The final subdivision map shall
provide for the dedication for public use of streets, easements, or rights of
way in which public sewer lines are located.
B.   Easements Or Rights Of Way: In the event that an easement is required for
the extension of the public sewer or the making of connections, the applicant
shall procure and have accepted by the council a proper easement or grant of
right of way sufficient in law to allow the laying and maintenance of such
extension or connection. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-13: BUILDING SEWER AND LATERAL CONNECTIONS:
A.   Building sewers shall be maintained by the owner of the property served
thereby.
B.   Permit To Tap Sewer Main: No person shall construct a lateral sewer or
make a connection with any public sewer without first obtaining a written
permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges.
C.   Separate Lateral Sewers Required: No two (2) adjacent buildings, on
separate parcels shall be permitted to join in the use of the same lateral
sewer line. Every commercial building or industrial facility must be separately
connected with a public sewer if such public sewer exists in the street upon
which the property abuts or in an easement which will serve said property.
Individual sewer laterals shall not be connected to sewer pressure mains.
D.   Construction Requirements And Specifications: Construction of building
sewers and lateral sewers shall be in accordance with any standards and
policies of the city as adopted by City Council, and also in conformance with
the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the Idaho Division of Building Safety.
E.   Individual Sewer Lift Stations: In all buildings in which any sewer is too
low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building sewer shall be lifted by individual sewer lift pump. Sewer lifts shall
only be allowed where lift systems pump into a gravity main and will not cause
damage to adjacent properties or the public system. All sewer lift stations
shall be approved by the sewer superintendent, in coordination with the city
engineer.
F.   Damage to system: Any damage to the public sewer as a result to
connection, shall be repaired by the applicant or landowner, to the
satisfaction of the city engineer and/or superintendent, with the cost borne by
the applicant.
G.   Lateral Connection To Main: All lateral sewer connections shall follow the
following standards when installing or connecting to a city sewer main.
   1.   Safety Devices: All excavations for a sewer service lateral
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades or lights to protect
the public from hazard.
   2.   Restoration Of Excavated Area: Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city and the county or any other person having jurisdiction
thereover.
   3.   All excavations within City rights-of-way require a city encroachment
permit. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-14: SEWER RATES AND FEES:
A.   Sewer Connection And Permit Application Fees:
   1.   A capitalization fee is required to be paid for each EDU, the fee is
set forth on the official fee schedule of the city. The fee shall be paid to
the city at the time the application is filed along with any other fees as set
forth in the official fee schedule.
   2.   A permit fee, as established on the official fee schedule, shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   3.   A separate and independent city sewer service connection fee shall be
paid for each connection or sewer tap.
B.   Sewer User Rates: Sewer service charges are set forth by Council for each
connection to the city sanitary sewage system based upon quantity flow of
sewage into the system which shall provide revenue sufficient to pay the
operation and maintenance, to repay bonded indebtedness and provide for the
reserve fund for said system.
C.   Annual Review Of Charges - Sewer Survey: The City Council shall annually
review user charges and revise the same to reflect the actual treatment works
operation and maintenance costs which shall provide revenue sufficient to pay
the operation and maintenance, to repay bonded indebtedness and provide for the
reserve fund for said system.
D.   Billing For Service: The City shall bill for sewer service in accordance
with the City's billing policy as adopted by Council.
E.   Real Property Subject To Rates: All real property, with or without
buildings, shall be subject to sewer rates, so long as a service pipe or
capitalization rate has been established on the property. (Ord. 602, - -2022;
amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023; Ord. 616, - - 2023)
10-3-15: ANNUAL REVIEW/SEWER STUDY:
A.   Authority: The city shall have authority to perform a yearly analysis of
its sewer usage and appropriately charge customers their proportionate share on
the system. In doing so the city shall establish a number of equivalent
dwelling units (EDU’s) assigned to each sewer customer so that a billing rate
can be multiplied by the EDU's to derive the total monthly charge for each
customer. The city shall also have authority to establish volumetric water
usage value for non-residential customers, that is delivered to the City's
wastewater treatment plant outside of typical irrigation months.
B.   EDU Count: One (1) EDU shall be the minimum unit assignment to any
customer in any class. Monthly sewer EDU's will be assigned as described below
for each customer class listed. One (1) EDU is defined as 4,500 gallons of
water use.
C.   EDU Assignment:
   1.   Residential: Includes all single-family, duplex and multifamily
residential structures. These assignments will be charged one (1) EDU per
dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units are considered separate dwelling units
for the purposes of this chapter.
   2.   Commercial And Other: Including all other units not considered
residential, duplex or multifamily, such as motels, hotels. and all other
commercial establishments. EDU's for these entities will be based on water
usage as described in subsection D of this chapter. Businesses that contain
residential structures or units shall be considered commercial for the purposes
of this chapter.
D.   EDU Establishment: All customers listed in subsection C2 of this section
shall be charged based the following EDU's method:
   1.   Based on the average water volume used within the months of November,
December, January and February. The exact dates for usage for these months vary
slightly based on billing cycles and timing of meters reads.
   2.   The average water use in gallons will be divided by 4,500, which is the
number of gallons used to define one EDU, as shown in the following equation:
   Average Water Use
         EDU's =    ________________________
   4,500 Gallons
   3.   The resulting EDU number as formulated in subsection D2 of this section
shall be used for sewer billings beginning in the month of May and will
continue until the end of April of the following year.
E.   Water Leaks:
   1.   If high water usage occurs during the months of November, December,
January and February and is determined by the City to be caused by a leak that
may or may not have entered the sewer system, the City may adjust the EDU value
established for those customers whose rates are based on water volume. if the
leak is repaired prior to the next cycle in which the sewer study is conducted.
      a.   If the City is unable to assign a base line EDU value because of a
leak in the EDU establishment period (November through February) the City may
look at data from other non-irrigation months to establish the customer's EDU
number.
   2.   If high water usage occurs is not corrected prior to the survey study
being completed, the city may cause EDU values to be established for those
customers whose rates are based on volume to be in effect for the entirety of
the survey period, per subsection D3 of this section.
   3.   Residential: Any residential customer which a water leak occurs and is
determined by the City to enter the sewer system, shall be charged based on the
number of EDU's calculated on water usage during the period that the leak
occurs and continues. That shall remain in effect for the rate period
established with subsection D3 of this section.
F.   Customer Assignment: The city reserves the right to determine the type of
customer receiving sanitary service and to classify the type of customer within
the foregoing categories. In the event of a dispute relative to the type of
customer receiving sewer service and accordingly the applicable sewer rate, the
city's determination as to the type of customer shall be binding upon the
customer in the absence of apparent error. A customer disputing the
classification shall have the right to appeal the determination of the city by
making a written request to the city council for a redetermination, the
determination of the city council shall be likewise binding on the customer in
the absence of apparent error.
G.   Grievances: Any customer aggrieved by a decision made by City staff is
entitled to an appeal pursuant to section
10-1-22  of this chapter. Any customer who does not timely file for appeal
pursuant to this chapter shall cause the decision to be final. (Ord. 545, 12-
16-2014; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-16: UNABLE TO SERVE PUBLIC SEWER:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this
chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewer disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
A.   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all the rules and regulations and recommendations of
the Idaho Panhandle Health District. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
B.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to property served by a
private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter and any septic tank, cesspool or similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. The cost for connecting to the City's sewer system will be borne by
the owner of the property being connected.
C.   The owners shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility
in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city.
D.   Septic tank pumping shall not be deposited in any manhole, cleanout or
sewer opening.
E.   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the department of
health and welfare of the state. (Ord. 602, - -2022; amd. Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-3-17: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND APPEALS:
Violations, enforcement, penalties and appeals shall follow such requirements
as provided for in
Chapter 10-1  of this Title. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER USER CHARGES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Water Shortage Policy
10-4-2:    Authority
10-4-3:    Powers Of Superintendent And/Or City Administrator
10-4-4:    Procedure In Event Of Shortage Or Anticipated Shortage
10-4-5:    Classes Of Service
10-4-6:    Notice Of System Limitations
10-4-7:    Council Action
10-4-8:    Violations
10-4-9:    Independent Water District Or Association
10-4-1: WATER SHORTAGE POLICY:
Purpose: The council finds that it is essential for the health and safety of
the public and property that the integrity of the water system be protected to
maintain its continued availability to deliver water as necessary to protect
the health and safety of the persons and property within the service area to
establish procedures, authority, and criteria to allocate restricted or limited
water supplies in times of emergency or shortage.
In the exercise of this authority, it shall be recognized that protecting the
integrity of the system from damage or destruction is of primary importance to
enable the city to continue, with minimal disruption, the delivery of water to
the users as is necessary for the protection of the health and public safety of
the persons or property within the city and served by the system. (Ord. 608, 6-
6-2023)
10-4-2: AUTHORITY:
A.   The mayor and council do, therefore, by the enactment hereof, establish an
official policy for:
   1.   The protection of the water system from damage in times of emergency.
   2.   For the redirecting of the system's resources to the highest priority
use in times of emergency.
   3.   For the establishment of priority uses in times when the demand for
water service exceeds the capacity of the system to deliver water to the users
served by the system; and
   4.   To grant authority to the mayor or, if unavailable, the president of
the council, to establish an orderly system to ration or limit the delivery of
water to users in the event of emergency or inability of the system to supply
the expected demand for water. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-3: POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT AND/OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
A.   In circumstances of emergency, the superintendent of water and sewer and/
or city administrator may, without prior notice, immediately take such action
as is necessary to:
   1.   Protect the system from further damage or harm; and/or
   2.   Prevent the system from causing damage or harm to persons or property;
and/or
   3.   Limit and direct the system's capacity to deliver water both in
sufficient quantity and at sufficient pressure to any portion of the system as
they deem necessary to protect persons or property from events threatening
their health and safety.
B.   Shutoff Without Notice: This authority shall include the authority to
summarily, without prior notice, shut off service to all or any portion of the
system or any user without prior notice as they shall deem necessary or
redirect the capacity of the system to deliver water to avoid or minimize the
anticipated or occurring damage or hazard to the system and/or persons or
property in the service area.
C.   Report To Mayor And Council: The person exercising this emergency
authorization shall, as promptly as reasonably possible, report these events
and the action taken to the mayor or president of the council, who shall report
such to the council at the next regular or special meeting of the council.
(Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-4: PROCEDURE IN EVENT OF SHORTAGE OR ANTICIPATED SHORTAGE:
A.   Establish System For Rationing: In the event of a shortage or anticipated
shortage of water, the superintendent of water and sewer and/or city
administrator shall report the shortage or anticipated shortage to the mayor,
or if he or she is unavailable, the president of the council, who is empowered
to establish a system of rationing or limiting the delivery of water to the
users.
B.   Use Priorities: In establishing such system of rationing, priority shall
be given to the use of water for the following purposes stated in order of
descending priority:
   1.   Sufficient reserves for emergency use and emergency facility, i.e.,
firefighting, fire stations hospitals, nursing homes, etc.
   2.   Residential inside building use and residential outside potable and
sanitary uses.
   3.   Commercial inside building use and commercial outside for potable and
sanitary uses.
   4.   Industrial inside building use and industrial outside potable and
sanitary use.
   5.   Commercial outside non-potable and non-sanitary uses.
   6.   Residential outside non-potable and non-sanitary use.
   7.   Industrial outside non-potable and non-sanitary uses.
   The system of rationing may either restrict or limit lower priority uses in
favor of higher priority uses or rationing may be applied to more than one
class of users to permit continued but reduced usage by several levels of
priority uses. Any rationing system may provide that a class of use may be
restricted to use on certain days of the week, times of the day, or quantities
of water as may be determined to be fair and equitable and in consideration of
the use priorities herein established. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-5: CLASSES OF SERVICE:
Because of the potential for larger diameter service connections to draw a
disproportionate quantity of water from the system each diameter size of
service connection shall constitute a separate class of service connection and
the larger service connection may be shut off or otherwise restricted to limit
or stop the flow of water to ensure adequate quantity and pressure is
maintained to users with smaller diameter connections applying the water to
uses of an equal or higher priority. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-6: NOTICE OF SYSTEM LIMITATIONS:
Notice of the system for limitation or rationing of service shall be given as
follows:
A.   Oral Written Notice: If the restriction affects less than twelve (12)
service connections oral notice shall be followed by written notice hand
delivered or mailed to the person or organization shown by the city's billing
records as responsible for payment for the service within forty-eight (48)
hours.
B.   Publication Of Notice: Restrictions applicable to more than twelve (12)
users or if twelve (12) or less users and when actual notice is not practical
shall be published in the following manner:
   1.   Radio: Notice given not less than twice per day for not less than one
week on the commercial radio station operated in Boundary County, Idaho; and
   2.   Publication: Publication in the official newspaper once a week for
three (3) consecutive weeks; and
   3.   Posting: Posting in a public location at the Bonners Ferry city hall.
No posting or notice shall be required to continue beyond the termination of
the rationing. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-7: COUNCIL ACTION:
A.   The mayor or president of the council establishing a system to allocate
water in times of shortage shall report such action to the council at its next
special or regular meeting. After considering the facts, the council shall, by
resolution, take action either:
   1.   Terminating the rationing system; or
   2.   Continue the rationing system as established; or
   3.   Continue the rationing system with modification to the policy as
established by the mayor or president of the city council.
B.   Failure of the council to take such action shall result in automatic
termination of the policy of rationing. A modification or termination by vote
or inaction of the council shall not bar the mayor or president of the council,
upon a finding of additional facts and circumstances, from again exercising
their authority to again establish a system of rationing following such meeting
of the council. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-8: VIOLATIONS:
A.   Misdemeanor: A violation of a system of water rationing in time of
shortage as declared under the authority of this section will constitute a
misdemeanor and punishable as a violation of city ordinance; and
B.   Termination Of Service: The superintendent of water and sewer and/or the
city administrator may direct service be immediately terminated or restricted
to the user through its service outlet where the violation occurs. A user whose
service has been so terminated or restricted shall not have service restored
until he comes before the council, who shall hear the facts as to why service
was terminated and what the customer's defense to the accusation is. The
council may continue the termination or restore service upon such terms and
conditions as they deem appropriate, including:
   1.   Reimbursement to the city for shutoff and reconnect fees and costs.
   2.   Requirements to provide, at customer's expense, assurance against
further violations, including, but not limited to:
      a.   Posting of a bond.
      b.   Installation, at customer's expense, of equipment to restrict or
shut off and lock out service or downsize the service connection to the
customer. (Ord. 608, 6-6-2023)
10-4-9: INDEPENDENT WATER DISTRICT OR ASSOCIATION:
Any independent water district or association purchasing water from the city
for redistribution to its members or persons within its service area shall, in
addition to its duties under its contract with the city, the right of such
district or association shall and its individual customers and users shall be
subject to the provision of this policy. (Ord. 445, 5-18-1999; amd. Ord. 608,
6-6-2023)
CHAPTER 5
GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 1
SECTION:
10-5-1: Definitions
10-5-2: Construction, Operation, Maintenance And Safety Standards
10-5-3: Inspection
10-5-4: Testing Of Piping On Construction
10-5-5: Connections To Steel Mains
10-5-6: Location Of Service Shutoffs
10-5-7: Location Of Utilities
10-5-8: Protection And Removal Of Utilities
10-5-9: Trenches
10-5-10: Water In Trenches
10-5-11: Breaking Through Pavement
10-5-12: Tunnels
10-5-13: Backfilling
10-5-14: Dry Backfilling
10-5-15: Protection Of Property
10-5-16: Preservation Of Monuments
10-5-17: Damage To Existing Improvements
10-5-18: Property Lines And Easements
10-5-19: Care Of Excavated Material
10-5-20: Interference With Other Services
10-5-21: Provision For Watercourses
10-5-22: Routing And Maintenance Of Traffic During Construction
10-5-23: Insurance
10-5-24: Plans For Construction
 
Notes
1 1. Franchises under this chapter; Washington Water Power, see ordinance 377
  on file in the office of the city clerk.
10-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings herein given to them:
   CITY ENGINEER: The engineer for and of the city of Bonners Ferry or his duly
authorized representative.
   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM: Any system of mains, pipes, service lines, regulators,
meters, fixtures, connections and attachments used in the distribution of gas.
   GAS: Natural, manufactured or mixed gas suitable for domestic or industrial
fuel.
   PERMITTEE: Any person holding a franchise to distribute gas in the city of
Bonners Ferry, Idaho.
   PERSON: Every person, firm, corporation or association.
   PUBLIC PROPERTIES: Any street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, viaduct, highway,
bridge, park drive or public ground open as a matter of right to public travel
under the jurisdiction of the city.
   SERVICE LINE: A pipe, regulator and meter which conveys gas from a main or
other distribution or transmission line to and on a customer's premises.
   TRANSMISSION SYSTEM: A system of pipelines installed to transmit gas from a
source or sources of supply to one or more distribution centers or a pipe
installed to interconnect sources of supply. (1959 Code § 4-7-1)
10-5-2: CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY STANDARDS:
A.   Adopted: The rules and regulations pertaining to matters of public safety
in the "Construction and Operations of Facilities for the Transmission and
Distribution of Gas of the Public Service Commission of the State of Idaho",
general order No. 31.C.21 adopted October 23, 1991, and the provisions of U.S.
department of transportation, part 192 of pipeline safety regulations, on file
in the office of the clerk, are each hereby adopted by reference as standards
for gas installation in the city; provided, that in the event of any of the
provisions of said rules and regulations or said DOT regulations should
conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, this chapter and the state
rules and regulations shall govern and be observed. In general, the most
stringent code will prevail.
B.   Amendments; Additions: All amendments and additions to said rules and
regulations and said DOT code, when printed, shall thereupon become amendments
and additions thereto if not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
Amendments shall be filed with the city clerk. (1959 Code § 4-7-2)
10-5-3: INSPECTION:
All construction of gas service piping, gas distribution or transmission system
shall be inspected by the permittee or any inspector for the permittee. (1959
Code § 4-7-3)
10-5-4: TESTING OF PIPING ON CONSTRUCTION:
Before any newly constructed gas service piping, gas distribution or
transmission system is placed in service, it shall be tested by the permittee
in conformity with the codes adopted by this chapter. (1959 Code § 4-7-4)
10-5-5: CONNECTIONS TO STEEL MAINS:
Service lines shall not be connected to steel mains by means of a clamp or
saddle type service connection, except by special permission of the city. (1959
Code § 4-7-5)
10-5-6: LOCATION OF SERVICE SHUTOFFS:
Service shutoffs shall be installed on all new services, including
replacements, at the curb or property line for each service, or at an easily
accessible place on the outside of the building served. If the latter method is
used, such service shall not enter a building directly without coming
aboveground. (1959 Code § 4-7-6)
10-5-7: LOCATION OF UTILITIES:
A.   Location: All gas mains shall be laid in alleys or easements whenever
possible, or at locations generally on the south and west sides of streets and
alleys approved by the city engineer.
B.   Lateral Clearance: Mains shall have a lateral clearance of not less that
three feet (3') from other utility mains that exceed three foot (3') bury and
one foot (1') when less than three foot (3') bury; providing, that under
exceptional circumstances the city may authorize less clearance.
C.   Vertical Clearance: Mains shall have a vertical clearance of twelve inches
(12") when crossing another pipe.
D.   Cover: Mains shall be laid with a cover not less than thirty inches (30").
Where the trench is in rock, the cover may be twenty four inches (24") if the
main is properly cushioned as required in section
10-5-9 of this chapter. In the event interference with other subsurface
utilities makes it impractical to maintain the above depths, the city may
permit gas pipelines and mains to be constructed so as to avoid such subsurface
utilities. If verbal approval is given by the city, the gas utility will
provide a gas engineering design report within thirty (30) days of verbal
approval.
E.   Minimum Depth: Minimum depth of service lines shall be twelve inches (12")
at the service terminal and shall normally slope to required depth at the main,
but not less than twenty four inches (24") everywhere within public ways. (1959
Code § 4-7-7)
10-5-8: PROTECTION AND REMOVAL OF UTILITIES:
A.   Existing Underground Utilities: The permittee shall inform itself as to
the existence and location of any underground utilities and protect the same
against damage.
B.   Responsibility For Damages: The permittee shall be responsible for any
damage done, if not located properly, to any public or private property by
reason of the breaking of any water pipe, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or
other utility. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility
without the written consent of the city engineer and the utility involved.
C.   Support; Protection: The permittee shall support and protect, by timbers
or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may
be in any way affected by the construction or maintenance work, and do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect the same under, over,
along or across said work. In case any of the said pipes, conduits, poles,
wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the authorities
having control of the same and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to
the permittee.
D.   Moving Existing Utility: If it should be necessary to move an existing
utility, the work shall be done by the owner of such utility. Whenever the
permittee's utility interferes with the actual construction of any public
improvement, such utility shall be moved by the permittee. No utility, either
publicly or privately owned, shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless
the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. (1959 Code § 4-7-8)
10-5-9: TRENCHES:
A.   Excavation: Trenches shall not be excavated more than three hundred feet
(300') in advance of pipe laying, nor left unfilled for more than seven hundred
feet (700') where pipe has been laid, except by special permission from the
city engineer. The length of the trench that may be opened at any time shall
not be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are
available to the site ready to be put in place.
B.   Completed Trench: The completed trench shall be kept not less than thirty
feet (30') ahead of the pipe layers. Trenches shall be at least six inches (6")
wider on each side or a total width of twelve inches (12") more than the
exterior diameter of the pipe, except where pipes are four inches (4") or less
in diameter. Where excavation is made in rock, a minimum of six inches (6") of
noncorrosive soil, sands or fine existing spoils shall be used as a padding
beneath the pipe and an additional six inches (6") above the pipe.
C.   Manholes And Other Structures: Excavation for manholes and other
structures shall be sufficient to leave at least twelve inches (12") between
their outer surfaces and the sides of the excavation. (1959 Code § 4-7-9)
10-5-10: WATER IN TRENCHES:
The permittee shall pump, bail or otherwise remove any water which accumulates
in trenches. Water shall not be permitted in trenches at any time during
construction nor until backfilling over the top of pipe has been completed. The
ground water level in trenches shall not be permitted to rise above an
elevation of six inches (6") below the pipe. The permittee shall perform all
work necessary to keep the trenches clear of water while the foundation and the
masonry are being constructed or the pipe laid. (1959 Code § 4-7-10)
10-5-11: BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT:
Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for the purpose of
constructing gas service facilities, the pavement and the base shall be removed
to at least six inches (6") beyond the outer limits of the subgrade that is to
be disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six inch (6") shoulder of
undisturbed material shall be provided on each side of the excavated trench.
The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical and
straight. (1959 Code § 4-7-11)
10-5-12: TUNNELS:
Tunnels under pavement shall not be permitted except by permission of the city
engineer. Permittee shall assure that all boring is conducted in a manner to
assure proper compactions are provided and no settlement of tunnel or sending
of receiving holes occurs. (1959 Code § 4-7-12)
10-5-13: BACKFILLING:
Backfilling and compacting in all public streets and improved areas, both
public and private, shall be completed to a degree equivalent to that of the
undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall be done by
mechanical tampers or vibrators, or by rolling in layers as required by the
soil in question. (1959 Code § 4-7-13)
10-5-14: DRY BACKFILLING:
Backfilling up the first eighteen inches (18") above the top of utility pipes
or similar installations shall be done with thin layers, each layer to be
tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand tamped shall not
exceed four inches (4") in thickness, layers that are power tamped shall not
exceed six inches (6") in thickness. These same requirements shall apply to the
remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used for backfilling.
(1959 Code § 4-7-14)
10-5-15: PROTECTION OF PROPERTY:
A.   Protection Required: The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and
protect all buildings, walls, fences of other property likely to be damaged
during the progress of the construction or maintenance work and shall be
responsible for all damage to public or private property. Whenever it may be
necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be
carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled, or
the area restored as neatly as possible to its original condition.
B.   Removal Of Trees Or Shrubs: Permittee shall not remove, even temporarily,
any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across
private property without first having notified the property owner, or in the
case of public parks, the city engineer. (1959 Code § 4-7-15)
10-5-16: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments, hubs or pins found on
the line of the improvements unless authorized by the city engineer. (1959 Code
§ 4-7-16)
10-5-17: DAMAGE TO EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of construction or
maintenance work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair
shall conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances. If, upon being
ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for
such repairs, the city engineer may cause said necessary labor and materials to
be furnished by other parties and the cost thereof charged against permittee.
(1959 Code § 4-7-17)
10-5-18: PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS:
Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plans and
shall be the permittee's responsibility to confine its construction activities
within these limits. Any damage resulting from trespassing beyond these limits
shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee. (1959 Code § 4-7-18)
10-5-19: CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL:
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench, or in
highways, shall be piled and maintained in a safe and orderly manner. When the
confines of the area through which the gas pipes are to be laid are too narrow
to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, it may be
necessary for the permittee to haul excavated material to a storage site and
then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the
permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all
necessary arrangements for all storage and disposal sites required. (1959 Code
§ 4-7-19)
10-5-20: INTERFERENCE WITH OTHER SERVICES:
The work shall be conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations
and fire hydrants. Material or obstructions shall be placed within fifteen feet
(15') of fire hydrants. Obstructions shall not be allowed to interfere with
other emergency services' reasonable public/private access. (1959 Code § 4-7-
20)
10-5-21: PROVISION FOR WATERCOURSES:
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains
intercepted during the progress of the work, and shall replace the same in as
good condition as it found them or shall make final provisions for them as the
city engineer may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any
street, but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of
surface water. The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus
water, mud, silt or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from
sluicing or other operations, and shall be responsible for any damage from its
failure so to provide. (1959 Code § 4-7-21)
10-5-22: ROUTING AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC DURING CONSTRUCTION:
A.   Maintaining Traffic; Closing: During construction, traffic shall be
maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to
the occupants of abutting property and to the general public; provided, that
the city engineer may permit the closing of public properties to all traffic
for a designated period of time, if, in his/her opinion it is necessary. Before
any public property may be closed or restricted to traffic the permittee must
obtain the approval of the city engineer and notify the chief of the fire
department and the chief of the police department. The permittee shall route
and control all traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the chief
of the police department. Upon completion of construction work, the chief of
the police department and the chief of the fire department shall again be
notified before traffic is returned to its normal route.
B.   Through Traffic; Detour: Through traffic shall be maintained without
detours if possible. When it is necessary to construct a detour, the permittee
shall construct same at its expense in accordance with industry standards for
operations, subject to the city engineer's approval. The permittee will be
responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any public properties by the
operation of its equipment.
C.   Barriers; Crossings: The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable
barriers to confine earth from trenches or other excavations in order to
minimize encroachment upon highways. It shall construct and maintain adequate
and safe crossing over excavation and across highways during construction to
accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all intersections, subject to
the city engineer's approval. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of approved
method. (1959 Code § 4-7-22)
10-5-23: INSURANCE:
The permittee shall have and maintain in force bodily injury and property
damage insurance with limits at a minimum of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). If the permittee has an established self-insured program of at
least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), verification of such a program will
be an acceptable substitute to the insurance requirement. Permittee by working
under this chapter does thereby indemnify and hold harmless the city against
all actions, claims and suits. (1959 Code § 4-7-23)
10-5-24: PLANS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
Plans for construction and other work in public ways shall be provided in
advance through completion and submittal of the city excavation permit
application 1 . Excavation shall not begin until same excavation permit has
been issued. (1959 Code § 4-7-24)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-3-2 of this code for provisions regarding excavation permits.
TITLE 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short TItle
11-1-2: Authority
11-1-3: Purpose
11-1-4:    Applicability
11-1-5:    Scope
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
   These regulations shall be known officially and cited as the Zoning
Regulations of the City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-1-2: AUTHORITY:
   A.   This title is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the City of
Bonners Ferry, Idaho, at Article XII, Section 2, of the Idaho Constitution, the
Idaho Local Land Use Planning Act at Title 67, Chapter 65, and Title 50,
Chapters 3, 9, and 13, as currently comprised or subsequently amended.
   B.   The City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, administrative staff,
and agents of Bonners Ferry are vested with the authority to review, approve,
approve with conditions, or deny applications, as specifically provided by this
title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-1-3: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of Bonners Ferry by establishing land use standards and
regulations, in accord with the adopted comprehensive plan, to:
   A.   Protect property rights while making accommodations for other types of
development such as low-cost housing and mobile home parks;
   B.   Ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to the
people at reasonable cost;
   C.   Ensure that the economy of the city and its people is protected;
   D.   Ensure that the important environmental features of the city are
protected;
   E.   Encourage urban and urban-type development within incorporated cities;
   F.   Avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land;
   G.   Ensure development on land is commensurate with the physical
characteristics of the land;
   H.   Protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and
disasters;
   I.   Protect fish, wildlife, and recreation resources;
   J.   Avoid undue water and air pollution;
   K.   Encourage the school district to participate in the community planning
and development process so as to address public school needs and impacts on an
ongoing basis; and
   L.   Implement the goals and policies of the adopted comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-1-4: APPLICABILITY:
   Provisions of this title shall apply to all properties within the
incorporated boundaries of the City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho, to the extent
permitted by law. Lands owned by the government of the United States of America
shall be governed hereby only to the extent provided by federal law. Lands
owned by the State of Idaho shall be governed hereby to the extent allowed by
state law.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-1-5: SCOPE:
   A.   Uniform Application: The regulations of this title shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as otherwise
specifically provided.
   B.   Interpretation In Case Of Conflict With Other Laws: The city does not
intend for this title to impair or interfere with other regulations of state or
local law, or with private restrictions on the use of land, improvements, and
structures. Where this title imposes greater restriction than that imposed by
other law or private restrictions, this title shall prevail.
   C.   Conformity Required: No building, structure or land shall be used or
occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified and for the zoning district in
which it is located.
   D.   Use: Any use not permitted by the provisions of this title is
prohibited.
   E.   Interpretation Authority: Interpretation of this title may be
reasonably made by the city staff and city council in the event its meaning may
be unclear or ambiguous.
   F.   Protection Of Property Rights: The city of Bonners Ferry wishes to
ensure that land use policies, ordinances, restrictions, conditions, and fees
do not violate private property rights, adversely impact private property
values, or create unnecessary technical limitations upon the use of the
property that would constitute an unconstitutional taking of private property
rights. Every final decision rendered concerning site specific land use request
shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the
applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to Idaho
Code.
   G.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this act, the provisions hereof shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted by the council for the promotion of the health, safety, morals, comfort
and convenience of residents of the municipality and to promote the general
welfare.
   H.   Existing Agreements: This act does not alter or change an existing
agreement between parties where this act imposes a greater restriction upon the
height of buildings or requires larger lots or yards than are imposed or
required by existing permits, easements, covenants, or agreements, but where
there is such variation, then this act shall be liberally construed to promote
the best interest and purpose of the public and the general welfare.
   I.   Existing Construction: Nothing herein contained shall require any
change in the principal construction or designated use of a building for which
a permit has been heretofore issued, and the construction of which such
building shall have been actually begun at the time of the passage of this act.
If any area in any particular zone is hereafter transferred to another zone by
change in zone boundaries, the provisions of this section with regard to
buildings or premises then existing, or building permits then issued at the
time of the adoption of this act shall apply to buildings or premises existing
or building permits issued in such transferred area at the time of such
transfer.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Interpretation
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
   For the purposes of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   A.   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
   B.   The word “shall” is a mandatory requirement, the word “may” is a
permissive requirement and the word “should” is a preferred requirement.
   C.   The words “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended, designed or
arranged to be used or occupied.”
   D.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
   E.   Words or phrases used in the singular number shall also include the
plural and words used in the plural shall also include the singular.
   F.   The words he, she, man, woman, or they are synonymous.
   G.   Where words are not defined, they shall have their ordinary, accepted
dictionary meaning within the context in which they are used.
   H.   For the purpose of this title, the following words or terms shall have
particular meaning as stated in 11-2-2 below.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A smaller, secondary dwelling on the same lot or
parcel as the primary dwelling that is independently habitable and provides the
basic requirements of a residential shelter, including heating, cooking, and
sanitation.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building that is incidental and subordinate to that of
the main building or use of land and that is located on the same lot or parcel
and under the same ownership in all respects.
ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING: An official having knowledge in the principles and
practices of zoning who is appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council
to administer this title.
ADULT BUSINESS: Any business providing, displaying, or offering for sale
obscene matter, material, or conduct as defined by Idaho Code § 18-4101 and as
regulated by the State of Idaho at Title 18, Chapter 41 and Title 67, Chapter
65 of Idaho Code.
ALLEY, PUBLIC: A right-of-way providing secondary access at the back or side of
a property otherwise abutting a street.
AMUSEMENT CENTER:
   A.   Indoor: The provision of entertainment, games of skill, recreation,
video arcades, pool or billiard hall, roller or ice skating, simulated golf or
similar uses wholly enclosed within a building.
   B.   Outdoor: A commercially operated park or facility conducted outdoors
and associated support structures, including skating rinks, batting cages, zip-
lines, paint ball range, carousels, and similar recreation and amusement uses.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure for rent,
lease, or sublet that are within a residential structure designed and
constructed to contain three (3) or more independent, self-contained dwelling
units. See definition of “Dwelling, Multi- Family.”
ART STUDIO: A structure, or portion thereof, used as a place of instruction or
work by artists to include graphic and visual arts, music, voice, sculptures,
or similar arts.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: An establishment that provides living quarters and a
variety of limited personal care and supportive health care to individuals who
are unable to live independently due to age, physical, or mental conditions,
but who do not need the skilled nursing care from an extended care or long-term
care facility. Such facilities may include individual living units within a
structure but do not include facilities defined as single-family dwellings
pursuant to Idaho Code § 67-6531.
AUCTION FACILITY: A facility where items are sold by bid.
AUTOMOTIVE FUEL STATION: The sale and supply of motor fuel and lubricating
oils. May also include convenience retail use such as a drive-in and self-
service.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR FACILITY: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles, or parts thereof, including collision service, painting and steam
cleaning of vehicles for profit. Can include the sale of tires, batteries, and
automotive accessories together with other related services, including minor
motor vehicle repair.
AUTOMOTIVE WASHING FACILITY: An establishment that provides self-service or
drive-through washing facilities for cars, trucks, recreational vehicles, or
other similar vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKING YARD: Any area, lot, land, or parcel where more than two
(2) motor vehicles without current registration or more than two (2) inoperable
or dismantled motor vehicles that are not in operating condition (or parts
thereof) are: a) standing more than thirty (30) days, b) dismantled, or c)
stored. The following uses are excluded from this definition: agricultural
equipment on a farm or personal vehicles stored or dismantled within a
completely enclosed structure. For the purposes of this definition the term
"inoperable" means the motor vehicle cannot move under its own power or does
not meet the minimum legal requirements necessary for the motor vehicle to be
operated in a safe and lawful manner upon the roads and highways in the state
of Idaho as set forth in the motor vehicle laws of the state of Idaho.
BANKS/FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: A business whose primary function is to provide
financial transactions to the public at large as allowed by state and federal
law.
BAR: An establishment for which a license is required and the principal
business is the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on premises, but
does not include restaurants where the principal business is serving food. This
definition includes taverns or lounges.
BARBERSHOP/ STYLING SALON: An establishment where the following services are
allowed by licensed professionals: haircutting, shampooing, shaves, perms, hair
coloring, manicuring, tanning booths including cosmetology of hair and makeup.
BASEMENT: The bottom floor of a dwelling unit, all or partly underground,
having at least one-half (1/2) of its height below the average level of the
adjoining ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-manager run facility providing up to six (6) rooms
for temporary overnight accommodations, and where the owner-innkeeper is
resident on the property. A bed and breakfast provides breakfast for overnight
guests, but does not provide a restaurant and/or bar.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building, other than a hotel or motel, where meals and/or
lodging are provided with or without compensation, to more than two (2) but
less than twelve (12) unrelated persons. A boarding house shall include, but
not be limited to, a rooming house, shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory,
fraternity, sorority, etc.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a lot after the minimum open space
requirements, including setbacks, have been deducted from the area available
for building.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building detached from, but located on, the
same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental and
accessory to that of the main building or use.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or person charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this title as it relates to the enforcement of
any building code, fire regulations, setback regulations or health regulations
which have been or shall be adopted by the Council.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is situated. Every dwelling in any
residential district is a principal building.
BUILDING SUPPLY OUTLET: A retail wholesale establishment selling any and all
building materials used in construction.
CAMPGROUND: An area or ground on which tents, buildings, cabins, spaces, or
recreational vehicles either temporary or permanent are provided for temporary
shelter, lodging or accommodation.
CEMETERY: A place dedicated to, used and intended to be used for the permanent
interment of the human dead, and shall include a burial plot for earth
interments, and may include a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a
crematory, or a crematory and columbarium for cinerary interments, or any
combination of one (1) or more of the above.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any facility where children regularly receive care and
supervision, usually unaccompanied by the children's parents, guardians or
custodians, and regardless of whether the facility does or does not provide any
instruction. This use excludes the case of: a) the operator's children or legal
wards or children related by blood or marriage, b) occasional personal guests,
and c) children aged twelve (12) and over. Any home, place, or facility
providing overnight custodial services for lodging or boarding for the
occupants therein shall not be considered a "childcare facility".
   There are three (3) types of childcare facilities:
   A.   In-home family daycares: A childcare facility for six (6) or fewer
children.
   B.   Group daycare facility: A childcare facility for seven (7) to twelve
(12) children.
   C.   Daycare center: A childcare facility for thirteen (13) or more
children.
CHURCH: A facility used for religious worship.
CLUB OR LODGE: A building, premises or portion thereof which houses an
auxiliary, fraternal, or veterans' organization as defined by Idaho Code
section 23-902.
COMMERCIAL USE OR BUSINESS: The purchase, sale or other transaction involving
the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for
livelihood or profit, or the ownership or management of office buildings,
offices, recreational or amusement enterprises or the maintenance and use of
offices by professions and trades rendering services.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission appointed by the Council.
COMMUNICATION FACILITY, WIRELESS/CELL TOWER: The collective components of an
unstaffed facility and its support structures for the transmission and/or
reception of radio frequency, microwave or other signals for commercial
communication purposes, including towers, antennas, antenna arrays, equipment
shelters, equipment cabinets, transmission cables, a support structure required
to generate, transmit, or receive communication signals.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan for the City of Bonners Ferry, Boundary County,
Idaho, consisting of the goals, objectives, policies, maps and the components
or elements which are adopted by the Council. The plan shall serve as a guide
for development.
CONCRETE BATCH PLANT: An establishment that combines cement, sand and gravel to
produce concrete.
CONDOMINIUM: An apartment house, office building, or other multiple-unit
complex, or structure that has been divided into separate interests in airspace
together with undivided interest in common in real property through the Idaho
Condominium Property Act.
CONTRACTOR YARD: Any land or buildings used primarily for the storage of
equipment, vehicles, machinery, building materials, paints, pipe, or electrical
components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the conduct of any
building trades, hauling, excavation, demolition, or similar activities.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A neighborhood store engaging primarily in the sale of basic
food items. Nonfood items may also be sold provided they are considered
everyday convenience goods.
COUNCIL: The city council of Bonners Ferry, Idaho.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street opening at one end and having a turnaround at the other
end.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved property, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK, SMALL FARM ANIMALS:    Chickens (hens only) and rabbits,
not raised for commercial use and subject to the specific standards of the
zoning district where allowed.
DRUGSTORE: A store where medical prescriptions are filled and drugs and medical
supplies are sold. A drugstore may also sell a variety of other merchandise.
DWELLING: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation, but not including a recreational vehicle,
motor home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent, or portable building, not
designed or constructed to meet Idaho residential building codes, such as a
shipping container.
DWELLING, COTTAGE: A single-family detached dwelling unit within a cottage
housing development that is clustered around common open space.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of three (3) or more dwelling
units including townhouses and condominiums with varying arrangements of
entrances and party walls.
DWELLING, PRIMARY: A separate, complete dwelling unit that is the larger of the
dwelling units when a single-family residential site development plan proposes
or contains an accessory dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling consisting of a single dwelling unit only,
separated from other dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DUPLEX: A dwelling, consisting of two (2) dwelling units
that may be either attached side by side or one above the other.
EASEMENT: A right of use over and under the property of another.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: Any profit making activity, which is generally
related to the entertainment field such as theaters, carnivals, nightclubs,
cocktail lounges and similar entertainment activities.
FABRICATION SHOP: An establishment in which welding work, machining to size,
assembling of materials and converting one form of metal into another to
produce products and structures.
FACADE: The front or chief face of a building.
FARM: Buildings and premises used for the raising and processing of
agricultural products. A farm is greater than five (5) acres in size.
FARM EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE FACILITY: Establishments selling, renting, or
repairing agricultural machinery, equipment, and supplies for use in soil
preparation and maintenance, the planting and harvesting of crops, and other
operations and processes pertaining to farming and ranching. Heavy equipment
sales are included in this category.
FENCE: An enclosure or barrier, such as wooden posts and rails, masonry, stone,
wire, iron, or other such common fencing materials used as a boundary or
enclosure for privacy, protection, or confinement, but not including hedges,
shrubs, trees, or other vegetation. Materials such as scrap or junk materials
such as tires, vehicle parts, broken glass or similar materials, shall not be
used for fence construction.
FOOD STAND OR FOOD TRUCK: A temporary structure or vehicle used for a retail
business of selling food.
GARAGE OR STORAGE BUILDING (PRIVATE): An enclosed accessory building designed
for private storage or parking of noncommercial vehicles. A private garage
attached to or part of the main building is considered to be part of the main
use.
GARDEN, COMMUNITY GARDEN: A private or public space for cultivation of flowers,
vegetables, fruits, and ornamental plants, and including customary gardening
structures such as hoop houses, non-commercial greenhouses, tool sheds, or
potting sheds.
GOLF COURSE: An area of land laid out for the game of golf with a series of
nine (9) or eighteen (18) holes each including tee, fairway and putting green
and often one or more natural or artificial hazards.
GOLF DRIVING RANGE: An area of land equipped with distance markers, clubs,
balls and tees for practicing golf drives.
GOVERNMENT OFFICE: An enterprise or office authorized by a federal, state,
local or foreign government to conduct public business and assistance as
provided in applicable federal, state, or local code, or constitution.
GRADE:
   A.   The degree of inclination of a slope, roadway, or other surface,
   B.   A slope or gradual inclination, and
   C.   The elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
midpoint of any exterior wall of a building or structure.
GREENHOUSE: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of transparent or
translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated
for the cultivation of plants, and for public sale.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The local district health department or state department of
health and welfare that has jurisdictional authority.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point
of the roof peak, parapet wall, or structural feature. Chimneys, cooling
towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, bell towers, smokestacks,
tanks, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio or television towers
or necessary mechanical appurtenances shall not be included in the measurement
of vertical dimensions.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The research, documentation, protection, restoration and
rehabilitation of buildings, structures, objects, district, areas, and site
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this
community, the state, or the nation and so designated by the city council.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, area or site that is significant in
the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community, the state,
or the nation and so designated by the city council.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS: An occupation, profession, or activity which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the premises as a residence, and which
is carried on wholly or in part within a main building or accessory building,
as authorized by an approved special use permit and in accord with the
standards of this title.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, profession, or activity which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the premises as a dwelling and which is
carried on wholly or in part within a main building or accessory building by
members of the family who reside on the premises.
HOSPITAL: An institution licensed by the state and as defined in Idaho Code
section 39-1301.
HOTEL: An establishment that provides lodging to the public for consumption and
is open to transient gusts but excluding boarding houses and “bed and
breakfast” establishments as herein defined. A motel shall not be deemed to be
a hotel.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE: The amount of area covered by hard
surfaces that either prevents or retards the entry of stormwater into the soil
mantel under natural conditions or a hard surface that causes water to run off
in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow as compared to conditions
prior to construction. Impervious surfaces include rooftops, driveways, parking
lots, paved or graveled roads, patios, walkways, or other surfaces.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY: Industrial uses which are generally major operations and
extensive in character, require large sites, open storage and service areas,
extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation and
normally generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare,
air pollution and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT: Manufacturing or other industrial uses, which are usually
controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet and free of objectionable or
hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor or dust; operating and storing
within enclosed structures and generating little industrial traffic and no
nuisances.
INSTITUTION: An establishment which aids individuals in need of mental,
therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling or other correctional services.
JUNKYARD: See definition of Wrecking Yard.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion on which more than three (3) dogs, cats
and other household pets are maintained, harbored, possessed, boarded, bred, or
cared for, in return for compensation or kept for sale.
LAUNDROMAT: An establishment that provides washing, drying, and/or ironing of
clothing or cloth items in machines for hire.
LAUNDRY: An establishment that provides washing, drying and/or ironing services
to retail customers.
LIBRARY: Any establishment or building set aside for the repository or
retrieval of information, available for the public or patrons to make use of
for all kinds of research and reading.
LOT: A platted unit of land recorded with the county in the book of plats,
pursuant to the Idaho surveying and recording standards for plats.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest
the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and
through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered
frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated in this section.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot which abuts only one street.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA OF: The area of a lot that excludes any portion of the right
of way of any public or private street.
LOT OR PARCEL OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the county recorder; or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one
street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
LOT, WIDTH: A measurement of the distance between the property side lines
calculated at the rear of the required front yard setback line.
MACHINE SHOP: A place where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other
metal-working machines are used such as blacksmith, tinsmith, welding, and
sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating, and electrical repair shops and other
similar non-vehicular repair shops.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed to HUD/FHA standards, transportable
in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or
more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, where erected on
site, is three hundred and twenty (320) square feet or more, and that is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation where connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained
therein.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership
whereupon three (3) or more manufactured or mobile homes are placed, located
and maintained for dwelling purposes on a permanent basis.
MASTER PLAN: A to-scale drawing and support documents detailing a proposed
development and methods to achieve the proposed project design, including: the
subject site dimensions, topography, hazardous areas, requested variations to
standards, service features, vehicle and pathway connections, housing types,
proposed uses, landscaping, stormwater features, parking, common areas,
building layout, and other development details that are essential or required
elements of the plan.
MEDICAL CLINIC: A building used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of
persons who seek medical/surgical attention. This does not include medical care
facilities, which provide board, room or regular hospital care and services.
MOBILE HOME: A structure similar to a manufactured home, but built to the
federal manufactured housing and safety standards act (HUD code) of June 15,
1976.
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a manufactured
home, which is constructed according to standards contained in the
international building code, as adopted, which is of closed construction and is
either entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other
than the building site.
MORTUARY: Any establishment or building utilized for the temporary repository
of human remains after death.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings on the same premises whether detached
or in connected rows, containing sleeping or dwelling units independently
accessible from the outside, with garage space or parking space located on the
premises, and designed for, or occupied by, travelers. This term includes, but
is not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as motor lodges,
tourist courts or by any other ordinance or sign intended to identify them as
providing lodging to motorists.
MUSEUM: Any establishment or building utilized for the public display of
artifacts or objects of interest to the public.
NIGHTCLUB: Any establishment or building that provides live or recorded music
and/or a dance area for patrons to gather inside in the evening and nighttime
hours where food and/or alcohol in any form may or may not be served.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure or portion that was lawfully
constructed under the land use regulations in effect at the time of
construction but does not meet the current standards of the district in which
it is located, such as height, area, setbacks, or other zoning standards.
NONCONFORMING LOT OR PARCEL: A lot or parcel that was lawfully created under
the land use laws in effect at the time of its creation but does not conform
with current land use laws for area, street frontage, size, design, or other
land use standards.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of the land, structure, or premises in combination
with a use that does not currently conform with the use regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located, but met the land use laws in effect at
the time of its establishment.
NURSING FACILITY, SKILLED, EXTENDED OR LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY: A home or
facility for the care and treatment of more than eight (8) people, equipped for
extended or long- term nursing service for individuals who require prolonged or
ongoing medical care, assistance with activities of daily living, and
rehabilitation services.
OPEN SPACE: A common area platted as a separate lot, or an area dedicated to
and accepted by the city or other governmental entity. A portion of a
development, which remains predominantly undeveloped and may include natural
resource areas, prime agricultural land, garden plots, greenways, lawns, and
recreation areas.
PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL: That portion of a building wall that rises above the
roof level.
PARCEL: A tract of land in single ownership, considered a unit for purposes of
development.
PARK: Any private or public land, with or without buildings, intended for
public outdoor active or passive recreational use.
PARKING AREA/LOT (PRIVATE): An open graded, surfaced or unsurfaced area, other
than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the
temporary storage of automobiles of occupants or customers of the building or
buildings for which the area is developed and is necessary and accessory.
PARKING AREA/LOT (PUBLIC): An open graded, surfaced or unsurfaced area, other
than a street or public way, to be used for temporary vehicle storage of
operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles and can be available to
the public for a fee.
PARKING SPACE: A usable space within a public or private parking area/lot or a
building, either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or
access drives for the parking of motor vehicles.
PARKLET: A public seating platform that conforms to specific standards as
outlined within city code, which converts curbside parking spaces into
community spaces. Also known as street seats or curbside seating, a parklet is
the product of a partnership between the city and local businesses.
PAWNSHOP: An enclosed building where all business is conducted for the loaning
of money, purchase, sale or exchange of used items.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Any enterprise conducted for gain, which primarily offers
services to the general public such as shoe repair, watch repair, barbershops,
beauty parlors and similar activities.
PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO: Any establishment or building utilized for the creation
and/or production of pictures on photographic or electronic media.
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE: The main use of land or building as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: Offices and related spaces maintained and used as a place
of business, such as doctors, dentists, engineers, attorneys, architects,
interior decorators, accountants and other persons providing professional
services.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE: A public facility and associated
structures for the purpose of supplying service or utilities to the public,
such as water, sewer, or gas pumping stations; power substations; major
transmission line; municipal wastewater collection and treatment facility;
park-and- ride lots; water reservoirs or tanks; storm drainage facility and
storm detention facilities; and similar uses.
PUBLIC USES: Public areas shall include, but not be limited to, parks, schools,
administrative and cultural buildings and structures, bike paths, and public
safety facilities such as police, fire, or emergency medical facilities, not
including public land or buildings devoted solely to the storage and
maintenance of equipment and materials and public service facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY YARD: A yard where facilities such as utility shops, garages, or
storage areas are located that are owned and operated by a public utility.
RADIO STATION: A facility that broadcasts audio over the airwaves, which is
properly licensed. This does not include the tower.
RECREATION VEHICLE (RV): A portable structure primarily designed as temporary
living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK: A premises upon which two (2) or more parking
sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by recreational
vehicles for temporary use for recreation or vacation purposes.
RECYCLING OPERATION: An establishment that is not a junkyard and in which
recoverable resource materials, such as paper products, glassware and metal
cans, are collected, sorted, flattened, crushed or bundled within a completely
enclosed structure prior to shipment to others who use such resource materials
to manufacture new products. The definition does not include the recycling or
recovery of asphalt, oils, shingles, or other such petroleum or chemical-based
products.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residential establishment, licensed by the Idaho
state department of health and welfare, shared by more than eight (8) dependent
individuals, where twenty four (24) hour care, maintenance and supervision are
provided by a resident staff. Said establishment shall not be considered a
daycare facility, retirement home, convalescent home, but may serve as an
intermediate facility to those establishments.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building, or part thereof, other than a boarding house,
where meals are provided for compensation, including, but not limited to, cafe,
cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, tearoom, outdoor dining, dining room, and
drive-in.
RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Large: Retail operations that carry an assortment of merchandise, and
include, but are not limited to stores or establishments such as grocery store,
department store, discount store, farm store, auction house, sporting goods
store, and similar establishments with a floor area generally exceeding ten
thousand (10,000) square feet;
   B.   Medium: Retail operations with a floor area generally between four
thousand (4,000) square feet and ten thousand (10,000) square feet and engaged
in the sale or rental of goods for consumer or household use but excluding
animal sales or service, building materials supplies, sales, or rental. Typical
establishments include drug store, convenience store, clothing store, small
appliance store;
   C.   Small/Specialty: Establishments generally of less than four thousand
(4,000) square feet of floor area engaged in the sale or rental of goods for
consumer or household use; excluding animal sales or service. Typical products
include the sale or rental of goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption or to service incidental to the sale or
rental of such goods or merchandise. Specialty retail sales include retail
operations that specialize in merchandise such as, but not limited to, apparel,
jewelry, books, shoes, stationary, antiques, bakery shop, deli, ice cream shop,
and similar establishments.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES: A place where a consumer in person can purchase
commodities and/or services. May also include mail order sales and dispatch of
repair personnel.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the
roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting
and drainage facilities, and may include special features required by
topography or treatment such as grade separation, landscaped area, utilities
and bridges.
ROADSIDE STAND: A booth, stall, or temporary structure designed or used for the
display or sale of agricultural and related products, the majority of which
have been grown on adjacent land or purchased for sale to the public.
SCHOOL: An institution of learning either publicly or privately supported.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing restroom facilities, with wastewater, sink
and laundry facilities with bath or shower accommodations.
SETBACK: The space on a lot required to be left open and unoccupied by
buildings and structures, either by the front, side, or rear yard requirements
of the ordinance or by delineation on a record subdivision map.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of three (3) or more retail sale establishments,
attached or detached, that are planned, developed, owned and/or managed as
units related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area the unit
serves.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: “Short-term rental’ or “vacation rental” means any
individually or collectively owned single-family house or dwelling unit or any
unit or group of units in a condominium, cooperative or timeshare, or owner-
occupied residential home that is offered for a fee and for thirty (30) days or
fewer. Short-term rental or vacation rental does not include a unit that is
used for any retail, restaurant, banquet space, event center or another similar
use.
SIDEWALK: The portion of the road right of way outside the roadway, which is
improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: Signs located on a separate parcel of land or a separate
site from the place where the product, service or business is located.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: Signs located on the same parcel of land or the same site as
the place where the product, service or business is located.
SIGNS:
   A.   Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not
on the premises on which the sign is located.
   B.   Any identification, description, illustration, symbol, statue or
device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place
designed to advertise, identify or convey information, including any
landscaping where letters or numbers are used for the purpose of directing the
public's attention to a product or location, with the exception of window
displays and state or national flags.
SMALL ENGINE REPAIR SHOP: A place that repairs small equipment such as lawn
mowers, tillers, weed eaters, chainsaws, and small recreational vehicles less
than thirty (30) horsepower.
STOCKYARD: Any area of land, structure, pen, or corral wherein cattle, horses,
sheep, goats, and swine are maintained in confined quarters for the purpose of
fattening such livestock for final shipment to market.
STORAGE FACILITY: A structure or group of structures with a controlled access
and fenced compound that contains individual, compartmentalized, or controlled
units that are leased or sold to store material (including, but not limited to,
goods, wares, merchandise, or vehicles).
STREET, PUBLIC: A public right of way which provides vehicular, walking,
biking, or other multi-modal access to adjacent properties, the dedication of
which has been officially accepted by the city of Bonners Ferry. The term
"street" also includes the terms "highway", "thoroughfare", "parkway", "road",
"avenue", "boulevard", "lane", "place" and other such terms.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed
location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings,
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and billboards, but not including fences or
walls used as fences not exceeding seven feet (7') in height, when measured
from pre-development elevations.
SUPPLY YARDS: A commercial establishment storing and offering for sale building
supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar goods.
TELEVISION STATION: A facility that broadcasts audio and video over the
airwaves, which is properly licensed. This does not include the tower.
TOWER: A structure and associated equipment for the purpose of commercial
radio, television, telephone, paging, or satellite reception and/or
transmission.
TOWER, CELL: A free-standing structure that is attached to the ground, a
rooftop, or other structure that is used for the installation and operation of
wireless communication facilities, including monopoles, lattice towers, guy-
wire supported towers, or other similar structures.
TOWNHOUSE, TOWNHOUSE LOT: Single-family attached unit in structures housing
three (3) or more dwelling units, contiguous to each other by a common bearing
wall, each with separate entrances and legally divided into separate ownerships
that includes individual ownership of front and back yards.
TRUCKING TERMINAL YARD: An establishment or area where freight (brought by
truck) is transferred. The terminal facility may include storage or repair
areas for trucks.
USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated, arranged,
intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title as to the lot size,
lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking
space, height of buildings, or other ordinance provision affecting the size or
shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size
of lots. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but
may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of
characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the
public interest. Prior to granting a variance, notice and an opportunity to be
heard shall be provided to property owners adjoining the parcel under
consideration.
VEHICLE SALES FACILITY: Premises where new or used passenger automobiles,
trailers, trucks, or recreation vehicles in operating condition are displayed
in the open or on sales floor for sale, trade, rental, and repair.
VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC: A place used for the care, grooming,
diagnosis and treatment of animals, which may include overnight accommodations
on the premises.
WALKWAY: A public way for pedestrian use only, whether or not along the side of
a road.
WALL: A continuous structure designed to enclose an area.
WAREHOUSE/WAREHOUSING: An enclosed facility where raw materials and finished
goods are received, stored, and distributed to customers for sale at other
locations.
WATERPARK: A large, outdoor area with water features such as swimming pool,
water slides, splash pad, wave pools, and other such water-based attractions
open to the general public and exceeding four thousand (4,000) square feet of
facilities, structures, and parking.
WHOLESALE: Establishment primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing
merchandise to retailers or to industrial/commercial end users, or other
wholesalers. This is not considered a general commercial or retail use.
WOODWORKING SHOP: Establishments where wood is modified and finished products
are sold.
WRECKING YARD: An outdoor space, whether commercial or noncommercial, where
waste and discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled,
packed, disassembled, stored or handled, including, but not limited to,
wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places for storage
of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment.
YARD, SETBACK:
   Corner Yard Setback: An unoccupied space on a corner lot that is not the
primary access point for the property.
   Front Yard Setback:    An unoccupied space extending across the full width
of a parcel or lot that abuts a street or access easement that is the primary
access for the property. Property fronting on parallel streets shall be deemed
to have two (2) front yards. Property on intersecting streets shall have one
front yard determined by the primary access point and a corner lot yard. The
front yard property line for property fronting on a public prescriptive right-
of-way shall be considered twenty-five feet (25') from the centerline of the
existing road for purposes of measuring the required setback.
   Rear Yard: An open unoccupied space on the same lot or parcel as the
structure that is most opposite the front yard. For triangular lots, the rear
yard shall be measured from the apex of the triangle.
   Side Yard: An open unoccupied space on the same lot or parcel as the
structure that is generally perpendicular to the front and rear yards. Any yard
not defined as front or rear shall be considered a side yard.
YARD SALE: A temporary sales activity at a private residence. The use is not
considered a commercial activity if not of greater frequency than twice in a
calendar year, not exceeding three (3) consecutive days.
ZONING PERMIT: A permit that requires approval by the Administrator, including
but not limited to, building permits, administrative reviews and site plans, as
applicable.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Planning And Zoning Commission
11-3-2: Zoning Administrator
11-3-3: Appeals
11-3-4: Mediation
11-3-5: Fees
11-3-6: Violation And Enforcement
11-3-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   The city has established a planning and zoning commission and set forth the
commission's organization, rules, meetings, appointments, and duties at Title 2
of city code. The commission has the authority and responsibility to perform
the duties set forth in the Idaho Local Land Use Planning Act and this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-3-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   This title shall be administered by the zoning administrator or designee,
who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council and shall have
the following duties and authority:
   A.   Advise interested persons regarding zoning and subdivision ordinance
provisions;
   B.   Notify the public and media of pending public hearings and actions, as
required by law;
   C.   Advise applicants regarding required applications and ordinance
compliance;
   D.   Administer and issue land use and development permits, notifications
and similar administrative duties as set forth in this title;
   E.   Investigate possible violations of this title and take the actions
necessary and appropriate to remedy such violations;
   F.   Assist the planning and zoning commission and city council in
implementing the provisions of this title;
   G.   Coordinate with other departments and public agencies concerning all
permits that may be required by this title; and
   H.   Perform other planning duties as assigned by this title or at the
request of the city council or city administrator.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-3-3: APPEALS:
   Any final, written administrative decision made pursuant to this title shall
be considered final unless appealed by an affected person to city council,
pursuant to the following procedures:
   A.   A written appeal, containing the grounds for such an appeal and any
supporting documents, shall be filed with the city clerk, along with applicable
fees, within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the final, written
administrative decision. Failure to file the appeal in a timely manner with
proper fees shall cause an automatic dismissal of the claim.
   B.   Upon receipt of the properly filed appeal, the city, shall schedule the
matter for consideration by the city council at a regular or special meeting
within thirty (30) days, allowing sufficient time for proper meeting notice.
Copies of the appeal shall be provided to the council and city staff affected
by the appeal.
   C.   The city council shall consider the appeal and provide an opportunity
for the appellant, appellant's representative, affected staff, and interested
parties to present relevant information regarding the matter.
   D.   The city council may reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in part,
the administrative decision, or may table the matter to another meeting to
allow time for additional information or further deliberations. The final
decision shall not grant a special privilege or provide an exception to the
regulations of this title.
   E.   The city shall notify the appellant in writing of the council's
decision.
   F.   The council's decision is final, and any further recourse shall be as
provided by Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-3-4: MEDIATION:
   Mediation: Mediation of planning and zoning issues may be provided in
accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6510.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-3-5: FEES:
   All fees for the administration and enforcement of this title shall be set
by resolution of the city council and shall be non-refundable. No action shall
be taken on any application or appeal until required fees are paid in full.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-3-6: VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any development, occupation, construction, action, or inaction that is
contrary to the requirements of this title or Idaho Code shall be declared a
violation. No person, entity, agent, contractor, landowner, tenant, or other
authority shall proceed with the development, occupation, construction or other
act until the requirements of this code have been satisfied.
   B.   The violation of any of the provisions of this act or failure to comply
with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Any person, entity,
agent, contractor, tenant, or landowner who commits, participates in, assists
in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense.
   C.   The city attorney, in addition to taking whatever criminal action
deemed necessary, has the authority to take steps to civilly enjoin any
violation of this act.
   D.   The adoption of this title shall not in any manner affect the
prosecution for violations of zoning codes committed prior to the effective
date hereof or be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due to the
city under such ordinances.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
11-4-1: Zoning Districts Established
11-4-2: Zoning Districts And Map Symbols
11-4-3: Zoning District Purposes And General Standards
11-4-4: Official Zoning Map
11-4-5: Uses By Zoning District
11-4-6: Classification Of New Uses
11-4-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
   Zoning districts are hereby established for all real property lying within
the corporate city limits of Bonners Ferry. The official zoning map adopted by
the city creates the zoning district boundaries and zones, rezones, and re-
establishes zoning district classifications and the boundaries for each zoning
district for all real property lying within the city. The regulations
established by this title for each district shall be the minimum regulations
and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land use, as
set forth by this title. The zoning district descriptions and map symbols are
established as follows.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-4-2: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP SYMBOLS:
ZONING DISTRICT NAME MAP SYMBOL
ZONING DISTRICT NAME MAP SYMBOL
Residential A        RES-A
Residential B        RES-B
Residential AB       RES-AB
Mixed Use            MX
Commercial           C
Downtown             D
Medical              M
Light Industrial     LI
 
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-4-3: ZONING DISTRICT PURPOSES AND GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Residential A (RES-A) Residential Single-Family. Purpose: The purpose
of this zone is to provide for single-family residences, accessory dwelling
units, residential accessory structures, home occupations, and other uses and
structures generally associated with moderate- to larger-sized residential
lots, consistent with the specific standards of this title. This zoning
district is generally appropriate for lands designated as Residential Single-
Family on the city's adopted comprehensive plan future land use map. The
following general standards shall apply to the Residential A zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Residential A:
 
Requirement                                                  Standard
Minimum site area for newly created lots or parcels          12,000 square feet
Number of primary residential dwellings permitted per lot or One
parcel
 
   B.   Residential B (RES-B) Residential Low Density. Purpose: The purpose of
this zone is to provide for single- and two-family residences, accessory
dwelling units, residential accessory structures, and home occupations.
Opportunities for townhomes and cottage housing developments that are
appropriately scaled for the neighborhood are provided, subject to the specific
standards of this title for these uses. Public and community uses could include
schools, churches, and public utility services. This zoning district is
generally appropriate for lands designated as Residential Low Density on the
city's comprehensive plan future land use map. The following general standards
shall apply to the Residential B zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Residential B:
 
Requirement                             Standard
Minimum site area for newly created     8,000 square feet
lots or parcels
Minimum site area for one duplex        12,000 square feet
                                        One single-family dwelling or one
                                        duplex meeting zoning standards, unless
Number of primary residential dwellings developed with approved cottage or
permitted per lot or parcel             townhome housing option, consistent
                                        with the specific standards of Chapter
                                        6 of this title
 
      2.   Specific Standards. The Residential B zone:
         a.   Permits the keeping of up to twelve (12) chickens (hens only) and
up to six (6) rabbits, regardless of acreage. The buildings or enclosures for
housing such animals and housekeeping measures shall meet the sanitary
standards of section
5-3A-6 of city code.
         b.   Prohibits the keeping of roosters and any other domestic
livestock or poultry other than those listed in subsection
11-4-3 B2a.
   C.   Residential AB (RES-AB) Residential Medium Density. Purpose: The
purpose of this zone is to provide a variety of housing options, appropriately
scaled for the neighborhoods, to include one- and two-family residences,
accessory dwelling units, accessory residential structures, townhomes, smaller-
scaled multi-family residences, cottage-style housing, and townhomes, subject
to the specific standards of this title. Included in this district are
opportunities for home occupations, schools, churches, parks, assisted living
facilities, and public service utilities. This zoning district is generally
appropriate for lands designated as Residential Medium Density or Neighborhood
Transition on the city's comprehensive plan future land use map. Those areas
designated on the adopted comprehensive plan as Neighborhood Transition have
opportunities for certain commercial-like uses as specified in this title. The
Neighborhood Transition also indicates an opportunity for future growth and
rezoning of lands as the city grows and transitions toward more intense land
uses. The following general standards shall apply to the Residential AB zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Residential AB:
 
Requirement                             Standard
Minimum site area for newly created     8,000 square feet
lots or parcels
Minimum site area for one duplex        11,000 square feet
                                        8,000 square feet + 3,000 square feet
                                        of additional land for each additional
Minimum site area for multi-family      dwelling unit, where additional units
                                        are authorized by the use table.
                                        (Example: Duplex = 11,000 square feet;
                                        tri-plex = 14,000 square feet of land)
                                        One single-family dwelling or one
                                        duplex meeting zoning standards, unless
Number of primary residential dwellings developed with approved cottage, multi-
permitted per lot or parcel             family, or townhome housing options,
                                        consistent with the specific standards
                                        of Chapter 6 of this title
 
   D.   Mixed Use (MX) Purpose: This zone provides for a variety of housing
options, small-scale, low-impact retail, dining, and entertainment uses, public
recreational and gathering amenities, parks, public utilities, and churches.
This zone is designed to encourage the development of mixed use and public and
recreational amenities through the planned unit development concept. Incentives
for clustered, more intense development and a wider array of uses are offered
through the mixed use planned unit development approach. In return, the city
requires walkable and bikeable public streets, corridors to recreational
opportunities, public gathering places, and other amenities to be created as
part of the planned unit development. This zoning district is generally
appropriate for lands designated as Masterplan Mixed Use on the city's
comprehensive plan future land use map. The following general standards shall
apply to the Mixed Use zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Mixed Use:
 
Requirement                             Standard
Minimum site area for newly created     8,000 square feet, unless developed
lots or parcels not developed through   through an approved planned unit
an approved planned unit development    development
Minimum site area for duplex            11,000 square feet
                                        8,000 square feet + 3,000 square feet
                                        of additional land for each additional
Minimum site area for multi-family      dwelling unit, where additional units
                                        are authorized by the use table.
                                        (Example: Duplex = 11,000 square feet;
                                        tri-plex = 14,000 square feet of land)
Minimum site area for newly created
lots or parcels within an approved      See Chapter 12
mixed-use planned unit development
                                        One, unless developed with approved
                                        cottage, multi-family, townhome housing
Number of primary residential dwellings or mixed-use planned unit development
permitted per lot or parcel             option, consistent with the specific
                                        standards of Chapters 6 or 12 of this
                                        title
 
      2.   Mixed Use Planned Unit Development: This zone allows an
administrative site plan review of a proposed mixed use planned unit
development, subject to the application requirements and procedures of Chapter
12 of this title.
      3.   Mixed-Use Opportunities And Variations: A mixed-use planned unit
development that meets the minimum standards of Chapter 12 shall be allowed to
vary from the zoning standards, including setbacks, density, parking, lot
sizes, and coverage, subject to the review and approval set forth at the mixed-
use PUD section of chapter 12.
   E.   Commercial (C) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to provide for a
wide variety of commercial, large- and small-scale retail, general service,
professional office, housing, mixed commercial and housing structures, dining,
and entertainment. This zoning district is generally appropriate for lands
designated as General Commercial & Mixed Use and Neighborhood Transition on the
city's comprehensive plan future land use map. The following general standards
apply to this zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Commercial:
 
Requirement                             Standard
                                        Sufficient to accommodate required
Minimum site area for newly created     parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
lots or parcels                         and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
Number of primary residential dwellings Sufficient to accommodate required
or dwelling units permitted per lot or  parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
parcel                                  and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
Number of structures permitted per lot  None specified; subject to setback and
or parcel                               maximum coverage standards
 
   F.   Downtown (D) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to provide for uses
in the city's downtown core, to include small-scale retail and general service
uses, entertainment, eating and drinking establishments, residential apartments
and dwellings above the ground floor, small instructional/educational uses,
public gathering and parking spaces. This zoning district is generally
appropriate for lands designated as Downtown on the city's comprehensive plan
future land use map. The following general standards apply to this zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Downtown:
 
Requirement                             Standard
                                        Sufficient to accommodate required
Minimum site area for newly created     parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
lots or parcels                         and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
                                        Sufficient to accommodate required
Number of primary residential dwellings parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
permitted per lot or parcel             and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
 
   G.   Medical (M) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to provide a variety
of medical, health care, emergency services, hospitals, clinics, pharmacies,
and residential care facilities. Uses may include residential opportunities to
support the medical community to include one- and two-family residences,
cottage-style housing, and townhomes. Parks, churches, and public service
utilities may be considered in this district. This zoning district is generally
appropriate for lands designated as Medical Commercial on the city's
comprehensive plan future land use map. The following general standards apply
to this zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Medical:
 
Requirement                             Standard
                                        Sufficient to accommodate required
Minimum site area for newly created     parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
lots or parcels                         and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
                                        Sufficient to accommodate required
Number of primary residential dwellings parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
permitted per lot or parcel             and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
                                        Sufficient to accommodate required
Number of primary and accessory         parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
structures permitted per lot or parcel  and other zoning standards of this
                                        title
 
   H.   Light Industrial (LI) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to provide
for light-and medium-industrial uses, warehouses, public utilities,
fairgrounds, and parks. Residential uses are prohibited. This zoning district
is generally appropriate for lands designated as Industrial & Public on the
city's comprehensive plan future land use map or where mapped Neighborhood
Transition and adjoins the Industrial mapped area on the future land use map.
The following general standards apply to this zone:
      1.   General Standards Table For Light Industrial:
 
Requirement                            Standard
Minimum site area for newly created    Sufficient to accommodate required
lots or parcels                        parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
                                       and other zoning standards of this title
Number of primary and accessory        Sufficient to accommodate required
structures permitted per lot or parcel parking, utilities, setbacks, coverage,
                                       and other zoning standards of this title
 
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-4-4: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
   A.   Map Adopted: The official zoning map is made a part of this title by
reference and shall be signed by the mayor and clerk upon adoption and shall be
kept on file with the city clerk as the official record of the city. The
official map shall constitute legal evidence of the existing zoning districts
within the city.
   B.   Districts: The districts established in section
11-4-1 and
11-4-2 of this chapter are shown on the official zoning map, as now existing or
as may hereafter be amended, together with all explanatory material thereon,
are hereby incorporated into this title as if set forth in full within this
title.
   C.   Boundaries Of Districts: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map,
the following shall apply:
      1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the centerline of street lines, highway right-of-way lines, streams, lakes or
other bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such boundary;
      2.   Where district boundaries are indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;
and
      3.   Where district boundaries indicate a single lot or parcel is split
by two (2) or more different zones, the zone assigned to the majority of the
lot or parcel shall be considered the effective zone.
   D.   Amendments. Any amendments to the official zoning map approved in
accord with this title shall be noted by the city on the official zoning map.
   E.   Replacement Map: The City Council may adopt by resolution a replacement
official zoning map if the official map:
      1.   Is difficult to read due to multiple noted zoning amendments;
      2.   Contains outdated mapping technology, aerial or parcel information;
      3.   Is lost, damaged, or destroyed; or
      4.   Contains drafting errors.
   F.   A replacement map shall not be used to amend any zoning district
boundaries approved by the city council.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-4-5: USES BY ZONING DISTRICT:
   Appendix A provides the official schedule of zoning district uses and is
based upon the following:
   A.   Determining Uses: To determine in which district a specific use is
allowed:
   B.   Find the use within the use table in appendix A of this title; and
   C.   Read across the chart's row and find where the use intersects the
applicable zoning district.
   D.   Determine whether a "P", "S" "(blank)", or "asterisks," appear in the
district column the property is located; and
   E.   Apply the follow rule to the use:
      1.   "P" means the use is a permitted use;
      2.   "S" means the use is only allowed upon the issuance of a special use
permit;
      3.   A blank cell means the use is not allowed;
      4.   An asterisk means a site plan review is required;
      5.   A double asterisk means only allowed where the site is mapped as
Transition on the adopted future land use map (comprehensive plan map).
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-4-6: CLASSIFICATION OF NEW USES:
   Classification Of New Uses Within Zone Districts: New or unanticipated types
of land uses may be proposed within the city. In order to provide for such
changes and contingencies, when a use is proposed that is not listed as a
permitted, special or prohibited use in a zone district, the administrator
shall make a determination that:
   A.   The use falls within the same standard classification pursuant to the
North American Industry Classification System, as amended, modified or
superseded, as a listed permitted or conditional use in a current zone district
and that it may be processed in the same fashion as the listed use; or
   B.   The use does not fall within the same standard classification pursuant
to the North American Industry Classification System, as amended, modified or
superseded, as a listed permitted or conditional use in a particular zone
district, and thus is a prohibited use in that district; or
   C.   The use is unique in nature and an amendment to this title is necessary
in order to allow for its placement within the appropriate zone district.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICT GENERAL STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-5-1: General Provisions
11-5-2: Schedule Of Building Standards
11-5-3: Site Development Standards
11-5-4: Landscaping Plans Required
11-5-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   The regulations for each zoning district set forth by this title shall
be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as otherwise specifically provided by this title.
   B.   Construction And Placement:
      1.   All required setbacks shall be measured from the greatest
architectural projection of the building or structure to the nearest property
line or other measurement point established by this title.
      2.   Each part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed
by other buildings or structures, except for cornices, gutters, eaves, bay
windows, or other similar above-ground architectural projections, which shall
not encroach more than two feet (2') into any required yard. The structure or
building shall be constructed and maintained to contain stormwater and snow
shed on site.
      3.   All single-family dwellings converted to multi-family dwellings must
conform to the latest edition of the adopted building codes.
      4.   Any existing single-family dwelling converted to a multi-family
dwelling shall contain at least four hundred (400) square feet of livable floor
area per dwelling unit.
      5.   Structures may be placed or constructed across legally created,
contiguous parcels or lots under the same ownership, provided the landowner
records a lot combination agreement on a form provided by the city that states
the land is considered one for the purposes of development. The city may then
consider the lot or parcel as one for the application of zoning standards.
      6.   The zoning administrator may grant the following administrative
exceptions to setback requirements:
         a.   An exception not to exceed one foot to any setback or height
standard, upon a showing of undue hardship or extraordinary physical conditions
of the property or structure.
         b.   Exceptions to front or corner yard setbacks if the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator that more than
fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the same side of the street within the
same block as the subject property are less than the required setbacks from the
property lines. The zoning administrator may grant an exception to allow a
structure to be built or placed in conformity with the front building lines of
the majority of the buildings erected on any such lots, but not less than ten
feet (10') set back.
         c.   Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals,
sanitariums, schools or churches, when permitted in a district, may exceed the
height allowed in the district where they are located, if approved through the
special use permit or variance process, provided the exception is approved by
the fire chief.
      7.   Where a zero lot line setback is indicated in the schedule of
building standards of this title, the structure shall meet the minimum adopted
building code requirements for setbacks and zero lot line construction.
      8.   Where the maximum height stated in the schedule of building
standards of this title differs from the adopted building code standards, the
adopted building code standards shall prevail.
      9.   Buildings shall not project into or over a public right-of-way
except for awnings, eaves, parapets, or signs, where allowed in this title. No
awning, eave or parapet shall be closer than two feet (2'), measured in
horizontal distance, to the curb and shall be at a minimum eight feet (8')
above the adjacent or closest grade that the public uses for walking, parking
or other public uses.
      10.   A recorded common/party wall agreement addressing construction,
maintenance, repair, and rights of access is required to be filed with the city
for zero setback/shared wall construction, where permitted by this title.
   C.   Fences:
      1.   Fences shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height. Fence height
shall be considered the vertical distance from natural grade of the property at
the base of the fence to the highest point on the fence or fence structure,
including finials, posts, latticework, screens, rockery bases, or other fence
features. A gate or arbor serving an entryway to the yard shall be permitted to
a maximum nine feet (9') in height and four feet (4') in width.
      2.   Fences not exceeding seven feet (7') in height may be located on the
property line. Fences exceeding the height limit are defined as structures and
shall meet the minimum structure setback requirements of the respective zoning
district.
      3.   No fence, wall, or shrubbery shall obstruct or interfere with
traffic visibility. Nothing shall be erected, planted, or placed that impedes
traffic vision through the sight triangle, as defined in Idaho Code.
   D.   Removal Of Traffic Hazards:
      1.   The owner(s) of real property have the responsibility to remove from
their property any hedge, shrubbery, fence, wall or other sight obstructions of
any nature, except public traffic or highway signs, buildings and trees, where
these sight obstructions constitute a potential traffic hazard. Sight
obstructions shall not be permitted within the "sight triangle" as defined in
Idaho Code.
      2.   When the City Engineer or designee determines upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that such a traffic hazard exists, the
city engineer or designee shall notify the owner and order that the hazard
shall be removed by the owner within fifteen (15) days.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-5-2: SCHEDULE OF BUILDING STANDARDS:
   The following table establishes the minimum zoning standards for building
construction and placement. Consult the General Standards Section
11-5-1 and the notes below the following table for additional requirements or
exceptions:
Zoning   Maximum Front Yard Rear Yard Interior/ Corner Lot Maximum    Minimum
District Height  Setback    Setback   Side Yard Yard       Impervious Lot Width
                                      Setback   Setback    Coverage
Zoning   Maximum Front     Rear Yard Interior/  Corner Lot Maximum    Minimum
District Height  Yard      Setback   Side Yard  Yard       Impervious Lot Width
                 Setback             Setback    Setback    Coverage
                                     20'
RES-A    35 ft.  20 ft.1   10 ft.    combine    20 ft.     50%        50'
                                     d4,5
                                     20'
RES-B    35 ft.  20 ft.1   10 ft.    combine    20 ft.     60%        50'
                                     d4,5
                                     20'
RES-AB   35 ft.  20 ft.1   10 ft.    combine    20 ft.     60%        50'
                                     d4,5
MX       35 ft.  20 ft.1   10 ft.    20'        20 ft.     75%        50'
                                     combine d4
M        35 ft.  20 ft.1   10 ft.    10 ft.     20 ft.     75%        50'
D        35 ft.  02        02        0          02         No maximum None
C        35 ft.  20 ft.1,2 03        03         20 ft.1,2  80%        50'
LI       35 ft.  20 ft.1,2 03        03         20 ft.1,2  No maximum 50'
 
Notes/conditions:
   1.   In addition to the setbacks listed in the schedule of building
standards table, the front and corner lot setbacks shall also be a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from the property line abutting the street and ingress/egress
easements.
   2.   Federal Highway Setback: No building shall be placed or erected within
a distance of sixty feet (60') each side of the centerline of the street
variously known as U.S. Highway 95, U.S. Highway 2 and South Main Street but
not less than twenty feet (20') set back from the front property line.
   3.   A ten-foot (10') minimum rear or side yard setback is required where
property line abuts land that is not zoned Light Industrial or Commercial. Rear
and interior residential structure setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') for the Commercial zone.
   4.   Combined side yard interior setback shall be twenty feet (20'), with
neither side less than eight feet (8'), except as otherwise provided.
   5.   Side yard interior setbacks for lots or parcels fifty feet (50') or
narrower shall be a minimum five feet (5'), inclusive of all architectural
projections. Structure shall be designed and constructed to retain snowshed and
stormwater runoff on site.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-5-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   Prior to any site preparation, excavation, and construction shall be in
accord with the standards adopted by the city for drainage, stormwater/erosion
control, public right-of-way access, floodplain, and hillside or steep slope
development.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-5-4: LANDSCAPING PLANS REQUIRED:
   A.   Applicability And Plans: In order to provide screening and shade and to
reduce glare, heat, and stormwater runoff, a landscape plan is required at the
time of building permit application for all new commercial or multi-family
development or expansion of existing development that creates ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of impervious surface or more or where specific conditions
of special use permit approval require landscaping. The project site plan shall
include landscaping details showing:
      1.   Existing trees and vegetation that are to be preserved and methods
to protect;
      2.   Location, spacing, size, and identification of proposed new
plantings;
      3.   Planting schedule, to be installed not later than structure
occupancy;
      4.   Location of any buffers, fences, lighting, benches or other outdoor
furniture;
      5.   Type and location of proposed irrigation.
   B.   Guidelines: Retention of existing vegetation and integration of native
vegetation are preferred landscaping options. Plantings should be a mix of
evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover suitable for the area
climate and of sufficient size to provide required shading and screening.
   C.   Protection Of Line Of Sight: Vegetation shall be planted in areas where
the plantings at maturity will not block the intersection sight triangle or
obscure other business facades, signs, driveway accesses, or pedestrian/bike
pathways.
   D.   Design: The following minimum landscaping features shall be installed
for the specific site conditions:
      1.   Parking Areas, Multi-Family Structures, And Commercial Uses: A mix
of evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs in a planting strip of not less than
ten feet (10') along the parking area and adjacent property lines.
      2.   Screening Of Adjoining Uses, Outdoor Storage Structures: Sight
barriers of a minimum twenty foot (20') wide buffering strip of evergreen trees
at a minimum height of six feet (6') at planting.
   E.   Maintenance: The required landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy
condition by the property owner or designee. Any unhealthy or dead plants shall
be replaced by the owner as soon as weather permits.
   F.   Exceptions: The zoning administrator may approve exceptions to the
design or placement where the owner can demonstrate that existing vegetation,
slopes, rockery, fencing, or other site features provide the necessary
screening or shading.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 6
ZONING STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
SECTION:
11-6-1: Purpose
11-6-2: Manufactured Home Siting Standards
11-6-3: Recreational Vehicle (RV) Occupancy
11-6-4: Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks
11-6-5: Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks
11-6-6: Bulk Storage
11-6-7: Home Occupations
11-6-8: Home-Based Business
11-6-9: In-Home Daycare
11-6-10: Wrecking Yard, Impound Yard, Junk Yard, Stock Yard
11-6-11: Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)
11-6-12: Short-Term Rentals
11-6-13: Parklets
11-6-14: Cottage Housing
11-6-15: Townhomes
11-6-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish basic development standards
consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan and to set
general and specific conditions for development and various uses or areas
within the city. The regulations set forth are adopted to serve, protect and
promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to preserve and enhance the
aesthetic qualities of the city, while allowing for the orderly and efficient
development of property in accordance with all state and federal regulations.
Appendix A, "Table of Uses," of this title establishes the types of uses and
zoning districts where various uses are allowed. The specific design
regulations set forth in this chapter are in addition to and supplement the
zoning district standards set forth elsewhere in this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-2: MANUFACTURED HOME SITING STANDARDS:
   Manufactured Home Siting Standards: In all areas within the corporate limits
wherein this code permits the location, occupation and use of single-family
dwellings, manufactured and mobile homes meeting or exceeding the following
specifications will be a permitted and authorized use, subject to the following
restrictions on the placement of said homes:
   A.   Manufactured homes shall be multi-sectional enclosing a space of not
less than one thousand (1,000) square feet and when assembled on site, they
shall not be less than twenty feet (20') both in length and width. They shall
also either have been certified as having been constructed in accordance with
the standards for certification of manufactured/mobile homes by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development and manufactured/mobile home
construction and safety standards, or if manufactured prior to June 15, 1976,
have received a certificate of compliance from the Administrator of the
Division of Building Safety of the State of Idaho that the structure meets the
rehabilitation requirements of Idaho Code title 44, chapter 25.
   B.   Manufactured housing shall be installed in accordance with Idaho Code
title 44, chapter 22, "Manufactured Housing Setup Code."
   C.   The manufactured home shall have a pitched attached roof with a slope
of not less than three feet (3') in height for each twelve feet (12') in width.
   D.   The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing material
commonly used on residential dwellings and which is comparable to the
predominant material used on the buildings in the area. The city officer
charged with the approval of building will determine compliance with this
provision.
   E.   The provisions of this chapter shall not permit manufactured homes or
the lot upon which they are sited to follow any development standard,
architectural requirements, and/or minimum size requirements, which are lower
or less than that which is or would be applicable to a conventional single-
family residential dwelling constructed on the same lot.
   F.   This chapter shall not apply to the regulation of manufactured/mobile
homes situated or to be situated in manufactured/mobile home parks which the
city has approved as a manufactured/mobile home park nor shall this apply to
lands falling within an area defined as a historic district under Idaho Code
67-4607 nor shall this chapter be applied to modify or abrogate any recorded
restrictive covenant applicable to any land within the jurisdiction of the
city.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-3: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) OCCUPANCY:
   A.   No RV, motor home, or travel trailer shall be used as permanent living
quarters.
   B.   No person shall live in or continuously occupy a recreational vehicle
or camper (pickup), as defined in this title whether or not self-contained,
within the city, unless said recreational vehicle is located within a legally
established recreational vehicle park or recreational vehicle campground;
except that the temporary occupancy of a recreational vehicle parked on a
residentially zoned property for a period of up to fourteen (14) days in one
365-day calendar cycle is permitted, pursuant to city code section
4-5-6.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-4: MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   Intent: This section is established to set standards and regulations
governing the location and approval of manufactured or mobile home parks in a
manner that is consistent with state law and in keeping with the policies of
the adopted comprehensive plan to provide a variety of housing types for all
ages, incomes, and abilities, while ensuring safe, attractive, and sanitary
conditions. The following standards apply to the development and redevelopment
of manufactured and mobile home parks:
   A.   Each manufactured/mobile home lot shall meet the following minimum land
area and space width:
      1.   Single-wide homes shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet in land area and a minimum of thirty five feet (35') of front lot width;
      2.   Multi-sectional homes shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet in
land area and a minimum of fifty feet (50') of front lot width.
   B.   A screening wall or vegetation screening along the borders of the
manufactured or mobile home park shall be provided.
   C.   All manufactured or mobile home parks shall comply with all other
applicable requirements of the zoning district and the requirements of
floodplain areas.
   D.   Manufactured or mobile home parks shall comply with the standards set
for public streets.
   E.   The park shall provide exterior lighting at locations, as determined by
the city engineer, necessary for public safety and welfare. Lights, that are
near a public street or alley, are to be installed so that the visibility of
any oncoming traffic is not obstructed.
   F.   All parks shall provide an open area for recreational purposes..
   G.   All parks with fifteen (15) spaces or more shall provide one or more
parking areas of adequate size for recreational vehicles for the occupants of
the park. No such parking area shall be used or occupied for a commercial
purpose or by those not residing in the park. Fencing and landscaping shall
screen the parking area.
   H.   A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each
manufactured/mobile home lot.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-5: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARKS:
   The purpose of this section is to provide the standards and requirements for
the location, operation and accommodations for a park or court for the purpose
of providing short-term camping facilities.
   A.   Application: The application for an RV park permit shall contain the
minimum requirements for the respective application type and shall also include
the following:
      1.   Extent and area used for camping purposes.
      2.   Roadways and driveways, including the width and type of surface.
      3.   Location of sites or units for RVs, motor homes or travel trailers.
      4.   Location and number of service buildings, including facilities
within.
      5.   Method of sewage and trash disposal.
      6.   Plan for water and electrical supply.
      7.   Landscaping provisions.
   B.   Site Development: The RV park shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to provide or meet the following requirements:
      1.   The park/court shall be adequately lighted from dusk to dawn, with
lights that shall not obstruct the visibility of any oncoming traffic.
      2.   Each space shall be provided with water, sewage, and electricity.
      3.   Each RV stall shall contain a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square
feet and shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide. There shall be a minimum of
ten feet (10') of space between RVs/motor homes/trailers.
      4.   Each RV stall shall have one extra parking space and shall be
graveled, paved or provided with other means for a dust free surface.
      5.   No greater number of RVs, travel trailers or motor homes shall be
allowed in any park/court than the number of RV stalls permitted, based upon
the standards of subsection
11-6-5 (3).
   C.   Service Building And Accommodations:
      1.   Each park/court shall provide one or more service buildings,
adequately equipped with electrical and plumbing facilities. Restroom
facilities shall be provided.
      2.   The service building shall be a permanent structure and meet
requirements of the current building code. All service buildings shall provide
proper lighting within the structure twenty four (24) hours a day. Each service
building shall provide exterior lighting after dusk and before dawn.
      3.   Each park/court shall provide trash disposal areas for each twenty
(20) spaces. Disposal areas shall be fenced with a site obscuring fence, the
height of which shall be a minimum four feet (4').
      4.   Landscaping shall be addressed in the park plan to provide a minimum
buffer strip of a mix of evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs in a planting
strip of not less than ten feet (10') along the parking area and adjacent
property lines.
   D.   Protection: The park/court shall be subject to all the provisions of
this title, other city ordinances, and current fire codes.
   E.   Restrictions:
      1.   No RV, motor home, or travel trailer shall be used as permanent
living quarters.
      2.   Tiny homes and park model homes, as defined by Idaho Code, which are
on foundations are prohibited.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-6: BULK STORAGE:
   The following standards shall be met for the bulk storage of flammable
liquids and gases, or corrosive materials, above ground and for resale:
   A.   Will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from a residence,
motel, or hotel, except for an owner's residence.
   B.   Will be erected with the written approval of the fire authority having
jurisdiction.
   C.   Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off-street parking
facilities meeting the approval of the fire authority.
   D.   A city business license is required prior to the use commencing on the
property.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-7: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   Home occupations, as defined by this code, shall be permitted where
authorized by the table of uses, Appendix A, subject to the following
standards:
   A.   Only members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in
such occupation.
   B.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants
and not more than twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conducting of the home occupation, except as otherwise
provided for home-based daycares.
   C.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises showing visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation. No
outside storage of machinery, equipment, or materials shall be permitted.
   D.   Traffic associated with the home occupation shall not exceed ten (10)
vehicle trips per day on average on a weekly basis.
   E.   The home occupation shall be small-scale and low intensity. No
equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation, which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference. No equipment
or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.
   F.   There shall be no on-premise sales in connection with the home
occupation, nor shall there be any uses allowed that are otherwise required to
obtain a special use permit for the applicable zoning district.
   G.   Internet sales and off-premise sales of the goods produced by the home
occupation are permitted.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-8: HOME-BASED BUSINESS:
   Home-based businesses, as defined by this code, shall be permitted where
authorized by the table of uses, Appendix A, and subject to the following
standards:
   A.   Home-based businesses require the approval of a special use permit.
Conditions of approval to set hours of operation, traffic, noise, screening, or
other measures to mitigate the impact of the use may be set by the city.
   B.   Members of the family residing on the premises and up to two (2)
employees who do not reside on the premises are permitted to be engaged in the
home business.
   C.   The home-based business shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
the use of the property for residential purposes. Not more than forty percent
(40%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conducting of
the home-based business. An accessory residential structure, such as a shop or
garage, may be used for storage of equipment and home-based business
activities, but not to exceed forty percent (40%) of the structure.
   D.   Traffic shall not exceed twenty (20) trips per day on average on a
weekly basis. Conditions of approval may further restrict maximum traffic
allowances, based upon the circumstances of the site and proposed use.
   E.   Limited storage of equipment and materials in an accessory residential
structure may be permitted.
   F.   One free-standing or wall sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet or
six feet (6') in height may be permitted.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-9: IN-HOME DAYCARE:
   A.   Shall not exceed six (6) children as outlined by the childcare facility
definition of this title;
   B.   Applications for in-home family daycare where permitted by the table of
uses of this title shall be processed by the zoning administrator, who shall
review the application for compliance with this title and may apply conditions
of approval to assure the in-home daycare does not adversely affect the
neighborhood. The zoning administrator shall provide the applicant with a
written decision. The final decision may be appealed pursuant to this title.
   C.   An application for the in-home daycare shall be submitted to the city
and shall contain at minimum the following:
      1.   The name and signatures of the applicants and the landowners;
      2.   A plan of the site, drawn to scale, showing location of all existing
and proposed buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and
circulation, undisturbed areas, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service
areas, utilities, signs, yard and any fencing or other features peculiar to the
operations of the use at the site;
      3.   A parking plan that addresses adequate off-street parking that is
designed consistent with this title; and
      4.   A fee, as set forth by the official fee schedule.
   D.   Prior to commencement of the use the applicant shall submit to the city
an inspection report from the city fire department indicating the department
has reviewed the site against the applicable International Fire Code and state
fire marshal standards for daycares and found the proposed use to be in
compliance with these standards.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-10: WRECKING YARD, IMPOUND YARD, JUNK YARD, STOCK YARD:
   Wrecking yards, impound yards, junk yards, and stock yards are prohibited
uses in all zoning districts.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-11: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADUs):
   A.   Purpose: To provide an additional, affordable housing option that meets
changing family and community needs while keeping the character of the single-
family developments by setting minimum and maximum standards.
   B.   Eligibility: An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is permitted in the
zoning districts as specified in the table of uses of this title.
   C.   Density: One ADU is permitted per parcel or lot. Construction or
placement may occur before, during, or after construction of the primary
dwelling. Construction of an ADU prior to the primary dwelling shall be
designed and built to comply with the maximum square footage established by
this section, based upon the future primary dwelling.
   D.   Design: ADUs may be attached to the primary dwelling or detached, new
construction or conversion of an existing structure and shall meet the
following standards:
      1.   Location shall be on a lot or parcel of not less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet.
      2.   Maximum size of fifty percent (50%) of the primary dwelling unit
square footage on the lot or parcel or eight hundred (800) square feet of
livable floor space, whichever is less. Livable space shall include areas for
living, sleeping, eating or cooking, but exclude garages, decks, covered
porches, and utility spaces.
      3.   A minimum livable floor space of not less than four hundred (400)
square feet is required for all detached ADUs. The livable floor space of an
ADU attached to the primary dwelling unit may be smaller but shall meet minimum
residential building code requirements for the living space.
      4.   A maximum of two (2) bedrooms.
      5.   Provisions for minimum of one (1) additional on-site parking space.
      6.   Approved building permit demonstrating construction or modification
complies with applicable building and fire codes.
      7.   Confirmation from respective agency or department that the existing
utilities are adequate to accommodate the future ADU.
      8.   Occupancy and use shall be the same standards as those applied to
primary dwelling unit.
      9.   Compliance with setback, height, and lot coverage of the respective
zoning district.
      10.   Design consistent with the primary residence, including roof pitch,
siding, color, materials, and windows is encouraged.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-12: SHORT-TERM RENTALS:
   A.   Purpose: This section provides standards and a process for the use of a
residential dwelling unit as a short-term rental, as defined by this title.
These standards allow the city to address the health, safety, and welfare of
the general public and occupants of the short-term rental and allow the city to
ensure adequate services and parking are available.
   B.   Applicability: This section shall apply to all short-term rentals, as
defined.
   C.   Registration: Prior to the operation of the short-term rental, the
landowner shall register with the city clerk and identify the location, contact
information, emergency contact information, and other details requested on a
form provided by the city.
   D.   The short-term rental shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   The short-term rental occupancy is limited to the dwelling only, and
shall not include occupancy in accessory structures, RVs, camp or tent sites,
or any other spaces outside the dwelling.
      2.   Occupancy shall not exceed two (2) persons per bedroom. Spaces such
as dens, library, kitchen, office, game room, or other such areas are not
bedrooms.
      3.   The short-term rental shall be equipped with a smoke detector, fire
extinguishers, applicable carbon monoxide detector, and a safe exit plan.
      4.   All trash shall be placed in an approved receptacle.
      5.   Parking shall be provided off-street for all short-term occupants,
based on the off-street parking requirements of the applicable zoning district.
      6.   No commercial activities shall be permitted within the short-term
rental dwelling.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-13: PARKLETS:
   A.   Parklets: The purpose of this use is to create options to expand the
public open spaces and boost economic activities in the downtown district by
allowing the conversion of some curbside parking spaces into raised platforms
for seating, retail area, art displays, bike racks, plantings, and other
amenities known as parklets, to be located on specified city streets.
   B.   Eligibility: Parklets are permitted in the downtown district on
specific streets identified by resolution of the city council. Properties
eligible for parklet space shall be:
      1.   Located adjacent to and on the same side of the street as the
parking space to be used for the parklet;
      2.   Located within twenty-five feet (25') of the parklet parking space;
      3.   Associated with an active business located along the street side or
ground floor.
   C.   Permits: Prior to installation of a parklet, a temporary right-of-way
permit shall be obtained by the applicant, using the forms provided by the city
and accompanied by applicable fees, as set by resolution of the council. The
city administrator or designee may issue the permit after a review of the
request by affected agencies and/or departments, and upon a finding that the
application is in accord with the standards of this section. The permit is only
valid for the authorized time specified in the permit. The permit shall be
renewed annually through the permit process.
   D.   Permit Requirements: The applicant shall provide:
      1.   A completed city application form, signed by the applicant and/or
property owner;
      2.   A site plan showing the diagrammatic plans for the parklet,
consistent with the design standards adopted by the city.
      3.   A signed indemnification form, holding the city, its employees, and
agents harmless from all costs, damages, or actions.
      4.   A general liability insurance policy with the City of Bonners Ferry
listed as an additional insured, in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00);
      5.   An acknowledgment that the applicant shall bear all costs for
parklet installation and required design elements.
   E.   Design Standards: Parklets shall be designed, installed, and maintained
to meet the following, to the satisfaction of the city:
      1.   All parklets shall meet the required design and installation
standards as specified in this section and as adopted by city council
resolution.
      2.   The use of corner parking spaces shall be avoided.
      3.   Permitted parklets shall be installed no earlier than April 1 and
removed by October 1, unless otherwise adjusted by the city due to weather
conditions or other reasons.
      4.   The parklets shall not impair or block underground utility accesses,
fire hydrants, electrical transformer vaults, traffic lanes, or city drainage
systems.
      5.   Parklets shall not inhibit or limit access to existing handicap
parking spaces.
      6.   Parklets shall not inhibit the free flow of pedestrians nor encumber
neighboring sidewalks.
   F.   Enforcement: The city may require the parklet to be removed and
invalidate the permit if the applicant fails to maintain the parklet in accord
with the design requirements and permit conditions.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-14: COTTAGE HOUSING:
   A.   Purpose: Cottage housing is an alternative, single-family housing type
that allows the grouping of smaller, detached housing units and shared open
space that can contribute to the affordable housing options, provide
neighborhood variety, and still provide the benefits of single-family homes.
The standards of this section are designed to allow the clustering of dwelling
units, provisions for pedestrian access, reduced building costs, and added
community amenities that include a functional open space. Cottage housing may
provide higher residential density than the underlying zone through smaller,
clustered housing units and parking areas, provided the standards of this
section are met.
   B.   Zoning: Cottage housing is permitted or conditionally permitted in the
zoning districts as specified in the table of uses of this title. A site plan
review is required where the use is permitted outright.
   C.   Procedures: Proposed cottage housing developments are subject to either
the special use permit or site plan review application process, as established
in the table of uses of this title. Notice is required pursuant to section
11-13-5E for cottage housing proposals in the medical zone. Depending on the
planned ownership, additional applications may be required. Each cottage
housing project application shall include a master plan, detailing how the
development will meet the standards of this section and timetables for
completion of improvements and amenities. Conditions of approval shall be set
by the city to ensure completion of improvements identified in the master plan.
   D.   Ownership: The developer has the following ownership options and
additional application requirements:
      1.   Retention of all homes and subject land by the owner for lease of
individual units. A planned unit development is required where a special use
permit is indicated in the uses table of this title. A site plan review is
required where indicated as permitted in the uses table.
      2.   Condominium ownership, where the landowner intends to sell
individual rights to the home's airspace only and not the land, together with
common space or limited common space. A condominium plat in accord with the
Idaho condominium property act is required.
      3.   Individual, fee simple ownership of individual lots and common
ownership of open space or common areas. A subdivision in conjunction with the
planned unit development special use permit is required.
      4.   A community land trust or community housing trust, where a qualified
trust holds the lease on the land but allows separate purchase of the
residence. A condominium plat or a subdivision and planned unit development are
required.
   E.   Density: Due to design requirements and reduced house sizes, a bonus
density multiplier of 1.5 is allowed for cottage house development. (For
example, if the underlying zone permitted five (5) dwelling units, the bonus
density of 1.5 allows eight (8) cottage dwellings.) Fractional density
calculations ending in 0.5 or greater may be rounded up to the next whole
number. Where there is no minimum lot/parcel size for the zoning district, a
minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land per dwelling is the basis
to be used for the calculation.
   F.   The following development standards and design criteria shall apply to
proposed cottage developments:
      1.   Cottage Housing Standards Table:
Standard Requirement
Standard                                Requirement
Minimum lot/parcel size to qualify      1 acre
                                        600 square feet of land per dwelling
                                        unit to be dedicated as functional
                                        common, open space, which may include
                                        outdoor gathering areas, community
                                        gardens, community center, play areas,
Minimum common open space               or other uses. Areas with steep slopes,
                                        above-ground utility features, streets,
                                        parking areas, or other features that
                                        would detract from the enjoyment of the
                                        common area are not considered
                                        "functional"
                                        200 square feet. Private, open space
                                        may be provided in front and/or at the
Minimum individual space assigned to    rear of the dwelling and shall be
each dwelling                           useable space designed for patio or
                                        seating area, gardens, pet yard, or
                                        other private space for the exclusive
                                        use of the homeowner
Maximum gross floor area                1,500 square feet
Minimum gross floor area                800 square feet
Maximum stories/height                  Not to exceed 25 feet in height, with a
                                        minimum roof pitch of 6:12
Minimum setbacks between cottage houses
and accessory residential cottage       10 feet
structures
                                        Equal to the minimum setback of the
Minimum setback from cottage            applicable zoning district between the
development                             cottage house and adjacent lands
                                        outside the development
                                        Eight (8) for Zones RES-B and RES-AB;
                                        and twelve (12) for M, C, and MX.
Maximum dwelling units                  Section 11-12-6 addresses density
                                        allowances within a mixed-use planned
                                        unit development
                                        The housing development shall be
                                        designed to group homes in clusters of
Cluster design                          two (2) or more homes to reduce
                                        infrastructure and driveway costs and
                                        to meet the purpose of the cottage
                                        housing option
Open space design                       Cottage houses shall be designed to
                                        abut the common space
                                        Shared garage structures or carports
                                        are encouraged. Attached, private
Garages                                 garage used solely for parking vehicles
                                        and storage are permitted if the
                                        structure otherwise meets the cottage
                                        housing design standards
                                        All parking shall be off-street and may
                                        be clustered to the side or the rear of
Parking                                 the development. A minimum of two (2)
                                        parking spaces per dwelling unit are
                                        required, inclusive of any private
                                        garage parking
ADUs                                    Accessory dwelling units are prohibited
                                        within cottage developments
                                        The development shall be designed and
Pedestrian access                       built to accommodate walking and biking
                                        access to the dwellings, common areas,
                                        and parking facilities
                                        Prior to issuance of certificates of
                                        occupancy for cottage homes, the
                                        applicant shall complete and install
Completion of Improvements              all infrastructure, amenities,
                                        accesses, pathways, and other
                                        improvements specified in the cottage
                                        master plan
 
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-6-15: TOWNHOMES:
   A.   Townhomes are housing options that allow for the development of
attached, single-family dwellings of three (3) or more units, with common
bearing walls and individual ownership of the land upon which the dwelling is
constructed and ownership of the adjoining front or rear yards.
   B.   Approval of a subdivision application and recording of the plat are
required to allow for the division of the subject land into individual
ownership.
   C.   The parent parcel or lot that exists prior to the townhome plat shall
be a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet. The resulting townhome lots are not
required to meet a minimum lot width.
   D.   A draft common/party wall agreement addressing construction,
maintenance, repair, and rights of access is required to be filed with the city
at the time of subdivision application. The agreement shall be recorded with
the final plat.
   E.   The preliminary plat application shall include the proposed homeowner
association agreement detailing utility/common billing, where applicable,
garages, parking, and any common open space and access maintenance and repairs.
   F.   Maximum dwelling units by zoning district, per lot or parcel:
      1.   Townhomes are not permitted in zones RES-A, Downtown, and Light
Industrial;
      2.   A maximum of three (3) dwelling units for zone RES-B;
      3.   A maximum of four (4) dwelling units for zones RES-AB and MX.
      4.   No specified maximum number of dwelling units for zones Medical and
Commercial. Section
11-12-6 addresses density allowances within a mixed-use planned unit
development.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 7
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
11-7-1: Purpose
11-7-2: Application; Filing; Contents
11-7-3: Public Hearing Required; Notice Of Time And Place
11-7-4: Commission Action
11-7-5: Council Action
11-7-6: Applicant Notification
11-7-7: Recording
11-7-1: PURPOSE:
A variance is a modification of the bulk and placement requirements of this
title as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, and
rear yard setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other ordinance
provision affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the
structure upon lots, or the size of the lot. A variance shall not be considered
a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a
showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site and that the
variance is not in conflict with the public interest. In acting upon such
variance the planning commission shall make full investigation and shall only
recommend granting a variance upon finding that the following are true:
A.   That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the spirit
and intent of the comprehensive plan for the city, and will not effect a change
in zoning;
B.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary physical circumstances or
conditions, applicable to the property involved, or the intended use thereof,
causing undue hardship, which do not apply generally to the property or class
of use in the district, so that a denial of the relief sought will result in:
   1.   Undue loss in value of the property,
   2.   Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner,
   3.   The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of any property right of the
owner;
C.   That such hardship shall be proven by the owner;
D.   That the granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements
of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of such property improvements;
E.   That the reason for a variance was not caused by the owner's, or previous
owner's, actions. (Ord. 504, 1-8-2008)
11-7-2: APPLICATION; FILING; CONTENTS:
An application for a variance shall be filed with the clerk by the property
owner for which such variance is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:
A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
B.   Legal description of property (with street address, if possible);
C.   Description of existing use;
D.   Zoning district;
E.   Description of proposed variance;
F.   A narrative statement indicating the reasons for the variance;
G.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on adjoining
property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other
properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan.
H.   The city reserves the right to request more information.
I.   Nonrefundable fee as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 504, 1-
8-2008)
11-7-3: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED; NOTICE OF TIME AND PLACE:
The method of notice of time and place for the public hearing will be in
accordance with Idaho Code. (Ord. 504, 1-8-2008)
11-7-4: COMMISSION ACTION:
The commission shall consider the application and evidence related thereto and
make its recommendations to the council. At the hearing, parties in interest
may appear in person or by agent or attorney to testify and offer evidence and/
or material relevant to the application. (Ord. 504, 1-8-2008)
11-7-5: COUNCIL ACTION:
A.   The council may require a public hearing before making a decision. They
may request studies from the applicant or public agencies concerning social,
economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed amendment,
supplement, or change.
B.   The council shall consider the application and evidence related thereto
and make its decision after receiving the recommendation from the commission.
(Ord. 504, 1-8-2008)
11-7-6: APPLICANT NOTIFICATION:
Within fifteen (15) working days after a decision has been rendered, the clerk
shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action or the request.
(Ord. 504, 1-8-2008)
11-7-7: RECORDING:
The agreement shall not be valid until recorded at the Boundary County
courthouse. (Ord. 504, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 8
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-8-1: Purpose
11-8-2: Applications Required
11-8-3: Application Fees
11-8-4: General Application Procedures
11-8-5: Public Hearing Process
11-8-6:    Administrative Permits And Reviews
11-8-7:    Administrative Appeals/Mediation
11-8-8:    Modification
11-8-1: PURPOSE:
   The following application requirements, procedures and standards of review
are adopted to ensure applications are considered in a timely manner and with
proper due process of law, consistent with the Idaho Local Land Use Planning
Act.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-2: APPLICATIONS REQUIRED:
   All applications required by this title shall be completed upon forms
furnished by the city. To be determined complete by the city, all applications
shall contain the minimum general and specific documents and information
required by this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-3: APPLICATION FEES:
   Fees for applications filed under the terms of this title shall be
established by resolution of the city council. The applicable fee established
by the city's official fee schedule shall be paid to the city when submitting a
completed application. The city shall take no action on any application,
appeal, reconsideration or any other request set forth in this title until the
required fees, charges, and expenses are paid in full.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-4: GENERAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Prior to submitting an application with the city, the applicant shall
review the proposal with the zoning administrator.
   B.   All applications and fees shall be filed with the city clerk or
designee.
   C.   The zoning administrator shall have a reasonable amount of time to
review the application for completeness, based upon the standards and
requirements of the respective application. A reasonable time is generally
considered not more than thirty (30) days.
   D.   The city shall inform the applicant in writing of any additional items
that are required to complete the application.
   E.   The city shall provide copies of the application to affected agencies
for review and comment, allowing up to thirty (30) days for replies. Affected
agencies may include fire, police, street department, utilities, school
district, health district, and any other local, state, or federal agencies or
services that could be affected by the request, as determined by the zoning
administrator. Agency comments shall be provided to the applicant for response
and any required actions.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-5: PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS:
   A.   The following applications require public hearings before the planning
and zoning commission and may require a public hearing before city council, as
specified under the specific application type:
      1.   Annexations;
      2.   Zone changes;
      3.   Comprehensive plan amendments to map and text;
      4.   Planned unit development, except as otherwise specified in this
title;
      5.   Text amendments to this title;
      6.   Variances; and
      7.   Special use permits.
   B.   Notice: For those applications requiring public hearings, notice shall
be provided in accord with the Idaho Local Land Use Planning Act for the
specific file type. When notice for a site-specific application is required to
two hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers of record, sufficient
notice shall be deemed to have been provided if the city provides notice
through a display advertisement at least four (4) inches by two (2) columns in
size in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the hearing date, in addition to site posting on all external boundaries of the
site.
   C.   Procedures: All public hearings are subject to the hearing procedures
adopted by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Decision Making: Whenever an application requires a public hearing, as
specified in this title, the planning and zoning commission and city council
shall render a decision, specifying the relevant facts considered in approving
or denying the application, and shall provide a reasoned statement in support
of the decision and the actions to be taken to obtain approval.
   E.   Written Decision: The city shall issue a written decision to the
applicant following the conclusion of the public hearing. The city council
decision shall be final, and any recourse shall be as provided by Idaho Code.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS AND REVIEWS:
   A.   Administrative reviews by the zoning administrator or designee are
authorized for applications, permits, and requests that do not require a public
hearing, as specified by the Local Land Use Planning Act or this title,
including the following:
      1.   Zoning permits;
      2.   Zoning reviews in conjunction with building permit applications;
      3.   Administrative site plan reviews;
      4.   Determinations of compliance for uses, standards, land divisions;
and
      5.   Requests for interpretation of zoning code and applicability.
   B.   The zoning administrator or designee shall have a reasonable amount of
time to review the application for completeness and conformance with zoning
standards. The zoning administrator may:
      1.   Request additional information to complete the application;
      2.   Seek review by affected agencies, where it is determined necessary
to complete a thorough review of the application;
      3.   Approve the application with conditions; or
      4.   Deny the application.
   C.   The zoning administrator shall provide a written decision, citing the
standards of review, whether approved or denied, relevant facts used in
reaching the decision, any conditions of approval, and actions to be taken to
obtain the permit.
   D.   All decisions of the zoning administrator are considered final unless
appealed to the council as set forth in this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-7: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS/MEDIATION:
   A.   Any final, written administrative decision made pursuant to this title
shall be considered final unless appealed by an affected person to city
council, pursuant to the following procedures:
      1.   A written appeal, containing the grounds for such an appeal and any
supporting documents, shall be filed with the city clerk, along with applicable
fees, within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the final, written
administrative decision. Failure to file the appeal in a timely manner with
proper fees shall cause an automatic dismissal of the claim.
      2.   Upon receipt of the properly filed appeal, the city, shall schedule
the matter for consideration by the city council at a regular or special
meeting within thirty (30) days, allowing sufficient time for proper meeting
notice. Copies of the appeal shall be provided to the council and city staff
affected by the appeal.
      3.   The city council shall consider the appeal and provide an
opportunity for the appellant, appellant's representative, affected staff, and
interested parties to present relevant information regarding the matter.
      4.   The city council may reverse, modify, or affirm, in whole or in
part, the administrative decision, or may table the matter to another meeting
to allow time for additional information or further deliberations. The final
decision shall not grant a special privilege or provide an exception to the
regulations of this title.
      5.   The city shall notify the appellant in writing of the council's
decision.
      6.   The council's decision is final, and any further recourse shall be
as provided by Idaho Code, Title 67, Chapter 65.
   B.   Mediation: Mediation may occur upon a written request filed with the
city clerk by the applicant, an affected person, the planning and zoning
commission, or the governing board. Mediation may occur at any point during the
decision-making process or after a final decision has been made. If mediation
occurs after a final decision, any resolution of differences through mediation
must be the subject of another public hearing before the decision-making body.
Mediation of planning and zoning issues shall be in accordance with Idaho Code
section 67-6510.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-8-8: MODIFICATION:
   The site plan, terms, and conditions of any approved permit are the
controlling document for the development and use of the property authorized or
required by this title and shall not be modified except in accord with the
following:
   A.   Filing: Applications and fees for modifications of any issued land use
permit shall be filed with the city clerk.
   B.   Consideration: The same process, standards of review, and notification
used for consideration of the original permit shall be followed for the review
and consideration of the modification. The governing body or official
authorized to approve make the original decision is authorized to consider the
modification. The review shall be confined to the modification request.
   C.   Decision: The decision to approve or deny the modification request
shall be in writing, based on the same standards of review as the original
permit.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 9
TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
11-9-1: Purpose
11-9-2: Amendments Of This Title
11-9-3: Public Hearing Required
11-9-4: Application Contents
11-9-5:    Standards Of Review
11-9-6:    Commission Action
11-9-7:    Council Action
11-9-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures to amend, repeal,
supplement, or enact new sections of this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-9-2: AMENDMENTS OF THIS TITLE:
   The city council or planning and zoning commission may initiate an amendment
to this title, the comprehensive plan, official zoning map, or comprehensive
plan map. Any citizen, landowner, or taxpayer may file an application with the
city clerk to amend the official zoning map, comprehensive plan map, zoning
codes, or comprehensive plan text, in accord with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-9-3: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED:
   The method of notice of time and place for the public hearing shall be as
outlined in Chapter 8 of this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-9-4: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   The application for text or mapping amendments shall be made on a form
provided by the city and shall contain at a minimum the following:
   A.   A completed application. Signatures of record landowners are required
for mapping amendments;
   B.   A narrative explaining the reason for the amendment and how it is in
accord with the adopted comprehensive plan;
   C.   The effect of the proposed amendment on the delivery of public
services;
   D.   A legal description of the subject property where mapping amendments
are proposed, stamped by an Idaho-licensed surveyor;
   E.   A site plan for all mapping amendments, drawn to scale and showing
boundary lines, utility locations, street patterns, and adjoining properties
within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property; and
   F.   Any additional information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator
to complete the application.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-9-5: STANDARDS OF REVIEW:
   The commission and city council shall analyze proposed changes to the zoning
ordinance, maps, or text to ensure that they are not in conflict with the
policies of the adopted comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-9-6: COMMISSION ACTION:
   The planning and zoning commission shall consider the application and
related evidence and make its recommendations to the council, following its
public hearing. They may request studies from the applicant or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal, and environmental effects of the proposed
amendment, supplement, or change.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-9-7: COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   The council may require a public hearing before making a decision.
   B.   No amendment shall be allowed to permit a nonconforming use, which will
materially interfere with the use of the adjoining premises in conformity with
the regulations applicable to the use district in which it is located.
   C.   Upon approval of the amendment of any zoning map or this title, an
ordinance shall be prepared, approved, and published in accord with the
requirements of state code.
   D.   Upon approval of an amendment to the comprehensive plan map or text, a
resolution shall be adopted in accord with the procedures of state code.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
SECTION:
11-10-1: Purpose
11-10-2: Limitations
11-10-3: Application Contents
11-10-4: Standards Of Review
11-10-5: Supplemental Conditions And Safeguards
11-10-6: Public Hearing Required
11-10-7: Commission Action
11-10-8: Council Action
11-10-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the processing of applications
for special or conditional use permits. A special use permit may be granted to
an applicant if the proposed use is conditionally permitted by the terms of
this title, subject to conditions pursuant to specific provisions of this
chapter, and subject to the ability of political subdivisions, including school
districts, to provide services for the proposed use, and when it is not in
conflict with the plan.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-2: LIMITATIONS:
   A special use permit shall run with the land and shall not be transferrable
to another property. The special use permit may be transferred to a future
owner of the subject property, provided the use remains in compliance with the
issued permit and conditions of approval. A special use permit shall not be
considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other special use
permits.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-3: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   An application for special use permit shall be filed with the clerk by at
least one (1) owner of property for which such special use is proposed. At a
minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   B.   Legal description of property and street address;
   C.   Description of existing use;
   D.   Zoning district;
   E.   Description of proposed special use;
   F.   A plan of the proposed site for the special use showing the location of
all buildings, parking and loading area, traffic access and traffic
circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the commission may require to
determine if the proposed special use meets the intent and requirements of this
title;
   G.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on adjoining
property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other
properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan;
   H.   Any additional information deemed by the zoning administrator or
commission to be required to complete the application, including studies of the
social, economic, fiscal, and environmental effects and any aviation hazard as
defined in section 21-501(2), Idaho Code, of the proposed special use; and
   I.   Fees as set by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-4: STANDARDS OF REVIEW:
   The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed special use in terms of the following standards and shall find
adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location will:
   A.   Constitute a special use as established in this title for the zoning
district involved;
   B.   Be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objectives or
with any specific objective of the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance;
   C.   Be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to be harmonious and
appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the
general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of
the same area;
   D.   Not be hazardous or disturbing to existing neighboring uses;
   E.   Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such
as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewer and schools, or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such services;
   F.   Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public
facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of
the community;
   G.   Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare or odors, or other factors determined to be nuisances;
   H.   Have vehicular approaches to the property that shall be so designed as
not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares;
and
   I.   Not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic or
historic feature of major importance.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-5: SUPPLEMENTAL CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS:
   In recommending any special use, the commission may prescribe appropriate
conditions, bonds, and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of
such conditions, bonds or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the special use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title. The
commission may set conditions including, but not limited, those to:
   A.   Minimize adverse impact on other development;
   B.   Control the sequence and timing of development;
   C.   Control the duration of development;
   D.   Assure that development is maintained properly;
   E.   Designate the exact location and nature of development;
   F.   Require the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or
services;
   G.   Require more restrictive standards than those generally required in an
ordinance; or
   H.   Require mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service
delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts, providing
services within the planning jurisdiction.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-6: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED:
   Prior to granting a special use permit, at least one (1) public hearing in
which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall be held
before the commission. Public notification of the public hearing shall be
provided in accordance with Idaho Code.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-7: COMMISSION ACTION:
   The commission shall recommend to city council approval, approval with
special terms, conditions and limitations, or disapproval of the application
for a special use permit. The commission shall ensure that any recommendation
for special use permits is in accordance with the comprehensive plan and
established goals and objectives.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-10-8: COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   Prior to granting a special use permit, the council may require a
public hearing. They may request studies from the applicant or public agencies
concerning social, economic, fiscal and environmental effects of the proposed
special use.
   B.   A special use permit issued shall specifically outline the permitted
use, note any allowed deviation from the zone requirements of the zone in which
the property is located and may impose such conditions and limitations as the
council shall deem appropriate, including, but not limited by, this inclusion,
time limits, setback and height alterations, lighting conditions, parking
spaces, access locations, aesthetics, environment protection, drainage and the
mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service delivery by any
political subdivision, including school districts, providing services within
the city jurisdiction. In determining these conditions and limitations, the
council shall consider such factors as it, in its discretion, deems necessary,
but it shall consider the impact that such use shall have on the surrounding
neighborhood and upon public services and facilities.
   C.   The council shall give approval, approval with special terms,
conditions and limitations, or disapproval of the application for a special use
permit after receiving the recommendation from the commission.
   D.   Upon granting or denying an application the council shall specify:
      1.   The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
      2.   The reasons for approval or denial; and
      3.   The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a
permit.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 11
VARIANCES
SECTION:
11-11-1: Purpose
11-11-2: Application Contents
11-11-3: Standards Of Review
11-11-4: Conditions Of Approval
11-11-5: Public Hearing Required
11-11-6: Commission Action
11-11-7: Council Action
11-11-1: PURPOSE:
   A variance is a modification of the bulk and placement requirements of this
title as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, and
rear yard setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other ordinance
provision affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the
structure upon lots, or the size of the lot. A variance shall not be considered
a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a
showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site and that the
variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-11-2: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   An application for a variance shall be filed with the clerk by the property
owner for which such variance is proposed. At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:
   A.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
   B.   Legal description of property, with street address, if possible;
   C.   Description of existing use;
   D.   Zoning district;
   E.   Description of proposed variance;
   F.   A narrative statement indicating the reasons for the variance;
   G.   A narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the
effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and vibration on adjoining
property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other
properties in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan;
   H.   Any additional information that the zoning administrator determines is
necessary to complete the application; and
   I.   A fee as set by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-11-3: STANDARDS OF REVIEW:
   The planning commission shall consider the evidence of record and testimony
and shall only recommend granting a variance upon finding that the following
are true:
   A.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary physical circumstances or
conditions, applicable to the property involved, or the intended use thereof,
causing undue hardship, which do not apply generally to the property or class
of use in the district, so that a denial of the relief sought will result in:
      1.   Undue loss in value of the property;
      2.   Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner;
      3.   The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of any property right of the
owner;
   B.   That such hardship shall be proven by the owner;
   C.   That the granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or
improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of such property
improvements; and
   D.   That the reason for a variance was not caused by actions of the owner
or previous owner.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-11-4: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
   Conditions of approval may be applied to ensure the development is in
compliance with the intent of the variance.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-11-5: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED:
   The method of notice and public hearing procedures shall be in accord with
Idaho Code.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-11-6: COMMISSION ACTION:
   The commission shall consider the application, evidence, and testimony
related to the request, and shall make its recommendations to the council.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-11-7: COUNCIL ACTION:
   A.   The council may require a public hearing before making a decision.
   B.   The council shall consider the application and evidence related thereto
and make its decision after receiving the recommendation from the commission.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 12
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
11-12-1: Purpose
11-12-2: Applicability
11-12-3: Application
11-12-4: Process
11-12-5: Design
11-12-6: Mixed Use Planned Unit Development
11-12-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) is to provide design
flexibility to encourage creative and efficient development of land and
infrastructure, the preservation of natural features, and the addition of open
spaces, pathways, green belts and other amenities that might not be achieved
under standard zoning requirements. Through flexible design standards, PUDs can
allow a mixture of housing and commercial land uses, encourage affordable
housing, and create walkable, accessible neighborhoods. Conditions can be set
and agreements established during the public process to ensure development is
carried out in accord with the approved conceptual design.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-12-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Planned unit developments are applicable in all zoning districts.
   B.   Planned unit developments shall be considered through the special use
permit process.
   C.   The subject property shall contain a minimum of two (2) acres.
   D.   The subject property shall be under single ownership or control.
   E.   Where a subdivision of land is proposed as part of a planned unit
development, the subdivision application shall be submitted and considered
simultaneously with the PUD application.
   F.   Uses shall be the same as the underlying zoning district, with the
following allowances/exceptions:
      1.   A mixture of housing types, including detached and attached duplex,
single- and multi-family, townhomes, court-yard or cottage style housing, are
permitted.
      2.   Limited, low-intensity commercial uses that are ancillary or
accessory to the residential districts may be included in the PUD proposal,
provided that:
         a.   Such uses are listed as permitted outright or permitted by
special use in the district;
         b.   The uses, inclusive of structures, parking, and loading areas, do
not collectively exceed five percent (5%) of the gross land area for five-acre
and larger PUDs and do not collectively exceed two percent (2%) of the gross
land area for PUDs smaller than five (5) acres;
         c.   Taxidermies and cemeteries are excluded;
         d.   Small laundromats, coffee shops, delicatessens or bakery shops
are included.
      3.   development shall be based upon the minimum site area requirements
of the underlying zoning district.
      4.   Residential uses are not permitted in the industrial district.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-12-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   Pre-Application: Prior to submitting an application to the city, the
applicant or representative shall meet with the city administrator or designee
for a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to review the
proposed planned unit development, the city application process and codes,
proposed infrastructure needs, and any potential variations to standards. The
purpose of the pre-application meeting is to familiarize the applicant and city
with the proposal and does not represent acceptance or approval of an
application. For the pre-application meeting, the applicant shall provide:
      1.   A conceptual sketch of the development;
      2.   General transportation layout;
      3.   General utility provisions;
      4.   Types of structures, proposed uses and densities;
      5.   Open space, greenway, and pathway proposals;
      6.   Any variations to standards; and
      7.   Any other information necessary for a complete overview of the
project.
   B.   Application: A planned unit development is a special use permit. In
addition to the special use permit application requirements of chapter 10 of
this title, the application shall include:
      1.   A preliminary master plan of the subject site, depicting any
proposed housing types and proposed layout and design, street and pathway
systems, parking facilities, drainage features, landscaping, common or open
space and proposed ownership, commercial or industrial structures, proposed lot
layouts, natural and hazardous features, requested variations to zoning
standards, and other essential development details.
      2.   A development schedule, including any planned phases.
      3.   A preliminary plat for any portion of the project that is to be
platted, consistent with the application standards of title 12 of city code.
      4.   Required fees.
      5.   Any additional information required by the city for a complete
understanding of the PUD proposal.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-12-4: PROCESS:
   A.   Permit Consideration: The planned unit development application shall be
processed and considered in accord with the special use permit requirements of
chapter 10 of this title.
   B.   Standards Of Approval: In addition to the general standards of chapter
10, the governing bodies shall also find adequate evidence confirming the
planned unit development:
      1.   Will result in a unified project that will benefit the surrounding
area and the city.
      2.   Can be constructed so that each phase can exist independently,
without relying upon subsequent phases for open space, amenities, density,
infrastructure, or other minimum standards or necessary dedications.
   C.   Conditions Of Approval: The city may set conditions of approval to
control the sequence and timing of development, assure the development is
maintained properly and other conditions consistent with the special use permit
processes of this title and the Idaho Local Land Use Planning Act, including
conditions that:
      1.   Minimize adverse impact on other development;
      2.   Control the sequence and timing of development;
      3.   Control the duration of development;
      4.   Assure that development is maintained properly;
      5.   Designate the exact location and nature of development;
      6.   Require the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or
services;
      7.   Require more restrictive standards than those generally required in
an ordinance; and
      8.   Require mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon
service delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts,
providing services within the planning jurisdiction.
   D.   Final Plan And Development Agreement: Following the approval of the
planned unit development, the landowner shall file with the city:
      1.   A final master plan, to include all elements and modifications to
the preliminary plan, as approved by the city council;
      2.   A final plat, where applicable; and
      3.   A draft development agreement containing the conditions of PUD
approval, specific authorizations for uses and housing types, project phasing
and timetables for completion, developer responsibilities, vesting, conveyance
of open space and amenities and long-term maintenance, and any other details
specified by the city to define code-required and negotiated elements of
development to ensure public benefits are realized. The development agreement
is subject to the review and approval of the city council and shall not be
valid until executed by the landowner and city and recorded.
      4.   Draft covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) providing for
the development and maintenance of the property in accord with the approved
plan.
      5.   Any other documents or details required by the conditions of
approval.
   E.   Expiration: The PUD special use permit shall be valid for two (2) years
from the date of the city's written decision. An extension not to exceed two
(2) years may be granted by the city council if it finds progress is being made
on the development or circumstances beyond the control of the developer have
prevented completion of the project. A written request for the extension must
be filed with the city clerk prior to the expiration date.
   F.   Minor Modifications: Minor modifications to lot lines, structure
placements, access alignments, or other modifications that were unforeseen at
the time of application and do not expand the original boundaries of the
project or increase density or intensity of the PUD may be approved by the city
administrator or designee prior to the filing of the final plan.
   G.   Major Modifications: Any requests for major changes to block and lot
design, density, exterior boundaries of the PUD, conditions of approval,
renegotiated terms of the development agreement or other modifications deemed
major by the city administrator shall require a public hearing before the city
council, using the same notice and procedures as the original application.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-12-5: DESIGN:
   A.   Lot Design: Lots may deviate from the minimum zoning district lot
width. Lots within the residential districts may deviate from the minimum lot
area standard, so long as the total number of lots do not exceed the units
allowed based on the lot area minimum for the entire subject area. Lots within
the commercial, medical, or industrial districts are not subject to the minimum
lot area standards, provided lots are sized to accommodate the use, required
parking, and other applicable zoning standards.
   B.   Clustering: The clustering of lots and housing units to allow greater
open space and reduced infrastructure costs is encouraged.
   C.   Setbacks: Reduced or zero setbacks may be permitted where structures
adjoin common areas, courtyards, open spaces, private streets, or common walls.
Setbacks to the exterior property lines of the subject property shall meet the
zoning district minimums. The setback reductions must be requested in the PUD
application and shown on the final plan.
   D.   Variations: The city may approve variations to design and construction
standards, where the applicant demonstrates that an alternative design would
better serve the proposed development due to topography, service connections,
existing development patterns, or other unique features. The variations shall
not adversely affect city or public services and shall not be detrimental to
public health, safety, or welfare.
   E.   Access: Connections to public rights-of-way shall be consistent with
the city transportation plan and standards. Interior streets shall be designed
to meet minimum fire code standards.
   F.   Parking: Off-street parking shall meet the minimum standards of Chapter
14 of this title unless variations to the standards are approved through the
PUD process.
   G.   Amenities: The developer shall provide public or private amenities
appropriate to the scale and location of the project, which may include any of
the following, subject to a negotiated agreement with the city:
      1.   A minimum ten percent (10%) of the gross acreage of the subject
property, dedicated as common or open space. The land may be dedicated to a
homeowners' association or to the city or other public entity through mutual
agreements. Proposed common/open space must be appropriate in scale, use, and
character to the planned unit development. The land shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained for recreational, community gardens, green belts,
courtyards, open space, or parkland.
      2.   Bike/pedestrian pathways.
      3.   Connections to existing pathways.
      4.   Bus stop.
      5.   Sidewalks.
      6.   Bike racks.
      7.   Park playground equipment, community facilities, or other public
features that serve the neighborhood.
      8.   Other negotiated amenities.
   H.   Buffering: Screening, vegetative buffers, greater setbacks, or
integration of multi-family with single-family housing shall be employed to
provide consistency with the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-12-6: MIXED USE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Purpose: This subsection provides an option for an administrative site
plan review for a planned unit development within the mixed use zoning district
to create an incentive for a wider array of permitted uses and flexible design
and parking standards, provided certain standards are met to create a variety
of housing options, commercial uses, walkable and biking opportunities, and
public amenities.
   B.   Application: Application requirements for a mixed use planned unit
development shall be as provided in section
11-12-3, except that a site plan review application rather than a special use
permit application is required.
   C.   Requirements: A mixed use planned unit development shall include the
following minimum standards and features:
      1.   A plan to develop and construct walkable and bikeable public
connections within the development and leading to other public places and
recreational opportunities;
      2.   A mixture of housing options, optional mixed-use buildings
containing at least one (1) floor developed for non-residential uses, and
appropriately scaled commercial development as identified in the table of uses
in Appendix A of this title;
      3.   Public open space accompanied by a specific plan for the
construction, use, and maintenance of the area, which may include public art
and seating area, bandstand, small water feature or fountain and bench areas,
or other such amenities; and
      4.   A design to provide for clustered, cohesive development, allowing
for a more compact arrangement of buildings and fewer extensions of accesses
and infrastructure.
   D.   Allowances: The mixed use planned unit development may vary from
parking and zoning standards as set forth in the design standards section
11-12-5. There is no set maximum for the number of structures allowed per
parcel or lot for a mixed-use planned unit development. Design and density
shall be sufficient to accommodate required parking, utilities, setbacks,
coverage, and other applicable zoning standards of this title.
   E.   Process: A mixed use planned unit development meeting the requirements
of this subsection shall be reviewed pursuant to the administrative site plan
review procedures of section
11-13-5 of this title. The remaining sections of
11-12-4 of this title, paragraphs B through G shall apply to mixed use planned
unit developments.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 13
ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS
SECTION:
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: Administrative Review Procedures
11-13-3: Zoning Permit Reviews
11-13-4: Compliance Reviews
11-13-5: Administrative Site Plan Review
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
   This chapter establishes the types of applications and permits the zoning
administrator has the authority to act upon and sets forth the procedures for
consideration. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to make final
decisions on the applications and permits provided in this chapter, subject to
the right of appeal for any written final administrative decision made pursuant
to this title, as set forth in Chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-13-2: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   Administrative reviews are authorized for applications, permits, petitions,
requests for reviews or interpretations, and zoning reviews that do not require
a public hearing, pursuant to this title and the state local land use planning
act. The following process shall be followed for administrative reviews:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application and fees to the city clerk, the zoning
administrator shall have a reasonable time, generally not to exceed thirty (30)
days, to examine the application for completeness with application requirements
and standards of this title. If the application is determined to be incomplete,
the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the
deficiencies and specify the information needed to complete the application.
   B.   The zoning administrator shall conduct a review of the complete
application for compliance with applicable standards of this title. The zoning
administrator shall provide a written decision either approving, approving with
conditions, or denying the application, and citing the reasons for the
decision, the evidence of record, and standards used to reach the decision. If
denied, the zoning administrator shall state the actions, if any, that can be
taken to obtain approval and the rights of appeal.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-13-3: ZONING PERMIT REVIEWS:
   Zoning permit reviews are associated with building permit applications and
applications for placement or construction of exempt structures. Prior to the
construction or placement of any structure or the remodel or modification of a
structure that requires a building permit, the zoning administrator shall
review the application for compliance with the city's zoning regulations. If
the proposed structure and use are determined to be in compliance, the zoning
administrator may sign the permit application and need not provide a reasoned
statement as required by section
11-13-2B of this chapter. No zoning permit shall be issued for the
construction, remodel, modification, or placement of any structure that is not
in conformance with the use or development standards of this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-13-4: COMPLIANCE REVIEWS:
   A landowner may submit an application to the city to determine whether a
parcel of land or lot was created, divided, adjusted, or consolidated in
conformance with the city's land use laws in effect at the time of its
creation, interpretations of this title, or whether an established land use
meets zoning code. The application shall include a chain of title prepared by a
title company, unless the zoning administrator determines chain of title is not
necessary based upon the type of determination requested. If the zoning
administrator determines the land in question is not in compliance with the
land use laws in effect at the time of creation, the written decision shall
include actions that may need to be taken to bring the land into compliance.
The required actions shall be limited to the requirements of the laws in effect
at the time of the parcel or lot creation.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-13-5: ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The site plan review process allows the city to
administratively review proposed development in a timely manner without
requiring a public hearing. The administrative review ensures that future
development meets the applicable standards and requirements of city code and
addresses potential development impacts by setting conditions to mitigate those
impacts.
   B.   Applicability: Certain uses and proposed development, which are not
subject to the public hearing process as set forth in this title, are subject
to the administrative site plan review application process. Approval of the
site plan application is required prior to issuance of building permits,
encroachment approval, or any other such permits allowing the development to
commence. The following uses and developments require a site plan review:
      1.   Those specified in Appendix A of this title as requiring a site plan
review;
      2.   Residential developments of four (4) dwelling units or more on a
single lot or parcel;
      3.   Commercial, industrial or light industrial new development that
requires a building permit for construction, conversion, or enlargement and is
greater than four thousand (4,000) square feet.
      4.   Any development specified in the respective zoning districts as
requiring a site plan review.
   C.   Application: A site plan review application and applicable fees shall
be filed with the city clerk prior to any construction, building permit
approvals, placement of structures, or use of a site that is subject to site
plan review cited at
11-13-5B. The application shall be completed on a form provided by the city and
shall contain at a minimum the following:
      1.   A to-scale drawing of the site showing the boundaries of the subject
property, access and traffic patterns, parking, pathways, the general vicinity,
proposed and existing structures and uses, utility features, landscaping,
lighting, signs, drainage patterns and proposed stormwater features, fire
protection, and any other information deemed by the city to be necessary to
properly assess the proposed use and impacts to city infrastructure and
neighborhood.
      2.   A narrative explaining the proposed use, compliance with city
standards, estimated traffic, hours of operation, potential for noise, lights,
and glare from the use, and any measures proposed to mitigate potential
impacts.
      3.   A stormwater/erosion control or hillside development plan, where
applicable.
      4.   Any additional information deemed necessary by the city
administrator or engineer to allow a thorough review of the development.
   D.   Review: The zoning administrator shall complete a review of the
application consistent with
11-13-2, procedures for administrative reviews. Copies of the application shall
be provided to affected agencies, as determined by the zoning administrator.
Agencies shall be given adequate time to review and reply, but not more than
thirty (30) days, unless the zoning administrator determines there are
extenuating circumstances that warrant additional review and comment time.
   E.   Notice: For those developments identified in the zoning districts as
requiring neighborhood notice, the city shall provide written notice of the
proposed development via regular U.S. mail to landowners within three hundred
feet (300') of the external boundaries of the subject property. Public comment
on the proposal shall be limited to whether the proposed development meets the
standards of city code and suggested conditions to mitigate potential impacts.
The deadline to reply to the city shall be fourteen (14) days from the date the
notice is mailed.
   F.   Decision: The determination of the zoning administrator shall be in
writing. No construction or commencement of uses shall begin until the site
plan is approved. The zoning administrator may approve, deny, approve with
conditions, based upon the following standards:
      1.   Compliance with applicable zoning, floodplain, stormwater, and
hillside development standards;
      2.   Adequacy of public and private services; and
      3.   Ability to mitigate potential impacts to the neighborhood and city
services through applied conditions or the development's design and applicant
proposals.
   G.   Conditions: The zoning administrator may impose conditions of approval
to:
      1.   Mitigate potential impacts;
      2.   Ensure dedication or installation of public improvements;
      3.   Meet zoning, health, safety, services or infrastructure standards;
and
      4.   Other reasonable conditions attributable to the direct impacts of
the development on the city, its infrastructure, the environment, or the
neighborhood.
   H.   Expiration: The approval shall expire one (1) year from the date of the
written decision if the use or construction has not commenced. Prior to the
expiration date, the applicant may seek an extension of up to one (1) year. The
written request shall be filed with the city clerk and may be approved by the
zoning administrator upon a showing of good cause as to why the use or
construction has not commenced, such as weather-related delays, unexpected
construction challenges, environmental remediation, or development-related
legal actions.
   I.   Appeals: Any administrative decision made by the zoning administrator
may be appealed to the city council, pursuant to section
11-3-3.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 14
OFF-STREET PARKING
SECTION:
11-14-1: Purpose
11-14-2: Application Of Provisions
11-14-3: Design And Maintenance
11-14-4: Location Of Parking Spaces
11-14-5: Schedule Of Parking Requirements
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations and standards for off-
street parking to minimize traffic hazards and congestion and mitigate impacts
on surrounding properties.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-025)
11-14-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered or its
use changed unless permanently maintained off-street parking has been provided
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The number of required off-
street parking spaces shall be in accordance with this chapter for all
permitted, accessory, special or other uses authorized in any district. The
city council may require a greater number of spaces as a condition of approval
for any special or conditional uses. Off-street parking shall be subject to
review by the administrator and/or the city engineer.
   B.   The site plan shall include the location, size, and type of all
proposed off-street parking, and verification that minimum off-street parking
requirements have been satisfied.
   C.   If the proposed development project is to be completed in phases, such
phases shall be noted on the site plan.
   D.   If the overall development plan as proposed by the applicant provides
as good or better results than could be achieved under the requirements of this
chapter, the city may permit such plans.
   E.   Off-street parking shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the city
engineer and/or street superintendent, in accordance with the approved site
plan.
   F.   No parking area or space provided as required by this chapter shall
later be eliminated, reduced or converted in any manner unless other equivalent
facilities are provided.
   G.   The number and design of accessible handicap parking spaces shall be in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
   H.   For mixed uses, the total requirement of off-street parking spaces
shall be the sum of the requirements of the individual uses.
   I.   Joint Use Parking: Two (2) or more uses may share the same off-street
parking area and be credited for the required parking spaces, provided:
      1.   Principal operating hours and traffic generation of the structures
or land uses are not in substantial conflict, to the satisfaction of the city
engineer and/or administrator;
      2.   The off-street parking shall be located not more than six hundred
feet (600') from the primary entrance of the structure to the nearest entrance
of the parking area;
      3.   An agreement between the parties for shared parking shall be
submitted to the city for review and approved by the city attorney and/or
administrator;
      4.   All shared parking and mutual easements shall be recorded and a copy
provided to the city; and
      5.   In the event the joint use agreement is terminated, the parties
shall notify the city and comply with the parking requirements in effect or
enter into another joint use agreement in compliance with this section within
sixty (60) days after the agreement was terminated.
   J.   All parking spaces required by this section shall be located on the
same property as the use(s) for which parking is required unless a parking
agreement as allowed in subsection I of this section is entered into.
   K.   Required parking spaces shall be used for vehicle parking only. No
vehicle sales, storage, repair work or dismantling shall be permitted.
   L.   Hallways, storage areas, restrooms, entries, stairways, equipment and
utility areas, and other such building service or circulation areas not used or
required for business operations, the public, or retails sales space shall not
count as floor space for purposes of determining parking spaces required.
   M.   Downtown Zone Parking: No off-street parking spaces shall be required
for commercial uses within the downtown district. Residential parking shall be
provided at fifty percent (50%) of the spaces required at
11-14-5.
   N.   Uses Not Listed: The city administrator or city engineer shall
determine the minimum parking requirements for uses not specifically listed in
the parking schedule, based upon comparable uses found in the North American
Industry Classification System, as amended, modified or superseded.
   O.   Administrative Considerations: The city administrator or city engineer
is authorized to interpret regulations or standards for particular uses or
situations not specifically provided in this title, taking into consideration a
parking plan submitted by the applicant detailing hours of operation, proximity
to pathways, expected attendance, number of employees, customers, or
participants, parking and loading needs, and other such factors.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-025)
11-14-3: DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth in this
chapter together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas shall be
easily identified by the patron.
   B.   All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of
surface water to prevent the drainage of such water onto adjacent properties or
walkways. The city engineer and/or street superintendent shall approve all
parking area drainage plans.
   C.   Access driveways for parking areas shall be located in such a way that
any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be clearly visible by a
pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or
private street and designed in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or
entering the parking area from or onto a public or private street shall be
traveling in a forward motion. One- and two-family residential uses are
excluded from the requirement to design access driveways for forward motion
travel.
   D.   The owner of property used for parking shall maintain such area in good
condition.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-025)
11-14-4: LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES:
   A.   The following regulations shall govern the location of off street
parking spaces and areas:
      1.   Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or institutional uses
shall be located not more than six hundred feet (600') from the principal use.
      2.   Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or similar residential
uses shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the
principal use.
   B.   The dimensions for parking and access shall conform to the following:
      1.   Minimum Size Parking Spaces:
         a.   Minimum size parking space, nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20').
         b.   Minimum size parking space exclusively for the handicapped shall
be as defined in the Americans With Disabilities Act.
      2.   Driveway Entrances And Exits: Minimum requirements for driveway
entrances and exits shall meet the city of Bonners Ferry road standards policy.
      3.   Minimum aisle widths shall be as follows:
 
Parking Minimum Width
30°    12 feet
45°    15 feet
60°    18 feet
90°    24 feet
 
(Ord. 621, 5-20-025)
11-14-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   For the purpose of this title, the off-street parking space requirements
listed in the following table shall apply. Fractional numbers shall be
increased to the next whole number.
Type of Use Off-street parking space required
Type of Use                             Off-street parking space required
Residential:
                                        2 for each dwelling unit
All residential, including multi-family 1.5 for studio unit (combined living
                                        and sleeping space)
Mobile/manufactured home parks          See subsection
                                        11-6-4  for parking standards
Commercial:
Automobile service and/or fuel          1 for each 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for
                                        each service bay
                                        4 for each alley or lane, plus 1
Bowling alleys                          additional for each 100 square feet of
                                        the area used for restaurant, cocktail
                                        lounge or similar use
Childcare facilities                    1 per 6 children, plus 1 for each
                                        employee
                                        1 for each 100 square feet of floor
Dining rooms, restaurants, taverns,     area plus 1 for every 2 employees. See
nightclubs                           subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations
Establishments for the service of food  1 per 100 square feet of floor area.
or beverage                          See subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations
Funeral parlors, mortuaries          1 per 4 seats
Hotels, motels                          1 for each sleeping room, plus 1 for
                                        every 2 employees
                                        1 per 100 square feet of floor area.
Public community centers, auditoriums   See subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations
Recreational or entertainment, indoors  Based upon parking plan review provided
or outdoors                             at subsection
                                        11-14-2  paragraph O
                                        1 for each 250 square feet of floor
Retail or service establishments        area of the building. See subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations
                                        1 for each 250 square feet of floor
All other types of business or          area permitted in any business district
commercial uses                         area. See subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations
Institutional:
                                        1 for each 250 square feet of floor
Banks/offices                           area of the building. See subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations.
Business, technical and trade schools   1 for each 2 students
Churches and other places of religious  1 for each 4-6 seats
assembly
Hospitals, nursing homes, and           1 for each 250 square feet of floor
sanitariums                             area of the building. See subsection
                                        11-14-2 L for floor space calculations
Libraries, museums and art galleries    1 for each 400 square feet of floor
                                        area
                                        1 space for every examination or
Medical and dental clinics           treatment room, 1 space for every 200
                                        square feet of waiting area, and 1
                                        space for each employee
Elementary schools                   2 for each classroom and 1 for every 8
                                        seats in auditorium or assembly hall
                                        1 space per 15 students and 1 for every
                                        8 seats in auditorium or assembly hall
High schools, junior high               or based upon parking plan review
                                        provided at subsection
                                        11-14-2 , paragraph O
Industrial:
Manufacturing                           1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
 
(Ord. 621, 5-20-025)
CHAPTER 15
SIGNS
SECTION:
11-15-1: Purpose
11-15-2: Requirements
11-15-3: Definitions
11-15-4: Signs Authorized Without A Permit
11-15-5: General Standards Applicable To All Zones And Signs
11-15-6: Standards For Specific Sign Types
11-15-7: Prohibited Signs
11-15-8: Signs Permitted By Zone
11-15-9: Nonconforming Signs
11-15-10: Administration
11-15-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by
regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, outdoor advertising signs
and outdoor signs of all types;
   B.   Protect property values;
   C.   Create a more attractive economic and business climate;
   D.   Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community;
   E.   Preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas;
   F.   Reduce sign or advertising distraction and obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents and reduce hazards that may be caused by signs
overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way; and
   G.   Provide more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural
environment and enhance community development.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-2: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sign Compliance: Signs shall not be constructed, installed,
structurally altered, enlarged, or relocated except in conformity with the
provisions contained herein, and only after a sign permit issued by the city
has been secured, if so required. The changing or maintenance of movable parts
or components of an approved sign, or authorized sign, designed for such
changes, or the changing of sign copy, business name, lettering, sign faces,
colors, display, graphic matter, and/or the content of any sign copy shall not
be deemed a structural alteration.
   B.   Sign Defined: For the purpose of this chapter, the word "sign" does not
include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state, city,
religious, fraternal, or civic organization; also, merchandise and pictures or
models of products or services incorporated in a window display, works of art
which in no way identify a product, or scoreboards located on athletic fields.
   C.   Alteration, Enlargement, Or Relocation Of Signs: No sign shall be
structurally altered, enlarged, or relocated except in conformity to the
provisions herein, and only upon applying for and securing a permit, unless
expressly authorized without a permit.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
AWNING: A shelter extending from the exterior wall of a building and composed
of nonrigid materials except for the supporting framework.
FACADE: As defined in chapter 2 of this title.
FOOT CANDLE: A unit of measurement for the intensity of light in a given area.
Defined as the amount of light that falls on a one-square-foot surface from a
consistent light source.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on
the premises on which the sign is located. Any identification, description,
illustration, symbol, statue or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is
visible from any public place designed to advertise, identify or convey
information, including any landscaping where letters or numbers are used for
the purpose of directing the public's attention to a product or location, with
the exception of window displays and state or national flags.
SIGN TYPES:
   ANIMATED SIGN: A sign depicting action, motion, light or color changes
through electrical or mechanical means. Although technologically similar to
flashing signs, the animated sign emphasizes graphics and artistic display.
   AWNING SIGN: A building mounted sign that provides additional functionality
as a shelter.
   BANNER: A sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with no enclosing
framework.
   BLADE: A sign that projects perpendicularly from a structure.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols
change either automatically through electrical or electronic means (for
example, time and temperature units) or manually through placement of letters
or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system. Also to include
electronic message boards and electronic messaging center (EMC).
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A nonpermanent sign identifying the persons, firms or
business directly connected with a construction project.
   DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A temporary construction sign denoting the architect,
engineer, contractor, subcontractor, financier or sponsor of a residential or
commercial development which may also designate the future occupant or use of
the development.
   DIRECTIONAL/INSTIT UTIONAL SIGN: A permanent instructional sign located on
private property at or near the public right of way, directing or guiding
vehicular traffic onto the property and/or toward parking or other identified
locations on the property.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD, ELECTRONIC MESSAGING CENTER (EMC): Includes those
signs displaying time and temperature and also refers to digital or video
displays or any sign that can be changed electronically by remote or mechanical
means.
   FLAG: A piece of cloth or fabric, varying in size, shape, color, or design
used as a symbol, standard, signal, emblem, or insignia.
   FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the
ground, supported by one or more structural members, with air space between the
ground and the sign face.
   GOVERNMENT SIGNS: A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge
of any governmental functions, or required by law, ordinance or other
governmental regulation.
   ILLEGAL SIGNS: Any existing sign that does not have a permit issued by the
city of Bonners Ferry or other local government is hereby deemed to be an
illegal sign and such sign and the person or persons responsible for such sign
shall be subject to the terms of this title.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign for which an artificial source of light is used
in order to make readable the sign's message, including internally and
externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs.
   NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION SIGNS: A sign that identifies a neighborhood,
subdivision or housing complex.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which was validly installed under laws or
ordinances in effect at the time of its installation, but which is in conflict
with the current provisions of this code.
   PERMANENT SIGN: A sign attached to a building or structure, or to the ground
in a manner that enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind,
and that precludes ready removal or movement of the sign.
   PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall or
parapet of a building with the display surface of the sign in a plane
perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the wall. Including, but not
limited to: blade signs, canopy signs, marquee signs, or any other sign that
projects away from the building but is not freestanding.
   RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN: A sign at the entrance of a residential
neighborhood, subdivision, or multi-family residential complex identifying the
neighborhood.
   ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected upon a roof, parapet, or roof mounted equipment
structure and extending above a roof, parapet, or roof mounted equipment
structure of a building or structure.
   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A portable, A-frame sign that complies with the
requirements of this title for size and shape.
   SMALL SIGN: A freestanding sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in gross
sign area and five feet (5') in height, which is not illuminated.
   TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign intended to remain in use for a period of time (not
exceeding 90 days) which is not permanently installed.
   VEHICLE SIGN: Any sign permanently or temporarily attached to or placed on a
vehicle or trailer.
   WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in a plane parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of said
wall.
   WAYFINDING SIGN: Advertises publicly accessible facilities remote from the
sign location and provides general descriptions of facilities or commercial
areas, but shall not advertise specific business names. These signs may be
located on public or private property.
   WINDOW SIGN: Any sign viewable through and/or affixed in any manner to a
window or exterior glass door such that it is intended to be viewable from the
exterior (beyond the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the window), including
signs located inside a building but visible primarily from the outside of the
building.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-4: SIGNS AUTHORIZED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
   A.   Directional or institutional signs that do not in any way advertise a
business. Signage includes, but is not limited to: signs identifying publicly
accessible facilities; signs providing direction, such as parking lot entrance
and exit signs; and those of similar nature.
   B.   Governmental signs for the control of traffic or other regulatory
purposes, or signs of public service companies indicating danger, which are
erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of public
duty.
   C.   Addressing numbers/mailboxes.
   D.   Flagpoles that do not exceed a height of thirty-five feet (35').
   E.   Small Signs:
      1.   Small signs shall not include any sign that is over six (6) square
feet in area or five feet (5') in height at any point along the existing grade.
      2.   Small signs shall not be illuminated, animated or contain reader
boards.
   F.   Wayfinding signs.
   G.   Window signs.
   H.   Temporary signs.
   I.   Sandwich board signs, provided subsection
11-15-6D6 of this chapter has been met.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-5: GENERAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES AND SIGNS:
   Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to provisions of this chapter, and
all other applicable provisions of other city ordinances.
   A.   Construction Standards:
      1.   All building permits for applicable signs shall accompany
construction quality plans. The plans shall be stamped by a design professional
certified by the state of Idaho to do such work. The plan shall illustrate how
the proposed sign is designed to be compliant with the minimum design criteria
as adopted and shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the building official
that the sign will not constitute a public hazard. Exception: The building
official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction
documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is
such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine
compliance with building codes.
      2.   All applicable signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of
the national electrical code and applicable building codes.
      3.   Signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and permanently
affixed to the ground or building except signs as defined at section
11-15-4.
      4.   Signs and sign support structures, together with their supports,
braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair and in proper state of
preservation. The display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted or
posted at all times.
   B.   Lighting:
      1.   Signs may be illuminated from within or from an external source, but
such illumination shall be in a manner that avoids glare or reflection that in
any way interferes with traffic safety.
      2.   Signs within two hundred feet (200') of a residential zoning
district may be illuminated from within or from an external source, but such
illumination shall be in a manner that avoids glare or reflection into a
residentially zoned property.
      3.   Signs in residential districts shall not be internally illuminated,
unless otherwise permitted.
      4.   All illuminated signs shall contain measures to automatically dim at
night from a higher illumination level to a lower level of at least fifty
percent (50%) change for the time period between one-half (1/2) hour before
sunset and one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise to avoid glare and/or reflection
that violates subsection B1 of this section.
   C.   Measurement Standards:
      1.   Determining Sign Height:
         a.   The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the base
of the sign or supportive structure at its point of attachment to the ground,
to the highest point of the sign. A freestanding sign on a manmade base,
including a graded earth mound, shall be measured from the grade of the nearest
pavement or top of any pavement curb.
         b.   Clearance for freestanding and projecting signs shall be measured
as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point
of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.
      2.   Determining Sign Area:
         a.   The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the
entire area within a regular, geometric form or combinations of regular,
geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign and including
all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not
being of advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface
area.
         b.   When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back to back so that
both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of
the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of
one of the two (2) faces.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-6: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES:
   A.   Changeable Copy Signs, Electronic Message Boards, Electronic Messaging
Centers (EMC), and Animated Signs:
      1.   Freestanding changeable copy, animated, electronic message board or
area shall be no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total sign area or a
maximum one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is less. Signs that are
fifty (50) square feet in area or smaller may use up to one hundred percent
(100%) of the total sign area for electronic messaging.
      2.   Changeable copy and electronic message/digital marquee signs may be
used as wall signs subject to the requirements of this section.
      3.   Freestanding changeable copy signs shall not be installed parallel
to a right-of-way except in the case of a corner lot when the sign may be
parallel to the secondary street/road.
      4.   Electronic message boards/digital/animated marquee signs shall be
equipped or designed to accommodate the following:
         a.   Automatic dimming capabilities that adjust with ambient light
conditions at all times;
         b.   Limited to 0.3 foot candles above ambient light; and
         c.   Text changes or alternating animation shall maintain a minimum
eight (8) seconds second interval time. The transition method from one message
to the next shall be instantaneous, or as an option of fade in or out, shall
take no more than one second.
      5.   Proof of compliance with the electronic messaging standards shall be
submitted with the sign permit application.
   B.   Roof Mounted Signs:
      1.   Roof signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
      2.   Roof signs shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from the
edge of the exterior wall on which the sign is located.
      3.   Roof signs shall not exceed a maximum height of ten feet (10') from
the highest point of the building on which the sign is being placed.
      4.   Roof signs shall not include any animated or moving parts. No
oscillating, flashing, rotating, flickering, or blinking lights shall be
allowed as part of roof signs.
   C.   Projecting Signs:
      1.   No sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet per sign face;
      2.   The sign shall allow a nine foot (9') clearance to the walking
surface; and
      3.   No sign shall be closer than two feet (2'), measured in horizontal
distance, to the curb line of any street, where permitted.
   D.   Sandwich Board Signs (A-Frame Signs): Any premises or principal
building may place sandwich board signs on the city sidewalk subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   Any premises, including those containing multiple businesses, shall
be permitted to locate only one (1) sandwich board sign per street frontage;
      2.   Any sandwich board sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet per
side in area. In addition, the width of the sign may not exceed two (2) linear
feet, with a maximum height of three feet (3'). Within these specified maximum
dimensions, creative shapes that reflect the type of business being advertised
are encouraged;
      3.   Sandwich board signs shall not be lighted and are for displaying
during daylight hours only. These signs must be removed each evening at dusk;
      4.   Sandwich board signs may be placed on the sidewalk directly in front
of the associated use. The sign must be placed within two feet (2') of the
building or structure. No sandwich board sign may be placed where the
unobstructed space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than
four feet (4'). Trees, poles, signs, hydrants, trash receptacles, tree grates,
etc., are considered obstructions;
      5.   The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished
appearance. Rough cut plywood is not acceptable; and
      6.   Any person erecting a sandwich board sign shall indemnify and hold
harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from any claim arising
out of the presence of the sign on city property or rights-of-way. The person
erecting a sandwich board sign shall sign an indemnification agreement,
approved by the city attorney, prior to placement of sign.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-7: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Signs which obstruct or interfere with vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with an
official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or interfere with a
driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
   B.   Signs which simulate traffic control devices.
   C.   No oscillating, flashing, rotating, flickering, or blinking lights
shall be allowed unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter.
   D.   Signs on public property or attached to trees, utility poles, public
benches or streetlights, unless authorized by the city or specifically
permitted within this chapter.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-8: SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONE:
   Authorized Signs: Unless otherwise permitted, those signs not specifically
authorized by this title shall be prohibited. The following table provides the
signs permitted by zoning district and the required standards:
SIGN STANDARDS TABLE BY ZONING DISTRICT
P = Authorized or S = Specially permitted             (blank) = Prohibited
permitted
Sign Type         Zone District
                 Residential A, B, Commercial, Light Medical  Downtown Mixed
                  AB                Industrial                 Use
Animated signs                     P                         P
Awning                             P9                P9       P10
Development signs P13               P13               P13      P13
Electronic                         P                 P        P
message boards
Freestanding      P/S1              P4,5,6,8,9        P3,5,7,8 P2,11
Neighborhood
identification    P13                                         
sign
Projecting                         P9                P9       P10
ROW banners                        P12                       P12
Roof mounted                                                P2
Sandwich board                     P9                P9       P
signs
Small signs                        P14               P14      P14
Temporary         P14               P9                P9       P
Wall/affixed      P1                P                 P        P
 
   Standards: All signs shall comply with the standards listed within this
chapter. All signs requiring a permit shall do so pursuant to section
11-15-10 of this chapter. The following list contains specific standards
appliable to the corresponding sign type and number listed in the Sign
Standards Table by Zoning District:
      1.   One freestanding sign that shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet,
without a special use permit. Signs shall be no more than six feet (6') in
height and setback from all property lines shall be 1.5 times the height of the
sign. Signs specially permitted shall be associated with an authorized use as
provided for in this chapter, size and location shall be determined by the city
council. Affixed or wall mounted signs shall not exceed a combined sign area of
twelve (12) square feet per building. All signs shall be externally lit.
      2.   A combined total or combination thereof, of two (2) freestanding or
roof mounted sign(s) are permitted per building. Total combined area of
freestanding and roof mounted sign(s) shall not exceed two hundred (200) square
feet.
      3.   Each building shall be permitted up to one (1) freestanding on
premises sign for each street frontage, up to a maximum of two (2) freestanding
signs per lot.
      4.   Each building shall be permitted up to one (1) freestanding sign for
each one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of public street frontage or thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of three (3)
freestanding signs per lot.
      5.   Maximum total sign area of freestanding signs shall be three hundred
(300) square feet in area as established by subsection
11-15-5C of this chapter.
      6.   Each freestanding sign shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height
as established by subsection
11-15-5C of this chapter.
      7.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height as
established by subsection
11-15-5C of this chapter.
      8.   Sign setback from all property lines shall be ten feet (10') or
equal to the height of the sign, whichever is less.
      9.   No sign shall be allowed to project into the public right-of-way or
public easements.
      10.   No sign shall be closer than two feet (2'), measured in horizontal
distance, to the curb line of any street.
      11.   There shall be no minimum setbacks for signs in the downtown zoning
district.
      12.   Right-of-way banners shall be reserved for community events
authorized by the city of Bonners Ferry and shall not be used to conduct or
advertise private business. Anyone seeking a right of way banner shall first
seek approval by the city of Bonners Ferry.
      13.   Signs shall be located at the entryway to a development or property
and shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in total sign area as
defined in this chapter. Neighborhood identification signs may also include
development signs as defined in this chapter.
      14.   Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet and shall not be located
or allowed to project into any public right-of-way. Signs shall comply with
section
11-15-3, "Definitions," of this chapter.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-9: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   A "nonconforming sign" is a sign that meets the definition of section
11-15-3 of this chapter.
   B.   No such nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered, in a way which
increases its nonconformity, but any sign may be altered to bring it into
conformity.
   C.   Except for ordinary maintenance, copy changes, or repairs not involving
structural, material, or electrical changes, no sign, or part thereof, shall be
changed, converted, additionally illuminated, enlarged, or moved unless the
entire sign and structure are brought into conformity with this chapter, unless
such sign was damaged or partially destroyed by man caused or natural act such
as fire, accident, explosion, flood, lightning, wind or other calamity. In such
cases, the sign or structure may stay at its current location, provided the
sign shall not be improved upon, constructed, altered, changed or re-erected
without review and approval by the city. Nonconforming signs shall be required
to come into compliance with any building standards relating to such uses, as
determined by the building inspector and/or engineer.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
11-15-10: ADMINISTRATION:
   The city has the responsibility to ensure that all measures of this chapter
are enforced. The following standards, permit requirements, and procedures
shall be met:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit shall be required for all signs, except for
those expressly authorized without a permit. Exemption from permit shall not,
however, exempt the owner of the sign from responsibility for its erection and
maintenance in a safe manner, and in a manner in accordance with all other
provisions of this chapter.
      1.   Application: An application for a sign shall be completed on a form
provided by the city and shall include at a minimum the following:
         a.   Name of organization and location;
         b.   Contact person;
         c.   Address and phone number for contact person;
         d.   Description of the activities occurring on the site where the
sign will be installed;
         e.   Description of any existing signage that will remain on the site;
         f.   Identification of the type of sign/signs to be erected by the
applicant;
         g.   Site plan depicting the locations of proposed signage including
setbacks from property lines, proposed landscaped areas and existing remaining
signage;
         h.   Construction quality plans of the sign and supporting structures
stamped by an engineer certified in the state of Idaho to do such work;
         i.   Written description explaining the drawing of the proposed
signage, including a detailed description of materials, colors, and letter
height, type and style; and
         j.   Any applicable fee as established by the city.
      2.   Standards For Sign Permit Approval: Permit application shall be
approved by the city if all of the following standards have been met:
         a.   The sign, as proposed, meets all applicable requirements of this
chapter;
         b.   The sign, as proposed, meets all applicable requirements of the
city's adopted building and applicable electrical codes;
         c.   The sign, as proposed, does not violate any other applicable
chapters or standards of the city, state and federal government.
   B.   Sign Location: The city recommends that all sign locations be reviewed
by the city engineer prior to submission of the application. The city engineer
or designee has discretion to suggest modification of the location based on
driver sight distances or other potential hazards.
   C.   Fees: The city has established by resolution an official fee schedule
that includes fees for processing sign applications. Fees are payable at the
time of permit application.
   D.   Removal Of Unsafe Signs: Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or
endangers the safety of the public or a building, the city administrator/
engineer, or designee, shall order that such sign be made safe or be removed.
Following receipt of said order, the person, firm, or corporation owning or
leasing the sign shall remove the sign immediately.
   E.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision in this chapter shall have
recourse as set forth at section
11-3-3 of this title.
   F.   Enforcement: All matters pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter
shall comply with standards listed at the enforcement section at
11-3-6 of this title.
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
APPENDIX A
TABLE OF USES
Interpretation: Tables A-1 to A-4: Where column and row intersect, a letter or
blank is shown to indicate whether or not the use(s) is authorized.
      (P = Permitted uses; S = Special uses; [Blank] = Not allowed;
      * = Zoning permit required)
Any use listed in Appendix A tables shall also be required to follow any
supplementary and standard regulations and permitting, as provided in this
title. See Definitions, Chapter 2 of this title, for specific descriptions of
certain uses.
TABLE A-1: RESIDENTIAL:
Use Zoning District
   RES A RES B RES AB MIXED MEDICAL DWTN COMM LIGHT INDUST
Use                     Zoning District
                       RES A RES B RES AB MIXED MEDICAL DWTN COMM LIGHT INDUST
Type of Use: Residential
Accessory dwelling unit P     P     P      P     P       P    P     
Dwelling, cottage            S     S      P*    P*          P*    
housing
Dwelling, duplex             P     P      P     P           P     
Dwelling, multi-family,           S      P*    S       P*   P*    
apartments
Dwelling, single-family P     P     P      P     P       P    P     
Dwelling, single-family
dwelling, group home as P     P     P      P     P       P    P     
defined by I.C. 67-6531
Dwelling, townhome           P*    P*     P*    P*          P*    
Gardens, community      P     P     P      P     P       P    P    P
Home-based business     S     S     S      S     S           P     
Home occupation         P     P     P      P     P       P    P     
Manufactured home park  S     S     S                      S     
Short-term rental       P     P     P      P     P       P    P     
Domestic livestock,          P                                
small farm animals
Type of Use: Commercial
Ambulance services           S     S      S     P       S    P    P
Amusement center                        P*           P*   P    P
(indoor)
Amusement center                        P*               P*   P*
(outdoor)
Animal feed, wholesale                              P    P    P
Assisted living              S     S      S     P                
facility
Auction center                                      P    P    P
Bakery, deli                            P     P       P    P    P
Bakery, non-wholesale                   P            P    P    P
Banks, mortgage,                        P     P       P    P    P
lending
Banks, drive-up                         P*    P*      P*   P    P
Bar, tavern, pub,
micro-brewery,                          P            P    P    P
nightclub
Barber shop, hair/nail       S     S      P            P    P    P
solon
Boarding house, bed &        S     S      P*    P*      P    P     
breakfast
Bowling alley                           P*           P*   P    P
Building supplies                                   P*   P    P
Campgrounds, tent                                       S    S
Car wash                                            P    P    P
Carpentry shop                                      P    P    P
Catering facility                       S     P       P    P    P
Cemeteries, mausoleums  S     S     S           S           S    S
Childcare, in home, 6   P     P     P      P     P       P    P     
or fewer group
Childcare, adult and
child daycare, 7-12          S     S      P*    P*      P*   P     
group
Childcare, adult and
child daycare, 13 or         S     S      P*    S       S    P     
more group
Churches                S     S     S      S     P*      P*   P*   P*
Clinics, medical,            S*    P      P     P       P    P    P
doctor, dental, optical
Club/lodge                        S**    P*           P    P    S
Community centers,           S     S      P*    S       P    P    S
senior center
Crematories                                             S    P
Dance hall                                          P    P    P
Dry cleaners,                           P            P    P    P
laundromats
Education services,
dance, music, voice          S     S      P            P    P     
studios
Equipment rental,
sports, medical &                       P     P       P    P    P
similar smaller items
Food stand, food truck                  P     P*      P    P    P
Funeral home                      S**         P       P    P    P
Furniture refinishing                               P    P    P
Garden center, nursery,
retail greenhouse,                      P            P    P    P
landscaping materials
Gas station                             S            P    P    P
Golf course                                             P*   P*
Health club                       S*     P     P       P    P    P
Health spa w/fitness              S*     P     P       P    P    P
Hospitals                                    P*               
Hotel, motel                                        P*   P*   S*
Kennels, pet shelters                                   S    S
Laboratories, medical,                  P     P       P    P    P
dental, optical
Library                                 P     P       P    P     
Liquor store (includes                  P            P    P    P
beer & wine sales)
Lumber retail yard                                      P    P
Machine, fabrication                                P    P    P
shop
Massage therapy office                  P     P       P    P    P
Medical equipment sales                      P       P    P    P
Monument works                                          P    P
Museum                                  P     P       P    P    P
Newspaper office                                    P    P    P
Nursing facility,
skilled, extended or              S           P*      P*   P*    
long-term care nursing
home
Office, administration  S     S     S      P     P       P    P    P
(schools)
Office, employment                      P     P       P    P    P
services
Offices, professional,
such as attorney,
bookkeeping, architect,           S**    P     P       P    P    P
engineering, real
estate, etc.
Parking, commercial
(not associated w/on-                   S     P*      P    P    P
site use)
Pet boarding,                                           S    S
veterinary hospital
Pet grooming                      S**    P            P*   P    P
Pharmacy                                     P       P    P    P
*if drive-up
Plumbing, electrical                                P    P    P
shop
Printing, commercial
(not > than 10,000 sq.                  P            P    P    P
ft. floor area)
Radio station                                       P    P    P
Repairs, automotive                                 P    P    P
Repairs, bicycle, small
appliances, shoes, w/                   P            P    P    P
associated sales,
locksmith
Repairs, small engine                               P    P    P
Research, general                            P       P    P    P
Restaurant, dine-in               S**    P     P*      P*   P    P
Restaurant, drive-                      S            P*   P*   P*
through, fast food
Retail sales                                            P*   P*
establishment, large
Type of Use: Commercial
Retail sales                            P     S       P    P    P
establishment, medium
Retail sales
establishment, small,             S**    P     P       P    P    P
specialty &
neighborhood
RV park                                                 S    S
Schools, public and     S     S     S      S     S       S    P*    
private
Studios, art,
photography, interior             S**    P            P    P    P
design
Taxidermy shop                                      P    P    P
Theater, indoor                         P            P    P     
Theater, outdoor                        P*           P*   P*   P*
TV station                                          P    P    P
Vehicle sales                                       P    P    P
Veterinary clinic                                   P    P    P
Waterpark                                               P*   P*
Type of Use: Light Industrial
Ag & heavy equipment                                P*   P    P
sales
Animal feed, wholesale                              P    P    P
Bakery, food processing                             S    S    P
plant (wholesale)
Bottling plant                                              P*
Brewery (wholesale, w/                                      P*
o restaurant)
Cold storage                                            P    P
Concrete & cement                                           S
manufacturing
Contractor yard                                         P    P
Cold storage                                            P    P
Equipment rental,                                       P    P
construction, farming
Grain storage                                               P
Impound yard, vehicle
storage, (not junk                                          P
yard)
Lumber mill                                                 P
Lumber, wholesale                                       P    P
Machine, fabrication                                P    P    P
shop
Manufacture d home,                                     P    P
wholesale
Mini- storages                                          P*   P*
Monument works                                          P    P
Nursery (greenhouse)                                P    P    P
wholesale
Petroleum bulk storage                                  S*   P
Recycling operation or
center (shall be within                                 S    P
completely enclosed
structure)
Repairs, heavy                                          P*   P
equipment
Sand & gravel sales                                         P
yard
Sheet metal shop                                        P    P
Tire, automotive parts,                             P    P    P
wholesale
Truck terminal                                          P    P
(construction yard)
Warehousing , general &                                     P
storage, large scale
Type of Use: Public
Airport                                                     S
Bus station                             P*    P       P    P    P
Cell tower, wireless
communication                           S     S       S    S    P
facilities, radio &
television towers
Electric vehicle                        P     P       P    P    P
charging stations
Fairgrounds                                             P    P
Fire, police station    P     P     P      P     P       P    P    P
Government office                 P      P     P       P    P    P
Park                    P*    P*    P*     P     P       P    P    P
Pool, public                 S     S      P     S       P    P*    
Post office                             P            P    P     
Prison, correction                                      S     
facility
Public water systems    S     S     S      S     S       S    P    P
Public utility facility S     S     S      S     S       P    P    P
or structure
Solid waste transfer                                        P*
Waste water collection  S     S     S      S     S       S    P    P
& treatment
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/88f8ee6f1e33f671fb7f9cd8491a56be5d90ca57/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1902.png]
(Ord. 621, 5-20-2025)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Authority
12-1-4: Fees And Mitigation
12-1-5: Enforcement And Penalties
12-1-6: Interpretation And Conflict
12-1-7: Condition Based Exceptions
12-1-8: Remedies
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall officially be known and cited as the SUBDIVISION
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BONNERS FERRY. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
These provisions are adopted to provide for the orderly division of land within
the City, and:
A.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of Bonners Ferry;
B.   To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan;
C.   To encourage the order and beneficial development of the community's land;
D.   To guide public and private policy in order to provide adequate and
efficient streets, sewerage, drainage, parks and public facilities;
E.   To establish standards for development and installation of improvements
for subdivisions, including water, sewer, streets and drainage;
F.   To further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal
description and monumentation of subdivided land;
G.   To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent
with development and will have sufficient capacity to serve the subdivision;
H.   To ensure that the community will bear no more than its fair share of any
cost of providing services by requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish
land, or establish mitigation measures to provide a fair share of capital
facilities needs generated by the development;
I.   To assure the adequacy of drainage facilities to safeguard the water
table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources to
preserve the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land;
J.   To provide open space through the most efficient design and layout of
land, while preserving the density of development as established in the zoning
ordinance of Bonners Ferry. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-1-3: AUTHORITY:
A.   This title is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the City
pursuant to article 12, section 2 of the Idaho Constitution, Idaho Code, title
67, chapter 65 and title 50, chapter 13.
B.   The provisions of this title shall be administered to ensure orderly
growth and development and shall supplement and implement provisions of the
Bonners Ferry Comprehensive Plan, this Code and the capital improvements plan.
By virtue of this title the City Council, Planning Commission and
administrative staff of Bonners Ferry are vested with the authority to review,
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove applications for subdivision of
land. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-1-4: FEES AND MITIGATION:
A.   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt reasonable fees related to the
cost of services associated with review, processing and inspection of
subdivision of land.
B.   The City may, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, require
mitigation of the effects of development on the ability of the City, and other
political subdivisions, to deliver services without compromising quality or
imposing substantial additional costs to current residents. (Ord. 495, 12-20-
2005)
12-1-5: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A.   No building permit will be issued for the construction or development of
any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of these regulations or State Platting Statutes,
nor shall the City have any obligation to issue any certificates of occupancy
or to provide utility services to any parcel created or established in
violation of these provisions.
B.   Violations of the provisions of this title are subject to compliance or
remedy measures as outlined in section
12-1-8 of this chapter. The City shall have recourse to such civil remedies in
law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
these regulations. (Ord. 570, 9-19-2017)
12-1-6: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
A.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be
required if it is demonstrated that such standards are necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
B.   Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision
of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes the standards most
likely to protect the public health, safety and general welfare shall control.
(Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-1-7: CONDITION BASED EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Where strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of
these regulations may be better served by an alternative proposal, the City
Council may approve condition based exceptions to these regulations. The
granting of an exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of these regulations. The City Council will not permit exceptions to
conditions unless it finds, based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case, that:
   1.   The granting of the condition based exception shall not be detrimental
to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property; and
   2.   The conditions upon which the condition based exception request is
based are unique to the lands for which the relief is sought and are not
applicable generally to other lands; and
   3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific lands involved, a particular and unnecessary
hardship to the owner or the public would result if these regulations are
strictly applied; and
   4.   The change sought shall not have the effect of increasing cost or
burdens on the City; and
   5.   The change sought shall not be contrary to the zoning ordinance or
Comprehensive Plan.
B.   In approving condition based exceptions, the City Council may require
conditions that will secure the purposes of this title. A condition based
exception is any alternative design, or deviation from subdivision ordinance
requirements that is requested by the developer. The exception requested must
be in writing and must be included in the notice to be given pursuant to
chapter 3 or 5 of this title and reviewed as an integral part of the overall
review process as outlined in this title and the recommendation and decision
made on the requested exception should be at the time the subdivision is
reviewed by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-1-8: REMEDIES:
A.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following conveyance
of any lot or parcel of real property:
   1.   Exempt from the definition of "subdivision", as provided for in this
chapter;
   2.   Identified in a recorded final plat after the date of recording.
B.   This section shall not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which
the City, other public agency or any person may otherwise be entitled. The City
or other public agency or any person may file suit to restrain or enjoin any
attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease, financing or gift of any lot
or parcel, or portion thereof, contrary to the provisions of this title. The
provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a
grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.
C.   The City shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to
develop or use any lot or parcel which has been divided, or which has resulted
from a division, contrary to the provisions of this title.
D.   For the purposes of the administration of this section, the following
shall be considered in compliance:
   1.   Any lot or parcel which is described on a recorded legal instrument of
conveyance prior to December 29, 2005;
   2.   Any lot or parcel for which a valid building permit has been issued by
the City, where on development has occurred and a use has been established in
reliance on that permit;
   3.   Any lot or parcel which is described on a recorded legal instrument of
conveyance prior to April 27, 2017, that does not meet lot size or lot
dimensional standards.
E.   Any division of land determined by the City to be in violation of this
title shall either seek remedy as outlined within this section or shall seek
compliance with the laws in affect at the time the division occurred.
Compliance with current subdivision laws shall be considered compliance with
the law. (Ord. 570, 9-19-2017)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: Words Defined
12-2-2: Interpretations
12-2-1: WORDS DEFINED:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases and words will
have the meanings given in this chapter or as defined in Idaho statute:
   ALLEY: A right of way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or
rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
   BLOCK: A group of lots, tracts or parcels within well defined and fixed
boundaries established by plat.
   CITY ENGINEER: The city administrator or his designee for a particular
project.
   CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real
property, together with a separate interest in a unit in a project in
accordance with title 55 of the Idaho Code.
   CUL-DE-SAC: A street closed at one end by a circular area of sufficient size
for turning vehicles around.
   DEDICATION: An act conveying property rights or interests.
   DEVELOPER: The person, party, or corporation who is proposing to develop or
divide property.
   DOUBLE PLUMBING: The developer, builder, developer or contractor shall be
responsible for installing an acceptable subsurface sewage disposal system, and
shall also be responsible for installing a sewer line from the point where the
sewer line to subsurface disposal system leaves the building to the future
sewer collection line at the property line or within the public right of way.
   FINAL PLAT: The final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for
filing for record with the county recorder and containing all elements and
requirements set forth in the Idaho Code and this title.
   LOT: A designated parcel of land established pursuant to title 50, chapter
13 of the Idaho Code.
   MUTCD: "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", latest edition.
   OFF SITE: Not located on the property that is the subject of a development
application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right of way.
ON SITE: Located on the lot in question or on the land being subdivided.
   OPEN SPACE: Land, essentially free of structures, set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for the public or for the use and enjoyment of owners
and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
   PARCEL: A unit of land of contiguous quantity in the ownership of one person
or entity and constituting a separate tract of land.
   PLAT: A reproducible or permanent drawing of a subdivision and dedications
and easements, prepared for filing and recording with the county recorder in
accordance with provision of title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code.
   PRIVATE STREET: A street, road, or drive, which is not a dedicated and
accepted public right of way for public use, and is not maintained by the city
of Bonners Ferry.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM: All sewerage collection systems, community septic tank and
drainfield, pump stations, interceptor and appurtenances that are utilized or
will be utilized to transport, treat and dispose of sewage.
   STREET: A public right of way, which provides vehicular and pedestrian
access to adjacent properties, that dedication of which has been officially
accepted by the city of Bonners Ferry. The term "street" also includes the
terms highway, parkway, road, avenue, land, place and other such terms.
   SUBDIVISION: The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
parcels, tracts or sites that meet the criteria for the purpose of sale, lease,
transfer or development, subject to the exemptions set forth in this title.
   SUBDIVISION PLAN: Both written information and all maps, plans or plats that
together fully describe a proposed subdivision as required by this title. (Ord.
495, 12-20-2005)
12-2-2: INTERPRETATIONS:
When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory, unless the
express language of the ordinance provides otherwise. Except as expressly
defined herein, words used in this title shall be given their ordinary meaning
consistent with common usage and context. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
12-3-1: Applicability
12-3-2: Exemptions
12-3-3: Application
12-3-4: Procedures
12-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
Every division of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites or
divisions, regardless of lot size, whether immediate or future, for the purpose
of sale, lease, transfer or development within the incorporated area of Bonners
Ferry that does not meet the criteria for a minor subdivision under chapter 5
of this title shall proceed in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 495, 12-20-
2005)
12-3-2: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A.   The transfer of land between two (2) adjacent property owners, which does
not result in the creation of any additional building site.
B.   Any division of land made by testamentary provision or the laws of
descent. Parcels of land so created must comply with lot size, frontage, and
other standards established by this code and other applicable laws to be
eligible for a building permit or to qualify for establishment of an authorized
land use.
C.   Any acquisition or division of land by a public agency for public right of
way or public utility purposes. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-3-3: APPLICATION:
Any person who undertakes a subdivision shall submit to the city a preliminary
subdivision plan.
Upon preliminary staff review and action on any comments, the developer shall
submit a proposed subdivision plan for planning and zoning review and
distribution to other affected entities. The developer shall submit one full
sized subdivision plan and one subdivision plan in eleven inch by seventeen
inch (11" x 17") format. Details and specifications shall conform to the
standards described in section
12-3-4 of this chapter and the Idaho Code.
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of an amount established by
resolution of the council. (Ord. 495A, 5-16-2006)
12-3-4: PROCEDURES:
A.   Proposed Subdivision Application Plan Standards: Every subdivision plan
shall consist of one or more legible maps, together with legible written data,
and will be considered together. Applicants shall fully and clearly disclose
the following information and additional information requested by the city due
to the site and other special considerations: (Ord. 495A, 5-16-2006)
   1.   The name of the proposed subdivision;
   2.   The legal description of the land contained within the subdivision;
   3.   The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all persons,
firms and corporations holding interests in said land and proof of ownership
and consent from any lien holder granting authorization to subdivide the
property;
   4.   A list, prepared by a title company licensed to do business in the
state of Idaho, of the names and mailing addresses of all property owners whose
property is within or adjacent to the area bounded by lines three hundred feet
(300') from the external boundary of the entire proposal area and others as
required by the city. Such list shall be provided on self-adhesive labels in
the number of copies necessary for the hearing(s) scheduled;
   5.   The name, a mailing address and telephone number of the engineer,
surveyor or other person that prepared the plan;
   6.   The location of the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision in
relation to section, quarter section and quarter-quarter section lines and any
adjacent corporate boundaries of the city which are part of the legal
description of the property;
   7.   The boundaries and dimensions of all blocks and lots within the
proposed subdivision together with the numbers proposed to be assigned each
block and lot;
   8.   A data table showing the number of lots, the smallest, largest and
average lot area within the proposal site, the total acreage of the entire
proposal area, and the density in lots per acre;
   9.   A statement of proposed provisions for irrigation/domestic water
supplies and sewage disposal;
   10.   A statement of proposed provisions for gas, electricity, telephone,
and cable television, together with the proposed location of those facilities.
   11.   A sketch map of the general vicinity in which the land proposed for
subdivision lies;
   12.   Any existing or proposed easements and right of way dedications;
   13.   All proposed streets; width, curbs, swales, sidewalks and proposed
street names shown;
   14.   All adjacent streets including swales, curbs and sidewalks;
   15.   Location of existing structures and setbacks from proposed lot lines
and streets;
   16.   Location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land to be set aside
for parks, open space, or other public use or for the use of property owners in
the proposed subdivision;
   17.   Proposed covenants and restrictions;
   18.   Development phases, or stages, if the project will be done over
several years;
   19.   Preliminary construction plans and profiles for the subdivisions which
shall include:
      a.   Proposed utility infrastructure plan, including storm sewers,
sanitary sewer plan, water line locations, and easements for electric power,
gas, and cable television;
      b.   Road centerlines, grades, typical cross sections, and special cuts
and fills;
      c.   General grading plan showing ultimate surface water flow patterns;
      d.   Pedestrian circulation plans;
      e.   General right of way landscape plan;
      f.   Traffic studies, if required by the city engineer;
      g.   Areas of cuts or fills of more than four feet (4').
B.   Request For Comment Package: Upon the receipt of a proposed subdivision
plan for processing, the city shall provide one copy of the completed
application, a vicinity map, showing the proposed subdivision and surrounding
area on eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") paper to be provided by the
city to each of the following agencies and provide the agency an opportunity to
provide comment to the city:
   1.   Panhandle health district;
   2.   City fire chief;
   3.   Boundary County school district;
   4.   Post office;
   5.   All affected utilities.
C.   Public Hearing: Once the city staff has reviewed the application, has
prepared a staff report, and coordinated with the developer so that the
application is complete and that sufficient information regarding the proposal
can be provided for the planning and zoning commission, the matter will be
placed on the next available planning and zoning commission agenda, within
Idaho Code required notification requirements, for a public hearing.
D.   Preliminary Plat Submitted: Prior to planning and zoning review, the
preliminary plat shall be submitted to the county for review of the subdivision
name and street names.
E.   Notice Of Public Hearing: At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public
hearing, notice of the time and place and a summary of the proposal, including
any proposed exceptions, shall be published in the official newspaper of the
city. Additional notice shall be provided by mail to property owners and
purchasers of record within three hundred feet (300') of the external
boundaries of the land being considered and any additional land that may be
substantially impacted by the proposed subdivision as determined by the city
staff. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or
purchasers of record, extraordinary notice may be given as provided by state
law. Notice will also be posted on the property in accordance with posting
standards concerning land use matters. The posted notice will be provided and
posted by the city. The applicant shall bear all costs of publication, mailing
of the notices, and posting on the property.
F.   Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendation: After the planning and
zoning commission has reviewed the proposed subdivision plan at the public
hearing, the commission shall forward a recommendation to the city council. The
commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval
of the proposed subdivision with reasons as soon as practicable. The city staff
shall notify the developer, in writing, of the recommendation of the commission
and any recommended conditions or changes requested and shall advise the
developer that the subdivision will be placed on the agenda of the city council
only upon the developer's request.
G.   City Council Decision: Upon receipt of a request that the proposed
subdivision be placed on the council agenda, the city clerk will place the
proposed subdivision request on the next available council agenda. The city
council, upon receipt of recommendations from the planning and zoning
commission, and after opportunity to review the file and minutes from the
public hearing, shall act upon the request. The city council may approve,
approve with conditions, disapprove the subdivision, or schedule an additional
public hearing. City staff will notify the developer in writing of the decision
of the city council.
H.   Standards For Planning And Zoning Commission Or City Council Approval:
   1.   Definite provisions have been made for a water supply system that is
adequate in terms of quantity and quality for the type of subdivision proposed.
   2.   Adequate provisions have been made for a public sewage system and that
the existing municipal system can accommodate the proposed sewer flows.
   3.   Proposed streets are consistent with the transportation plan, the
transportation element of the comprehensive plan, and city street department
interest.
   4.   All areas of the proposed subdivision which involve soil or
topographical conditions presenting hazards have been identified and that the
proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions.
   5.   The area proposed for subdivision is zoned for the proposed use and the
use conforms to other requirements found in this code.
   6.   Construction plans meet the design and improvements standards of all
affected entities.
   7.   Existing city infrastructure is adequate to serve the proposed
development.
   8.   The developer has made adequate plans to ensure that the community will
bear no more than its fair share of costs to provide services by paying fees,
furnishing land, or providing other mitigation measures for off site impacts to
streets, parks, and other public facilities within the community. It is the
expectation that in most cases, off site improvements will be dealt with
through the agreements.
I.   Commencement Of Construction: Upon review and approval of the final
construction plans by the city council, the developer may proceed with
construction of the subdivision. No construction of any kind, other than
removal or stripping of topsoil, shall take place on the site prior to those
approvals.
J.   Approval Duration: Failure to file the final plat application within
eighteen (18) months after action by the city council shall cause all approvals
of said subdivision plan to be null and void, unless an extension of twelve
(12) months has been applied for by the developer and approved by the council.
All requests for extension should be applied for in advance of expiration and
council approval shall be based on the merits of the request and whether actual
work has been commenced and is continuing on the installation of the
improvements.
   1.   Changes, Alterations Or Deletions: After approval of the preliminary
subdivision plan and construction plan the city engineer may, in writing,
approve minor changes of the plan. If the amendment is major or involves a
substantial change in the conditions of approval, the same procedures for a
public hearing for subdivision plan approval must be followed to address the
requested amendment.
K.   Phasing Of Subdivisions:
   1.   Subdivisions may be phased, to be developed in portions periodically
according to a proposed schedule, so long as each phase contains all of the
necessary improvements to function as a subdivision without the completion of
any of the other phases. The developer shall provide detailed plans for phasing
at the time of application. The plans shall show proposed phasing boundaries,
proposed interim or temporary solutions to utility systems and to the handling
of traffic on local streets within the subdivision and shall be accompanied by
a narrative description of assurance of completion of permanent system
improvements.
   2.   A phasing plan shall coordinate required infrastructure systems,
dedications, off site improvements, open space/parks, landscaping, private
utilities, or other elements of a subdivision. The plan may indicate times of
triggering mechanisms for improvements. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
CHAPTER 4
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
SECTION:
12-4-1: Final Plat Requirements
12-4-2: Submittal
12-4-3: Agreement And Bond/Guarantee For Improvement
12-4-4: Council Review
12-4-5: Recordation
12-4-1: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Every final plat required by this title shall be prepared in accordance with
title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho Code as it now exists or is subsequently
amended. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-4-2: SUBMITTAL:
The original and four (4) copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the
city for council review and approval that the plat meets all of the
requirements of the Idaho Code, this title and the subdivision plan approval,
including any conditions imposed by the city council, and that all required on
site and off site public improvements have been completed and are ready for
acceptance by the city or have been suitably guaranteed. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-4-3: AGREEMENT AND BOND/GUARANTEE FOR IMPROVEMENT:
A.   Before recordation, the developer shall install required improvements and
repair any existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the
development of the subdivision, or execute and file with the council a secured
agreement between himself and the city of Bonners Ferry, specifying the period
within which required improvements and repairs shall be completed. The
agreement shall also contain a provision that the developer shall be
responsible for the successful operation and all repairs to the improvements
for a two (2) year period following their installation. The agreement shall be
accompanied by a surety bond, cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter
of credit or other form of security approved by the city attorney, in the
amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of
construction for the improvements to be completed. In the event that the
developer does not meet timely completion of the improvements, the city may
proceed against the guarantee. If the cost of completion of the improvements
exceeds the amount of the guarantee, the city may recover the full cost and
expenses thereof from the developer. The two (2) year warranty shall be
accompanied by a bond or some other security acceptable to the city in an
amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of cost of the total improvements.
B.   It shall be a requirement of compliance with this title that a development
agreement and a construction improvement agreement be entered into prior to
recordation of a subdivision plat and approval by the city if any physical
construction of subdivision improvements has not been completed prior to
recordation of the plat and a capital facilities guarantee agreement shall be
entered into prior to acceptance of the improvements by the city.
C.   For a phased subdivision, the required bonding shall be for the phase
which is being developed. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-4-4: COUNCIL REVIEW:
When staff review of the final plat is completed and all required terms and
conditions are satisfied, the final plat will be submitted to the city council
for approval. The council shall review the subdivision and plat and, upon
finding that all of the requirements have been satisfied, shall authorize the
mayor and the city clerk to sign the plat. The city engineer's signature shall
be the final approval assigned to the plat. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-4-5: RECORDATION:
After the plat is signed by the mayor, city clerk and city engineer, the
developer shall record the plat with the county recorder, and provide the city
with a reproducible copy of the recorded plat and a digital file of the plat on
CD or DVD in AutoCAD format acceptable to the Boundary County assessor's
office. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
CHAPTER 5
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
12-5-1: Applicability
12-5-2: Exemptions
12-5-3: Application
12-5-4: Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary Minor Plat
12-5-5: Minor Plat; Contents Of Final Plat, Procedure For Approval Of Final
Plat
12-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
The division of land into four (4) or fewer contiguous lots, parcels, tracts or
sites may be considered a minor subdivision provided it meets all criteria
outlined in this section. If any one of the following criteria is not met, the
developer must file a regular subdivision plat as outlined in this title. A
minor subdivision shall be subject to all development standards established by
this title. The proposed minor subdivision and all of the proposed development
shall meet the following criteria:
A.   Comply with all minimum standards and requirements of the zoning
ordinance, and shall not require a zone change;
B.   All lots shall maintain frontage on and access onto an existing public
street meeting the city street standards and the standards contained herein.
Dedication of additional right of way for future improvements may be required
as a condition of approval;
C.   At the time of preliminary plat submittal, all lots shall have adequate
sewer and water services available to the subdivision;
D.   The subdivision does not require extensions or improvements to sewer or
water mains other than individual lateral connections to serve the future lots,
including installation of booster stations, pressure mains, and lift stations.
(Ord. 560, 1-3-2017)
12-5-2: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A.   The transfer of land between two (2) adjacent property owners, which does
not result in the creation of any additional lot or parcel.
B.   Any division of land made by testamentary provision or the laws of
descent. Parcels of land so created must comply with lot size, frontage, and
other standards established by this code and other applicable laws to be
eligible for a building permit or to qualify for establishment of a regulated
land use.
C.   Any acquisition or division of land by a public agency for public right of
way purposes. (Ord. 560, 1-3-2017)
12-5-3: APPLICATION:
An application for a minor subdivision must be submitted to the city with the
following:
A.   A fee if an amount is established by resolution of the council;
B.   Proof of ownership and consent from any lienholder granting authorization
to subdivide the property;
C.   One full sized copy of the proposed plat, one eleven inch by seventeen
inch (11" x 17") copy of the proposed plat, and one digital copy of the
proposed minor subdivision, prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state of
Idaho, and which shall contain all applicable items listed at subsection
12-3-4A of this title and shall be prepared in accordance with title 50,
chapter 13 of the Idaho Code as it now exists or is subsequently amended. (Ord.
560, 1-3-2017)
12-5-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY MINOR PLAT:
A.   The applicant shall file an application for a preliminary minor plat with
the city, pursuant to the procedures of this title.
B.   Upon the determination of by the administrator that an application is
complete, the city shall:
   1.   Provide copies of submitted documents, as necessary, by first class
mail to agencies, departments and jurisdictions, which, in the judgment of
staff, may be affected by the proposal, allowing not less than fourteen (14)
days for response.
   2.   Provide notice of the proposed subdivision by first class mail to all
property owners of record within three hundred feet (300') of the external
boundaries of the land being considered. The notice shall, at a minimum,
include the applicant's name, a description of the proposed subdivision and the
general location of the property. The notice shall advise of a fourteen (14)
day written comment period beginning the day after notice is postmarked.
   3.   Provide notice to the official county newspaper of record. The notice
shall provide a summary of the proposal and advise of the fourteen (14) day
comment period.
C.   At the close of the comment and review period and upon a determination by
the administrator that the agency review comments have been addressed by the
applicant, the administrator shall issue a staff report containing, at a
minimum, proposed findings, reasoned decision and conditions of approval and a
recommendation for action. Any response to the staff report by the applicant or
interested parties shall be received by the city not later than ten (10) days
after the issuance of the report.
D.   Following the ten (10) day response period, the administrator shall
consider the application for the preliminary minor plat, any comments received,
the facts on the record and the standards for considering the subdivision
application and may:
   1.   Approve the preliminary minor plat, as presented;
   2.   Approve the preliminary minor plat, as modified;
   3.   Continue action on the minor plat, pending changes to be made in the
application, the subdivision design or the receipt of additional information;
   4.   Deny the application for the preliminary minor plat;
   5.   Recommend the council hold a public hearing pursuant to the public
hearing noticing requirements and procedures set forth in Idaho Code 67-6509,
based upon the extent of public comment or other contested factors in the case
which warrant a full hearing before the council. This option may be selected at
any time following the initiation of the review and comment period when
evidence of the record supports it, to ensure prompt processing of the
application for hearing.
E.   The administrator shall render a written decision, setting forth the
ordinance provisions and standards as provided for at subsection
12-3-4H of this title, the facts of the application and such conclusions that
support the decision. If the administrator denies the preliminary minor plat,
the administrator shall specify in the decision the actions, if any, which the
applicant could take to obtain approval.
F.   As a part of the decision for approving an application for a preliminary
plat, the administrator may stipulate conditions to be placed on the final plat
provided evidence of record is sufficient, which may include:
   1.   Minimizing adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
   2.   Designating the exact location and nature of development.
   3.   Requiring the provision of on or off site public facilities or
services.
   4.   Assuring the development is maintained properly.
G.   The preliminary minor plat shall be valid for a period not to exceed two
(2) calendar years from the date of approval. At any time prior to the
expiration date of the preliminary minor plat, an applicant may make a written
request to the administrator for an extension of the preliminary minor plat for
a period up to two (2) years. The administrator shall consider such request for
extension and the request must be approved or denied prior to the expiration
date of the preliminary plat.
H.   Any determination made by the administrator in the administration of this
section may be appealed to the council by notifying the city in writing of the
intent to appeal within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the written
determination. Upon receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall schedule the
application for a public hearing before the council, allowing sufficient time
for notice. The council shall conduct a public hearing and consider the
application, in accordance with the noticing procedures set forth in Idaho Code
67-6509. (Ord. 560, 1-3-2017)
12-5-5: MINOR PLAT; CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT, PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL
PLAT:
A.   The contents of the final plat for minor subdivisions processed under the
minor plat procedure shall be as set forth in chapter 4 of this title.
B.   The procedure for processing final plats of minor subdivisions utilizing
the minor plat procedure shall be as set forth in chapter 4 of this title.
(Ord. 560, 1-3-2017)
CHAPTER 6
SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-6-1: Minimum Design Standards Required
12-6-2: Construction Plans
12-6-3: Streets And Roadways
12-6-4: Storm Water Drainage
12-6-5: Utilities
12-6-6: Fire Provisions
12-6-7: Lots
12-6-8: Public Sites And Open Spaces
12-6-1: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED:
All plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this title and all
subdivisions, development, improvements and facilities done, constructed or
made in accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design
standards set forth hereinafter in this chapter; provided, however, that any
higher standards adopted by Idaho transportation department, federal agencies,
health agency, or any other agency with jurisdiction shall prevail over those
set forth herein. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-6-2: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
It shall be the responsibility of the developer of every subdivision or minor
subdivision to have prepared by a registered engineer, a complete set of
construction plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications and
supporting data, for all required streets, streetlights, utilities and other
facilities. Such construction plans shall be based on the approved subdivision,
and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. The planned
improvements must be constructed prior to filing of said final plat in
accordance with terms of surety accepted by the city. All construction plans
shall be prepared in accordance with the following conditions and
specifications, any public agency having jurisdiction and any applicable codes
and standards. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-6-3: STREETS AND ROADWAYS:
A.   Streets: Public streets and roads are required up to all individual
parcels or lots.
B.   Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial
subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off street
loading and parking. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited in all cases.
Dedicated alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and be
completed by the developer.
C.   Cul-De-Sac: Cul-de-sac or dead end streets, designed to be so permanently,
shall not be longer than three hundred feet (300') and shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside diameter of eighty feet (80')
curb face to curb face and a street property line diameter of at least one
hundred feet (100').
D.   Intersections: Intersections shall conform to the following:
   1.   Angle Of Intersection: Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°)
or as closely thereto as possible and in no case shall streets intersect at
less than seventy five degrees (75°).
   2.   Sight Triangle: Per Idaho Code 49-221.
   3.   Number Of Streets: No more than two (2) streets shall cross at any one
intersection.
   4.   "T" Intersections: "T" intersections may be used wherever such design
will not restrict the free movement of traffic.
E.   Street Names: The naming of streets and issuing of addresses shall conform
to the current city ordinances and policies.
F.   Street Name Signs: Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate
locations at each street intersection in accordance with the local standards
and the MUTCD. The developer shall install the signs and/or pay the actual
costs for signs installed by the city as determined by the city.
G.   Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be installed at intersections
throughout the subdivision. All street and area lighting shall be built to the
requirements of the city of Bonners Ferry electric department. (Ord. 495, 12-
20-2005)
12-6-4: STORM WATER DRAINAGE:
A.   Storm Drainage: An adequate on site storm drainage system shall be
required in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision
shall be established by the city.
B.   Drainage Improvement Standards: Drainage improvements shall be constructed
in accordance with the "Idaho Standards For Public Works Construction Manual"
and city approval. These standards shall apply to off site improvements when
required. In addition, such improvements shall meet the best management
practices accepted by the state of Idaho.
C.   Stream Or Drainage Course Easements: Approval is required for irrigation
route changes. The reservation of an easement along any stream or important
surface drainage course located in an area being subdivided may be required by
the council for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or
protecting the stream or drainage course. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-6-5: UTILITIES:
A.   All new public water supply or sewer systems shall be an extension of an
existing public system whenever possible. In the event that the proposed public
water supply or sewer system is not an extension of an existing public system,
there shall be a showing by the developer that an extension to an existing
public water supply or sewage system is not feasible and not in the best
interest of the public.
B.   Water and sewer line construction shall be governed by the standards
established by the city engineer and approved by the city council. Any water
and sewerage system shall be provided in conformance with the water and sewer
master plans of Bonners Ferry, Idaho department of environmental quality state
law and water and sewer policies and procedures approved by the city council.
C.   The city requires that all water and sewer plans be submitted for review
and comment by the city staff, one of which must be the supervisor of the water
and sewer departments.
D.   The city may require the water and sewer facilities to be oversized if
deemed necessary for future development.
E.   Underground utilities including electric, water, sewer, telephone, natural
gas, and cable television are required in all new subdivisions if available.
F.   Tracer wire shall be installed for all facilities made of nonconductive
material for future locating purposes.
G.   Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided along front lot lines,
rear lot lines and side lot lines when deemed necessary by the city. Total
easement width shall not be less ten feet (10'). On side lot lines the ten feet
(10') may consist of five feet (5') from two (2) contiguous and adjacent lots.
(Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-6-6: FIRE PROVISIONS:
A.   Adequate ingress, egress, and fire hydrant shall be provided as required
by the city of Bonners Ferry fire chief;
B.   Adequate fire protection shall be surveyed and required to be in
accordance with the Idaho fire bureau insurance ratings. Recommendations as to
the consistency or inconsistency with fire and water restrictions of the city
must be made by the fire chief and the superintendent of the water and sewer
departments. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-6-7: LOTS:
A.   Urban construction standards shall apply to all health and safety
standards set by district health.
B.   All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum
requirements of the zoning regulations.
C.   Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to the street
lines unless a variation will give a better street and lot plan.
D.   Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where unusual topography
or other conditions make it impossible to meet this requirement.
E.   All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after the subdividing of
a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as
unusable parcels.
F.   All lots shall be numbered by progressive numbers in each block
separately; blocks shall also be numbered consecutively throughout all
adjoining plats of the same master name.
G.   Planting strips may be required to be placed next to incompatible features
such as interstates, railroads, commercial or industrial uses to screen the
view from residential properties. Such screening shall not be a part of the
normal street right of way or utility easement. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-6-8: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
A.   Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use as shown on the comprehensive plan is located in
whole or part within a proposed subdivision, sufficient area for such public
use shall be dedicated to the public or reserved and offered for public
purchase.
B.   Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to residential
development and enhance the attractiveness of the community (such as trees,
water courses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets) shall be
preserved in the design of the subdivision.
C.   Special Developments: In the case of planned unit developments and large
scale developments, the commission may require sufficient park or open space
facilities of acceptable size, location and site characteristics that may be
suitable for the proposed development. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Purpose
12-7-2: General
12-7-3: Elements Of Agreement
12-7-4: Agreement To Be Recorded
12-7-5: Third Party Rights
12-7-6: Limitations On Liability
12-7-7: Construction Improvement Agreement
12-7-8: Warranty Agreement
12-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of a development agreement is to specify the means by which the
subdivision requirements will be accomplished, to establish terms of
mitigation, to describe the scope of construction improvements, to financially
secure the construction of such requirements and to have an understanding
between the city and the developer if any improvements are not completed prior
to final plat approval. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-2: GENERAL:
A development agreement shall constitute a binding secured contract between the
developer and property owner of a proposed subdivision and the city and shall
contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the parties and those required
by this title and other legal requirements. Development agreement requirements
may be waived by the city council for certain minor subdivisions upon a finding
that they will serve no purpose. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-3: ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT:
The development agreement shall contain a brief statement describing the
subdivision, which shall include its location, legal description, number of
lots, and the date of subdivision approval by the city council. The agreement
shall also include, but not be limited to, the following:
A.   Any conditions of approval from the review and approval process.
B.   Time limit, and provisions for extension and extinguishing the agreement.
C.   Phasing plans, if any, and a description of any required temporary
improvements and the terms of those improvements.
D.   A description of construction improvements to be installed on site and off
site.
E.   Covenants, if any, made by the developer and/or the city.
F.   Details of dedications and improvements beyond those required in this
title.
G.   Addenda, to include a construction improvement agreement and a maintenance
agreement as detailed in sections
12-7-7 and
12-7-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-4: AGREEMENT TO BE RECORDED:
The development agreement shall be recorded and shall run with the land and
bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the developer. The development
agreement will expire at the agreed upon date set forth in the agreement, or
upon the filing, by the city, of a release with the county recorder when the
terms of the agreement have been satisfied or are no longer valid, whichever
comes first. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-5: THIRD PARTY RIGHTS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in a development agreement, the
development agreement shall create no rights enforceable by any party not a
party to the development agreement. Purchasers of lots in approved subdivisions
are not deemed to be third party beneficiaries of development agreements. (Ord.
495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-6: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY:
Any breach of a development agreement by the city shall not give rise to
monetary damages, but shall be enforceable only by resort to an action for
specific performance. No provision of any development agreement which is
contrary to law may be enforced. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-7: CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
A.   A construction improvement agreement shall be an addendum to, or component
of, a development agreement and shall be executed prior to the commencement of
any construction relating to the subdivision. Staging or mobilizing of
equipment or establishing a temporary construction office or equipment storage
yards shall not be considered to be "construction" for the purposes of this
section.
B.   The construction improvement agreement shall set forth the specific public
improvements to be constructed in the subdivision, the manner and timing of the
construction, duties and responsibilities of the developer, and estimated costs
of the improvements. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
12-7-8: WARRANTY AGREEMENT:
A.   A warranty agreement shall be an addendum to, or component of, a
development agreement and shall be executed prior to the acceptance of the
public improvements by the city. All public capital improvements shall be
guaranteed for two (2) years from the date of formal acceptance for operational
maintenance by the city council by a surety acceptable to the city.
B.   The warranty agreement shall set forth the duties and responsibilities of
the developer regarding the ongoing maintenance of the public improvements that
are installed by the developer that are in excess of those required by the city
and are installed for the purpose of enhancement of the aesthetics of the
development. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
CHAPTER 8
SURVEY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-8-1: Survey
12-8-1: SURVEY:
All surveying shall be done by Idaho Code and standards of the surveying
profession. All lot corner pins shall be placed prior to the filing of the
final plat or record of survey. (Ord. 495, 12-20-2005)
TITLE 13
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
13-1-1: Statutory Authority
13-1-2:    Findings Of Fact
13-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
13-1-4:    Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
13-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The Legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code sections 46-1020,
46-1023, and 46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain
management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain
development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health,
and property. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
A.   The flood hazard areas of the City of Bonners Ferry are subject to
periodic inundation that results in:
   1.   Loss of life and property;
   2.   Health and safety hazards;
   3.   Disruption of commerce and governmental services;
   4.   Extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection; and
   5.   Impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B.   These flood losses may be caused by development in flood hazard areas,
which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
C.   Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning,
adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to promote public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
A.   Protect human life, health, and property;
B.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
C.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas;
D.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
E.   Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
F.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
G.   Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of special
flood hazard; and
H.   Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-1-4: OBJECTIVES AND METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purpose, this title includes methods and provisions
to:
A.   Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including
structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare
of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
B.   Restrict or prohibit development which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
C.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage or erosion;
D.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands;
E.   Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers which carry and store flood waters. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13-2-1:    Interpretation
13-2-2:    Definitions
13-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
title its most reasonable application. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                                       A structure on the same lot or parcel as
ACCESSORY AND AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES  a principal structure, the use of which
(APPURTENANT STRUCTURE):               is incidental and subordinate to the
                                       principal structure.
                                       An extension or increase in the floor
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING):    area or height of a building or
                                       structure.
                                       A structure that is used exclusively in
                                       connection with the production,
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES (APPURTENANT   harvesting, storage, raising, or drying
STRUCTURE):                            of agricultural commodities and
                                       livestock; specifically excludes any
                                       structures used for human habitation.
                                       A request for review of the Floodplain
APPEAL:                                Administrator's interpretation of
                                       provisions of this title or request for
                                       a variance.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:          See Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
                                       The flood having a one percent (1%)
BASE FLOOD:                            chance of being equaled or exceeded in
                                       any given year.
 
 
                            A determination by the Federal Insurance
                            Administrator of the water surface elevations of
                            the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a
                            one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any
                            given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): Special Flood Hazard Area, it may be obtained from
                            engineering studies available from a Federal,
                            State, or other source using FEMA-approved
                            engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
                            combined with the Freeboard, establishes the Flood
                            Protection Elevation.
BASEMENT:                   Any area of the building having its floor sub grade
                            (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING:                   See Structure.
                            Facilities that are vital to flood response
                            activities or critical to the health and safety of
                            the public before, during, and after a flood, such
                            as a hospital, emergency operations center,
                            electric substation, police station, fire station,
CRITICAL FACILITIES:        nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment storage
                            facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if
                            flooded, would make the flood problem and its
                            impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials
                            facility, power generation facility, water utility,
                            or wastewater treatment plant.
                            The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or
                            set of points) from which all elevations are
                            determined. Historically, that common set of points
DATUM:                      was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
                            (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by
                            the federal government as a basis for measuring
                            heights is the North American Vertical Datum of
                            1988 (NAVD88).
                            Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
                            estate, including but not limited to buildings or
DEVELOPMENT:                other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
                            grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
                            or storage of equipment or materials.
                            Any activity defined as Development which will
                            necessitate a Floodplain Development Permit; such
                            as: the construction of buildings, structures, or
                            accessory structures; additions or substantial
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY:       improvements to existing structures; bulkheads,
                            retaining walls, piers, and pools; the placement of
                            mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of
                            materials; the construction or elevation of dikes,
                            berms and levees.
 
 
                                   For insurance purposes, a non-basement
                                   building which has its lowest elevated floor
ELEVATED BUILDING:                 raised above ground level by foundation
                                   walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings,
                                   or columns.
                                   The Elevation Certificate is an important
                                   administrative tool of the NFIP. It is used
                                   to determine the proper flood insurance
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE:             premium rate; it is used to document
                                   elevation information; and it may be used to
                                   support a request for a Letter of Map
                                   Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision
                                   based on fill (LOMR-F).
                                   An area enclosed by solid walls below the
                                   BFE/FPE or an area formed when any space
                                   below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides
ENCLOSURE:                         by walls or partitions. Insect screening or
                                   open wood lattice used to surround space
                                   below the BFE/RFPE is not considered an
                                   enclosure.
                                   The advance or infringement of uses, fill,
                                   excavation, buildings, structures, or
ENCROACHMENT:                      development into a floodplain, which may
                                   impede or alter the flow capacity of a
                                   floodplain.
                                   For the purposes of determining rates,
                                   structures for which the "start of
                                   construction" commenced before the effective
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION:             date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975,
                                   for FIRMs effective before that date.
                                   "Existing construction" may also be referred
                                   to as "existing structures."
                                   A manufactured home park or subdivision
                                   where the construction of facilities for
                                   servicing the lots on which the manufactured
                                   homes are to be affixed (including, at a
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR minimum, the installation of utilities, the
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION:     construction of streets, and final site
                                   grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
                                   completed before the effective date of the
                                   original floodplain management regulations
                                   adopted by the community, August 13, 1974.
 
 
EXISTING     See existing construction.
STRUCTURES:
EXPANSION TO The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
AN EXISTING  the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
MANUFACTURED installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
HOME PARK OR grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
SUBDIVISION:
             A.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
             dry land areas from:
                1.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
                2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
             source.
                3.   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as
             defined in paragraph A2 of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and
FLOOD OR     flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by
FLOODING:    a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
             B.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
             water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
             exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water
             level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
             unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
             some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event that results in flooding as defined
             in paragraph A1 of this definition.
FLOOD        The FBFM shows how the floodplain is divided into the floodway and flood fringe
BOUNDARY AND where streams are studied in detail. They also show general floodplain areas where
FLOODWAY MAP floodplains have been studied by approximate methods. (Old format Pre 1986.)
(FBFM):
 
 
FLOOD
ELEVATION      See Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
DETERMINATION:
FLOOD
ELEVATION      See Flood Insurance Study (FIS).
STUDY:
FLOOD HAZARD   An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator,
BOUNDARY MAP   where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion
(FHBM):        areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD          An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator
INSURANCE RATE has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
MAP (FIRM):    applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is
               called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD          An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if
INSURANCE      appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or an examination,
STUDY (FIS):   evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related
               erosion hazards.
               The Base Flood Elevation plus the Freeboard.
FLOOD          A.   In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have
PROTECTION     been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus zero feet (0') of
ELEVATION      freeboard; and
(FPE):         B.   In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where no BFE has been established, this
               elevation shall be at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade.
               Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
               appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to
FLOOD          modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community
PROTECTION     subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated
SYSTEM:        flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes.
               These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance
               with sound engineering standards.
                                   A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard
                                   Boundary Map (FHBM) or Flood Insurance Rate
FLOOD ZONE:                        Map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or
                                   type of flooding in the area, and applicable
                                   insurance rate.
                                   Any land area susceptible to being inundated
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA:    by water from any source (see definition of
                                   "flooding").
                                   The individual appointed to administer and
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:          enforce the floodplain management
                                   regulations.
                                   Any type of permit that is required in
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:     conformance with the provisions of this
                                   title, prior to the commencement of any
                                   development activity.
                                   The operation of an overall program of
                                   corrective and preventive measures for
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT:             reducing flood damage, including but not
                                   limited to emergency preparedness plans,
                                   flood control works, and floodplain
                                   management regulations.
                                   Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
                                   building codes, health regulations, special
                                   purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain
                                   ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: control ordinance), and other applications
                                   of police power. The term describes such
                                   state or local regulations, in any
                                   combination thereof, which provide standards
                                   for the purpose of flood damage prevention
                                   and reduction.
                                   Any combination of structural and non-
                                   structural additions, changes, or
FLOODPROOFING:                     adjustments to structures which reduce or
                                   eliminate flood damage to real estate or
                                   improved real property, water and sanitary
                                   facilities, structures and their contents.
                                   The channel of a river or other watercourse
                                   and the adjacent land areas that must be
FLOODWAY:                          reserved in order to discharge the base
                                   flood without cumulatively increasing the
                                   water surface elevation more than a
                                   designated height.
                                   A factor of safety usually expressed in feet
                                   above a flood level for the purposes of
                                   floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
                                   compensate for the many unknown factors that
                                   could contribute to flood heights greater
                                   than the height calculated for a selected
FREEBOARD:                         size flood and floodway conditions, such as
                                   wave action, obstructed bridge openings,
                                   debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic
                                   effects of urbanization in a watershed. The
                                   Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus the
                                   freeboard establishes the Flood Protection
                                   Elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be zero
                                   feet (0').
 
August 2023
13-2-2   13-2-2
 
 
             A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or
FUNCTIONALLY carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility
DEPENDENT    necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or
USE:         ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture,
             sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST      The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction,
ADJACENT     adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation
GRADE (HAG): Certificate for HAG related to building elevation information.
             A structure that is:
             A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
             maintained by the U.S. Department of lnterior) or preliminarily determined by the
             Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
             the National Register;
             B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
             contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
             to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
HISTORIC     historic district;
STRUCTURE:   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as
             eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
             the Secretary of the Interior; or
             D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as
             eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been
             certified either:
                1.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
             Interior; or
                2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
             programs.
 
   August 2023
13-2-2   13-2-2
 
 
                             A general term used to refer to the several types
                             of revisions and amendments to FIRMs that can be
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map
                             Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR),
                             and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).
                             An official amendment, by letter, to an effective
                             National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A
                             LOMA establishes a property's or structure's
   LETTER OF MAP          location in relation to the Special Flood Hazard
   AMENDMENT              Area (SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a
   (LOMA):                property or structure has been inadvertently
                             mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually
                             on natural high ground above the base flood
                             elevation.
                             FEMA's modification to an effective Flood
                             Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or a Flood Boundary and
                             Floodway Map (FBFM) or both. LOMRs are generally
                             based on the implementation of physical measures
                             that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic
                             characteristics of a flooding source and thus
                             result in the modification of the existing
   LETTER OF MAP          regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood
   REVISION (LOMR):       Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard
                             Area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood
                             Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and
                             Floodway Map (FBFM), and sometimes the Flood
                             Insurance Study (FIS) report, and when
                             appropriate, includes a description of the
                             modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied
                             by an annotated copy of the affected portions of
                             the FIRM; FBFM, or FIS report.
                             FEMA's modification of the Special Flood Hazard
   LETTER OF MAP          Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
   REVISION BASED         (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the
   ON FILL (LOMR-F):      existing regulatory floodway. The LOMR-F does not
                             change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
 
August 2023
13-2-2   13-2-2
 
                 A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection
                 project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements
   CONDITIONALfor such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard
   LETTER OF Mareas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
   REVISION   (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon submission and approval of
   (CLOMR):   certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) may
                 be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building permits and/
                 or Flood Development Permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR,
                 because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
                 A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
LEVEE:           constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain,
                 control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
                 temporary flooding.
                 A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and
LEVEE SYSTEM:    associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
                 constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
                 practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT  The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to
GRADE (LAG):     the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to building elevation
                 information.
                 The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
                 unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
                 vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
LOWEST FLOOR:    area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
                 enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
                 the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR § 60.3 and
                 this title.
                 A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a
MANUFACTURED     permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
HOME:            foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
                 "Manufactured Home" does not include a "Recreational Vehicle."
 
 
                                       A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: divided into two (2) or more
                                       manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
                                       The building value, not including the
                                       land value and that of any accessory
                                       structures or other improvements on the
                                       lot. Market value may be established by
MARKET VALUE:                          independent certified appraisal;
                                       replacement cost depreciated for age of
                                       building and quality of construction
                                       (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax
                                       assessed values.
                                       For purposes of the National Flood
                                       Insurance Program (NFIP), the National
                                       Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
MEAN SEA LEVEL:                        or other datum (such as North America
                                       Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to
                                       which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown
                                       on a community's FIRM are referenced.
                                       Describes a condition where there is a
                                       river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud
                                       down a hillside usually as a result of a
                                       dual condition of loss of brush cover
                                       and the subsequent accumulation of water
                                       on the ground preceded by a period of
MUDSLIDE (I.E., MUDFLOW):              unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
                                       mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a
                                       distinct phenomenon while a landslide is
                                       in progress, and will be recognized as
                                       such by the Administrator only if the
                                       mudflow, and not the landslide, is the
                                       proximate cause of damage that occurs.
                                       The operation of an overall program of
                                       corrective and preventive measures for
MUDSLIDE (I.E., MUD FLOW) AREA         reducing mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
MANAGEMENT:                            damage, including but not limited to
                                       emergency preparedness plans, mudslide
                                       control works, and floodplain management
                                       regulations.
                                       An area with land surfaces and slopes of
MUDSLIDE (I.E., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA:   unconsolidated material where the
                                       history, geology, and climate indicate a
                                       potential for mudflow.
                                       The NFIP is a Federal program created by
                                       Congress to mitigate future flood losses
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM       nationwide through sound, community-
(NFIP):                                enforced building and zoning ordinances
                                       and to provide access to affordable,
                                       federally backed flood insurance
                                       protection for property owners.
 
 
              For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the start of
              construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
NEW           regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
CONSTRUCTION: such structures. Any construction started after August 13, 1974 and before the
              effective start date of this floodplain management title is subject to the
              ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of
              construction was within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
NEW           A place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
MANUFACTURED  manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of
HOME PARK OR  utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of
SUBDIVISION:  concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
              management regulations adopted by a community August 13, 1974.
POST-FIRM:    Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred
              on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
              Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred
PRE-FIRM:     before April 22, 1977, the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map
              (FIRM).
              A vehicle that is:
              A.   Built on a single chassis, and
              B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
RECREATIONAL  horizontal projection, and
VEHICLE:      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck,
              and
              D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
              living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY    See Floodway.
FLOODWAY:
 
 
                                  An NFIP-insured structure that has had at
REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE:        least two (2) paid flood losses of more than
                                  one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each in any
                                  ten (10) year period since 1978.
RIVERINE:                         Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
                                  (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
                                  The land in the floodplain within a community
                                  subject to a one percent (1%) or greater
                                  chance of flooding in any given year. For
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): purposes of these regulations, the term
                                  "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in
                                  meaning with the phrase "area of special
                                  flood hazard."
                                  Includes substantial improvement, and means
                                  the date the building permit was issued,
                                  provided the actual start of construction,
                                  repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
                                  addition placement, or other improvement was
                                  within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
                                  permit date. The actual start means either
                                  the first placement of permanent construction
                                  of a structure on a site, such as the pouring
                                  of slab or footings, the installation of
                                  piles, the construction of columns, or any
                                  work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
                                  placement of a manufactured home on a
                                  foundation. Permanent construction does not
START OF CONSTRUCTION:            include land preparation, such as clearing,
                                  grading, and filling; nor does it include the
                                  installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
                                  does it include excavation for a basement,
                                  footings, piers, or foundations or the
                                  erection of temporary forms; nor does it
                                  include the installation on the property of
                                  accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
                                  not occupied as dwelling units or not part of
                                  the main structure. For a substantial
                                  improvement, the actual start of construction
                                  means the first alteration of any wall,
                                  ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
                                  building, whether or not that alteration
                                  affects the external dimensions of the
                                  building.
                                  A walled and roofed building, including a gas
STRUCTURE:                        or liquid storage tank that is principally
                                  above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
                                  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
                                  whereby the cost of restoring the structure
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE:               to its before-damaged condition would equal
                                  or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market
                                  value before the damage occurred. See
                                  definition of "substantial improvement."
 
 
             Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
             structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
             value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
             This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage,"
             regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
SUBSTANTIAL  include either:
IMPROVEMENT: A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
             state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
             identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
             necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
             B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will
             not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure" and
             the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this title.
             FEMA publications that provide guidance concerning the building performance
             standards of the NFIP, which are contained in Title 44 of the U S Code of Federal
TECHNICAL    Regulations § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily
BULLETINS    by State and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP
AND          regulations and by members of the development community, such as design
TECHNICAL    professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing
FACT SHEETS: bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create
             regulations. Rather they provide specific guidance for complying with the minimum
             requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
TEMPERATURE  Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or cooling system, built-in or
CONTROLLED:  appliance.
 
 
VARIANCE:    A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this title.
             The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with
             the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
VIOLATION:   development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate, other
             certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)
             (S), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(S) is presumed to be in
             violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER        The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
SURFACE      1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified
ELEVATION:   datum), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
             coastal or riverine areas.
             A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on
WATERCOURSE: or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes
             specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
             (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
 
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13-3-1:    Lands To Which This Title Applies
13-3-2:    Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas
13-3-3:    Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit
13-3-4:    Compliance
13-3-5:    Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
13-3-6:    Interpretation
13-3-7:    Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
13-3-8:    Penalties For Violation
13-3-1: LANDS TO WHICH THIS TITLE APPLIES:
This Title shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the
jurisdiction of the City of Bonners Ferry. Nothing in this title is intended to
allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-3-2: BASIS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Insurance
Administrator in a scientific and engineering report titled "Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for City of Bonners Ferry, Idaho, Boundary County, dated August 19,
1985, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this title. The FIS and the FIRM are on file
at the office of the City Clerk, 7232 Main, Bonners Ferry, ID. (Ord. 605, 12-6-
2022)
13-3-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this title prior to the commencement of any development
activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of section
13-4-2 . (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-3-4: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered,
or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this title
and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-3-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This title shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other laws, ordinances, regulations,
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, etc. However, where this title and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or greater
restrictions shall control. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-3-6: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this title all provisions shall be:
A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-3-7: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This title does not imply that land
outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability
on the part of the City of Bonners Ferry or by any officer or employee thereof
for flood damages that result from reliance on this title or an administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-3-8: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or
altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this title and other
applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this title or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special
exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not
more than six (6) months, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
of Bonners Ferry from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
13-4-1:    Designation Of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator
13-4-2: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
13-4-3: Floodplain Development Application, Permit, And Certification
Requirements
13-4-4:    Corrective Procedures
13-4-5:    Variance Procedures
13-4-1: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR:
The City Administrator, hereinafter referred to as the "Floodplain
Administrator," is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this title. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-4-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The Floodplain Administrator or designee shall perform, but not be limited to,
the following duties:
A.   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all
proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that the
requirements of this title have been satisfied and all proposed development is
reasonably safe from flooding.
B.   Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to
assure that all necessary Local, State, and Federal permits have been received,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 USC § 1334.
C.   Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources
State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA).
D.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained;
E.   Prevent encroachments into floodways unless the certification and flood
hazard reduction provisions of section
13-5-5  are met.
F.   Obtain and maintain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of
subsection
13-4-3 C.
G.   Obtain and maintain actuai eievation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of subsection
13-4-3 C.
H.   Review plans to verify public utilities are constructed in accordance with
the provisions of subsections
13-5-1 E through G.
I.   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain and
maintain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of subsections
13-4-3 C and
13-5-2 B.
J.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of
the Special Flood Hazard Areas, and floodways (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make
the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in this section.
K.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance
with the provisions of section
13-3-2 , obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to
administer Chapter 5. Any such information shall be consistent with the
requirements of the Federal Insurance Administrator.
L.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway data has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of section
13-3-2 , require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones AE on the
community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
M.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this title and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing
that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
N.   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a
floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
O.   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is
being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this
title, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately
stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person
doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition
(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order
constitutes a misdemeanor.
P.   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may
also be revoked.
Q.   Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard Areas within
the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each member
of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial
jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
R.   Follow through with corrective procedures of section
13-4-4 .
S.   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
T.   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS
Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in accordance
with the provisions of section 13-3-2 of this title, including any revisions
thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State
Coordinator and FEMA of your community's mapping needs.
U.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map
Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
V.   A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting
from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable,
but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes
available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA)
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with
this part. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those
physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
W.   Upon occurrence, notify the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA) in
writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by
annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to
adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In
order that all FHBM's and FIRM's accurately represent the community's
boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of the community
suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new
area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management
regulatory authority. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-4-3: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT, AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Application Requirements: Application for a Floodplain Development Permit
shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
   1.   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
      a.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
      b.   The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on the
FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
13-3-2 , or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard
Area;
      c.   The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
13-3-2 ;
      d.   The boundary of the floodway(s) as determined in section
13-3-2 ;
      e.   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
sections
13-3-2 ,
13-3-3 , and
13-5-3 .
      f.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
   2.   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
      a.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
      b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential
structure in Zone A or AE will be floodproofed; and
      c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility equipment and machinery will be elevated or flood proofed.
   3.   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) with
supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan
that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance
of flood proofing measures will be required prior to Certificate of Occupancy/
Completion.
   4.   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the
proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this title are met.
These details include but are not limited to:
      a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid
foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation, or on
columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
      b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood
forces on walls in accordance with subsection
13-5-1 H2 when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH,
and AO.
   5.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
   6.   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
   7.   Certification that all other Local, State, and Federal permits required
prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
   8.   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary
structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of subsections
13-5-2 E and F of this title are met.
   9.   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when
applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and
      a.   A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
B.   Permit Requirements: The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but
not be limited to:
   1.   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, rip-
rap, docks, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials, etcetera).
   2.   The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in section
13-3-2 .
   3.   The Flood Protection Elevation required for the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities.
   4.   The Flood Protection Elevation required for the protection of all
utility equipment and machinery.
   5.   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
   6.   A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach
into the flood way of any watercourse, as applicable.
   7.   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, or AO.
   8.   All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the start
of construction of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
unless the permitted activity has commenced as per the Start of Construction
definition.
   9.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
   10.   All materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant materials.
C.   Certification Requirements:
   1.   Elevation Certificates
      a.   A final as-built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate (FEMA
Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
final as-built construction of the elevation of the lowest floor and all
attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
      b.   The Finished Construction Elevation Certificate certifier shall
provide at least two (2) photographs showing the front and rear of the building
taken within ninety (90) days from the date of certification. The photographs
must be taken with views confirming the building description and diagram number
provided in Section A. To the extent possible, these photographs should show
the entire building including foundation. If the building has split-level or
multi-level areas, provide at least two (2) additional photographs showing side
views of the building. In addition, when applicable, provide a photograph of
the foundation showing a representative example of the flood openings or vents.
All photographs must be in color and measure at least three inches by three
inches (3" x 3"). Digital photographs are acceptable.
   2.   Floodproofing Certificate: If non-residential floodproofing is used to
meet the Flood Protection Elevation requirements, design plans, with supporting
data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required
prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
flood proofed design elevation of the lowest floor and all attendant utilities,
in relation to mean sea level. Flood proofing certification shall be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and
certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior
to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit.
Prior to request for a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy a Flood proofing
Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34) shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and approval.
   3.   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A or AE, and the elevation
of the chassis is more than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade, an
engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of subsection
13-5-2 C2.
   4.   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall all
be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit:
      a.   A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation;
      b.   A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream;
      c.   A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation; and
      d.   An Idaho Stream Channel Alteration Permit approval shall be provided
by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
   5.   Certification Exemptions: The following structures, are exempt from the
elevation/flood proofing certification requirements specified in subsections
C5a and C5b of this subsection:
      a.   Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of subsection
13-5-2 E1;
      b.   Temporary Structures meeting requirements of subsection
13-5-2 F; and
      c.   Accessory Structures less than footprint of six hundred (600) square
feet meeting requirements of subsection
13-5-2 G.
D.   Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For applications for
building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions,
rehabilitations, renovations, improvements, repairs of damage, and any other
improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain
Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:
   1.   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value of the structure, prepared by a qualified
independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of
construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of
the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred
and before any repairs are made;
   2.   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
   3.   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
   4.   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho
Building Code and this title is required.
E.   Any other information deemed necessary for review of public safety and
floodplain management requirements by the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 605,
12-6-2022)
13-4-4: CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES:
A.   Violations To Be Corrected: When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
B.   Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the owner of a
building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
   1.   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
   2.   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
   3.   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
C.   Order to Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the
notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue an order in writing to the
owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time
period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one-hundred
eighty (180) calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there
is imminent danger to life or other property, the Floodplain Administrator may
order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
D.   Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may
appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal
in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
E.   Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or property fails
to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has been
made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-4-5: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
A.   The Bonners Ferry City Council shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the requirements of this title.
B.   Variances may be issued for:
   1.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
   2.   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the definition
as stated in section
13-2-2  of this title, provided provisions of subsections
13-4-5 H2 through H4 have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety; or
   3.   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
C.   In passing upon variances, the City Council shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this title, and:
   1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
   5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under
section
13-2-2  of this title as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
   6.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
   7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
   9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
   11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
D.   The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the above
factors in subsection
13-4-5 C1 through C11 with their application for a variance.
E.   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
title, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this title.
F.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official specifying the difference between
the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to
be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and
property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the BFE may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.
G.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administrator and the
State of Idaho upon request.
H.   Conditions For Variances:
   1.   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure
in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
   2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if the
variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge.
   3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   4.   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
   5.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
      c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
I.   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
   1.   The use serves a critical need in the community.
   2.   No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area.
   3.   The lowest floor of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at
least the Flood Protection Elevation.
   4.   The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local
laws.
J.   The City of Bonners Ferry will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of the
Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
K.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal such
decision to the Court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 5
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
SECTION:
13-5-1:    General Standards
13-5-2:    Specific Standards
13-5-3:    Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations
13-5-4:    Standards For Riverine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But
Without Established Floodways
13-5-5:    Standards For Floodways
13-5-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions are required:
A.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and development shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
B.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and development shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in
accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
C.   All new construction, substantial improvements, and development shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
D.   All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the Flood Protection Elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
F.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
G.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
H.   A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved
structures, which is below the lowest floor used solely for parking, access,
and storage shall:
   1.   Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the
Flood Protection Elevation; and
   2.   Include, in Zones A and AE flood openings to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by
a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
design criteria:
      a.   A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
      b.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1)
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
      c.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area
must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
      d.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than
one foot (1') above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
      e.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
      f.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures
for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry
or flood resistant wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
I.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this title, shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as contained in this title.
J.   Nothing in this title shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
title and located totally or partially within the floodway, or stream setback,
provided there is no additional encroachment below the Flood Protection
Elevation in the floodway, or stream setback, and provided that such repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
title.
K.   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management
facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be
permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection
13-4-5 I. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the Flood
Protection Elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
subsection
13-4-3 C.
L.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
M.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
N.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
O.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC § 1334.
P.   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals greater than
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include
within such proposals base flood elevation data.
Q.   When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the
entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
R.   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood
hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the
more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) shall apply. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-5-2: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in section
13-3-2 , or section
13-5-4 , the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section
13-5-1  are required:
A.   Residential Construction: New construction, substantial improvements, and
development of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, and utilities including ductwork,
elevated no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in section
13-2-2  of this title.
B.   Non-Residential Construction: New construction, substantial improvements,
and development of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, Residential
Construction. New construction, substantial improvements, and development of
any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, and utilities including ductwork, elevated no lower
than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in section
13-2-2  of this title, elevated no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation,
as defined in Section
13-2-2  of this title. Structures located in Zones A and AE may be floodproofed
to the Flood Protection Elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas
of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
below the Flood Protection Elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the flood proofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in
section
13-4-3 C, along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
C.   Manufactured Homes:
   1.   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is no lower than the Flood Protection
Elevation, as defined in section
13-2-2  of this title.
   2.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by
certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current
edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety's "Idaho Manufactured Home
Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code section 44-2201(2).
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis
thirty-six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation
of the chassis is above thirty-six inches (36") in height, an engineering
certification is required.
   3.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of subsection
13-5-1 H1 and H2.
   4.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of
all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured home
parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be
filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency
Management Coordinator.
D.   Additions/Improvements:
   1.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition
and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the
existing structure are:
      a.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must
be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-conforming
than the existing structure; or
      b.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
   2.   Additions to non-compliant post-FIRM structures that are a substantial
improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a
standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with
the standards for new construction.
   3.   Additions and/or improvements to non-compliant post-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:
      a.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only
must comply with the standards for new construction; or
      b.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
   4.   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five (5) year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started,
must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or
structure, the five (5) year period begins on the date of the first improvement
or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of
this title. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are
considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
      a.   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
      b.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
E.   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be either:
   1.   Temporary Placement:
      a.   Be on site for fewer than one hundred eight (180) consecutive days
and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently
attached additions); or
   2.   Permanent Placement: Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of Temporary Placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction, as set forth in section
13-5-1  and subsections
13-5-2 A and C.
F.   Temporary Non-Residential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.
The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval:
   1.   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted.
Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one (1) year;
   2.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for
the removal of the temporary structure;
   3.   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed
(i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
   4.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
   5.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   6.   Temporary structures in the floodway must provide a Hydraulic and
Hydrology Analysis along with a No-Rise Certification.
G.   Accessory And Agricultural Structures (Appurtenant Structures): When
accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) used solely for parking,
and storage are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, elevation or
floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures in
accordance with subsection
13-4-3 C, and the following criteria shall be met:
   1.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including
working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
   2.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
   3.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
   4.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
   5.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the
provisions of subsection
13-5-1 A;
   6.   All utility equipment and machinery, such as electrical, shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of subsection
13-5-1 D; and
   7.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below the Base Flood Elevation in conformance
with the provisions of subsection
13-5-1 H;
   8.   Accessory structures not used solely for parking, access, and storage
must be elevated per subsections
13-5-2 A and B;
   9.   An accessory structure with a footprint less than six hundred (600)
square feet and is a minimal investment of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or
less and satisfies the criteria outlined in subsections G1 through G7 above is
not required to provide the elevation certificate per subsection
13-5-2 B.
H.   Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a Special
Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
   1.   Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of
buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
   2.   Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be attached to
and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure
that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during
conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the
foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
   3.   Not elevated above-ground tanks may be permitted in flood hazard areas
provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects
of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
   4.   Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
      a.   At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
      b.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the
base flood.
I.   Construction Of Below-Grade Crawlspace:
   1.   The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than
two feet (2') below the exterior lowest adjacent grade (LAG).
   2.   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point.
   3.   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from
the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within
a reasonable time after a flood event.
   4.   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet
(5') per second for any crawlspace.
   5.   See Technical Bulletin 11 for further information. Buildings that have
below-grade crawlspaces may have higher flood insurance premiums than buildings
that have the preferred crawlspace construction, with the interior elevation of
the crawlspace soil at or above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
J.   Subdivision Plats: Flood Zones:
   1.   A note must be provided on the final plat documenting the current flood
zone in which the property or properties are located. The boundary line must be
drawn on the plat in situations where two or more flood zones intersect over
the property or properties being surveyed.
   2.   FEMA FIRM panel(s): #160xxxxxxC, & 160xxxxxxE, etc.
   3.   FIRM effective date(s): mm/dd/year.
   4.   Flood Zone(s): Zone X, Zone A, Zone AE, A Zone D, etc.
   5.   Base Flood Elevation(s): AE ____.0 ft., etc.
K.   Critical Facilities: Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to
the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard
area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities
shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is
available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above BFE or to the height of the five
hundred (500) year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical
facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing
and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-5-3: STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A (also known as
Unnumbered A Zones) and established in section
13-3-2 , where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA,
the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section
13-5-1  shall apply:
A.   The BFE used in determining the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) shall be
determined based on the following criteria:
   1.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources,
all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also
comply with all applicable provisions of this title and shall be elevated or
floodproofed in accordance with standards in section
13-5-1  and section
13-5-2 .
   2.   When floodway data is available from a Federal, State, or other source,
all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas shall
also comply with the requirements of sections
13-5-2  and
13-5-5 .
   3.   Require that all new subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions)
greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser,
include within such proposals base flood elevation data. Such Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with section
13-3-2  and utilized in implementing this title.
   4.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal,
State, or other source as outlined above, the lowest floor shall be elevated or
floodproofed (non-residential) to two feet (2.0 ft.) above the Highest Adjacent
Grade (HAG) at the building site or to the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE)
whichever is higher, as defined in section
13-2-2 . All other applicable provisions of section
13-5-2  shall also apply. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-5-4: STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS:
Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided by
FEMA or is available from another source but floodways are not identified for a
Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following
requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
A.   Standards of sections
13-5-1  and
13-5-2 ; and
B.   Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be
permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-5-5: STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAYS:
Areas designated as floodways located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas
established in section
13-3-2 . The floodways are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential
projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
sections
13-5-1  and
13-5-2  shall apply to all development within such areas:
A.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
   1.   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in
any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based
on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to
issuance of floodplain development permit (This is a No-Rise Analysis and
Certification); or
   2.   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA
A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six (6) months of
completion of the proposed encroachment.
B.   If subsection
13-5-5 A is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this title.
C.   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions are
met:
   1.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection
13-5-2 C; and
   2.   The encroachment standards of subsection
13-5-5 A.
D.   Other Development In Regulated Floodways:
   1.   Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters,
such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated floodways shall meet
the limitations of section
13-5-5  of this title.
   2.   Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve the
placement of fill in regulated flood ways shall meet the limitations of section
13-5-5  of this title.
   3.   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts,
low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel
from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated
floodways, shall meet the limitations of section
13-5-5  of this title.
   4.   Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks,
apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways
shall meet the limitations of section
13-5-5  of this title.
   5.   Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking facilities,
port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that encroach into
regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section
13-5-5  of this title. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 6
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13-6-1:    Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance
13-6-2: Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits
13-6-1: EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE:
This title, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of
the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted August 13, 1974, as amended, and
it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit, or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance of the City of Bonners Ferry enacted on August 13, 1974, the adoption
date of the community's initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, and the
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance #357 adopted August 6, 1985, as amended,
which are not reenacted herein are repealed. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
13-6-2: EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS:
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a
Floodplain Development Permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator
or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this ordinance.
Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding
permit within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 605, 12-6-2022)
 
